CODE OF ORDINANCES CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF DELTA, EATON COUNTY, MICHIGAN 
Published in 2012 by Order of the Township Board  
Adopted September 17, 2012  

Ken Fletcher 
Supervisor 
Mary R. Clark 
Clerk 
Howard Pizzo 
Treasurer 
Jan Cunningham Cara Dobie Jeff Hicks Barb Poma  
Township Board 
Gordon W. VanWieren, Jr.  
Attorney 
Ken Fletcher 
Supervisor 
Mary R. Clark 
Clerk 
Howard Pizzo 
Treasurer 
Dennis Fedewa Jeff Hicks Karen Mojica 
R. Douglas Kosinski 
Township Board 
Gordon W. VanWieren, Jr.  
Attorney 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1992 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the Township Board. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1992 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.  
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6­2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE  CD1:1  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES  CCT:1  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE  SLT:1   
CODE INDEX   CDi:1  

Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still 
others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested.  
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.  
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and D.J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.  
The publisher is most grateful to Janice Vedder, former Township Clerk, and other Township staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Township readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Township's affairs.  
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan.  
© Copyrighted material.  
Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan. 2012.  

ORDINANCE NO. 12-70 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF DELTA, EATON COUNTY, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF DELTA, EATON COUNTY, MICHIGAN ORDAINS: 
Section 1. Short title. This ordinance shall be known as the "Code of Ordinances adopting ordinance" and may be so cited.  
Section 2. Adoption of Code of Ordinances. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 42, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 3. Repealer. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 16, 2012, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 4. Prior ordinances not revived. The repeal provided for in section 3 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.  
Section 5. Penalty. Whenever in this code or any ordinance of the township an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction, or whenever in this code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be a misdemeanor or municipal civil infraction, the violation of any such provision by any person shall, upon conviction of a misdemeanor, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, except whenever a specific is otherwise provided. Whenever any such violation shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, a finding of responsibility shall be punished by a civil fine not exceeding $500.00, except whenever a specific penalty is otherwise provided. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Township may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.  
Section 6. Code additions or amendments. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Township Board to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.  
Section 7. Later ordinances. Ordinances adopted after April 16, 2012, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.  
SEVERABILITY. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this Ordinance shall for any reason be finally adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder of this Ordinance, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment is rendered.  
REPEAL. All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Charter Township of Delta inconsistent herein are hereby repealed so far as they may be inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect upon final publication as required by law.  
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF DELTA  
MARY CLARK, TOWNSHIP CLERK 
KENNETH FLETCHER, TOWNSHIP SUPERVISOR  
I, Mary Clark, Clerk of the Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan hereby certify that the foregoing is a complete ordinance amendment adopted by the Township Board at their regular meeting held on Monday, February 7, 2011.  
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF DELTA  
MARY CLARK, TOWNSHIP CLERK 
Introduced by Township Board: February 6, 2012  
Published following first reading: Grand Ledge Independent: February 12, 2012 
Delta Waverly Community News: February 12, 2012 
Adopted by the Township Board: February 20, 2012 
Published following final reading: 
Grand Ledge Independent: February 26, 2012 
Delta Waverly Community News: February 26, 2012 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Delta Charter Township Code." 
(Code 1992, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification authority, MCL 42.20. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
It is the legislative intent of the township board, in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the township. In the construction of this Code and any amendment thereto, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:  
Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the township board may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings.  
Agencies, officers. Any reference to any local, state or federal agency or officer includes any successor agency or officer.  
Code. The term "this Code" or "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of a Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Eaton in the State of Michigan.  
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.  
MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" means the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended, now or in the future, and shall include any successor statute.  
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.  
Municipal civil infraction. The term "municipal civil infraction" means an act or omission that is prohibited by this Code of Ordinances of the township, but which is not a crime under this Code of Ordinances, and for which civil sanctions, including, without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs may be ordered, as authorized by chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense.  
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.  
Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" includes the term "affirmation" in all cases, where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases the term "sworn" includes the term "affirmed." 
Officer, department, etc. Whenever any officer, department or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Charter Township of Delta, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer of the township is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer means and includes such officer or his deputy or authorized subordinate. Whenever in accordance with the provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the township, any specific act is required to be done by any designated officer or official of the township, such act may be performed by any township employee duly authorized to perform that act by such officer or official. 
Person. The term "person" includes firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assignees thereof.  
Public acts. All references to "public acts" are references to Michigan Public Acts, as amended, now or in the future, and shall include any successor statute.  
Shall/may. The term "shall" is mandatory and the term "may" is permissive. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Michigan.  
Superintendent. The term "superintendent" means the Township Manager of Delta Charter Township.  
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past.  
Township. The term "township" means Charter Township of Delta in Eaton County, Michigan.  
Township board or board. The term "township board" or "board" means the township board of Delta Township, Michigan.  
Week. The term "week" means seven days.  
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" may include any form of reproduction or expression of language.  
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year.  
(Code 1992, § 1-2; Ord. No. 93-3, § 1, 5-17-1993; Ord. No. 97-4(B), § 1, 12-1-1997; Ord. No. 10-57, § 1, 5-2-2011; Ord. No. 17-98 , § 1, 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division.  
(Code 1992, § 1-3) 

Sec. 1-4. - References and notes. 
State law references, editor's notes and history notes are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section.  
(Code 1992, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a) 	
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance, when not inconsistent with this Code:  

(1) 	
Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the township, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the township or any evidence of the township's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the township.  

(2) 
Containing any administrative provisions of the township board.  

(3) 
Granting any right or franchise.  

(4) 	
Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the township. 

(5) 
Making any appropriation.  

(6) 
Levying or imposing annual taxes. 

(7) 
Establishing or prescribing grades in the township.  

(8) 
Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 

(9) 
Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the township.  

(10) 
Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any township officers or employees. 

(11) 	
Prescribing specific parking restrictions, no-parking zones, specific speed zones, parking meter zones, and specific stop or yield intersections or other traffic ordinances pertaining to specific streets.  

(12) 
Pertaining to zoning.  

(13) 
Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature.  

(b) 	
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the township clerk's office.  


(Code 1992, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a) 	
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 

(b) 	
The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance in the township in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.  


(Code 1992, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty. 
(a) 	
Violation deemed misdemeanor unless otherwise specified. Unless a violation of this Code of Ordinances of the township is specifically designated in the Code of Ordinances as a municipal civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. 

(b) 	
Penalty for misdemeanor violation. The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding $500.00 (plus costs of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation by this Code of Ordinances. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.  

(c) 	
Sanction for municipal civil infraction. The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code of Ordinances, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.), and other applicable laws.  

(1) 	
Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction.  

(2) 	
Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person or any requirement or provision of this Code of Ordinances. As used in this section, the term "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision:  

a. 	
Committed by a person within any 12-month period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code of Ordinances); and 

b. 	
For which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code of Ordinances for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 

1. 	
The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be not less than $125.00, plus costs.  

2. 	
The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense shall be not less than $250.00, plus costs.  

3. 	
The fine for any offense which is a third repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $400.00 plus costs.  





(d) 	
Act prohibited and omission to act. A violation includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code of Ordinances; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code of Ordinances. 

(e) 	
Continuing violation. Each day on which any violation of this Code of Ordinances continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense.  

(f) 	
Injunctive relief. In addition to any remedies available at law, the township may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this Code of Ordinances.  

(g) 	
Surcharge; equitable remedies. The imposition of any penalty provided for in this section shall be in addition to any surcharge levied for a violation of or noncompliance with a provision of this Code of Ordinances, or a provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in this Code of 

Ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of either, or of state law, and shall be in addition to any equitable remedy provided by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, or a provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in this Code of Ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of either, or of state law, or provided by state law, including the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 

(h) 	
Complicity. Every person who commits or procures, counsels, aids or abets the commission of any act declared in this Code of Ordinances to be an offense, whether individually or in connection with another person, or as principal, agent or accessory, shall be guilty of or responsible for such offense. Every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision of this Code of Ordinances shall likewise be guilty of, or responsible for, such offense. 


(Code 1992, § 1-6.1; Ord. No. 97-4(B), § 2, 12-1-1997) 
State Law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 42.21; municipal civil infractions, MCL 600.8701 et seq. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a) 	
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan (or Delta Charter Township Code), is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.  

(b) 	
If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan (or Delta Charter Township Code), is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which such section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.  

(c) 	
If a section is to be repealed, the following language shall be used: "The Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Delta, Eaton County, Michigan (or Delta Charter Township Code), is hereby amended by deleting section _____."  


(Code 1992, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of any prior ordinance of the township by any subsequent ordinance shall not operate to revive the provisions of any ordinance which may have been repealed by such prior ordinance, unless such revival shall be expressly provided for. Ordinances repealed remain in force for the trial and punishment of all past violations of them, and for the recovery of penalties and forfeitures already incurred, and for the preservation of all rights and remedies existing by them and so far as they apply, to any office, trust, proceeding, right, contract or event, already affected by them.  
(Code 1992, § 1-7.1) 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a) 	
By contract or by township personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the township board. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so 

numbered that they will fit properly in the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.  

(b) 	
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages.  

(c) 	
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 

(1) 
Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.  

(2) 	
Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 

(3) 	
Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers.  

(4) 	
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code).  

(5) 	
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 


(Code 1992, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability. 
Should any provision or section of this Code be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent of the township board that this Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance.  
(Code 1992, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-12. - Fees and charges. 
All fees and charges provided for in this Code may be changed by resolution of the township board. Such resolutions shall be on file in the office of the township clerk. 
(Code 1992, § 1-10) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
State Law reference— Townships generally, MCL 41.1 et seq.; charter townships, MCL 42.1 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. -TOWNSHIP BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: --- (2) ---  
State Law reference— Township board, MCL 42.5; township meetings, MCL 42.7 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
Secs. 2-19—2-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) ---  

State Law reference— Township officers, MCL 42.9 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 
15.341 et seq.  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY Secs. 2-40—2-50. - Reserved. DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS Subdivision I. - In General Secs. 2-51—2-60. - Reserved. Subdivision II. - Pension Plan Sec. 2-61. - Created; established. 
Pursuant to Public Act No. 77 of 1989 (MCL 41.110b), the township hereby creates and establishes a pension plan to provide for retirement income of certain of its officers and employees, and does hereby ratify and confirm the validity of the pension plan in existence before adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 2-97) 
Sec. 2-62. - Terms. 
The township board shall, by resolution, determine the precise terms of the pension plan, including, but not limited to: 
(1) 
The definition and classes of employees and officers eligible to participate in the plan.  

(2) 
The age, length of service and any other requirements for eligibility under the pension plan.  

(3) 	
The formula, percentage share, amounts or limitations by which the township shall contribute to such plan and the method by which earnings and/or losses under the plan are allocated to plan participants.  

(4) 
The normal retirement age under the plan. 

(5) 
Any early or late retirement ages or dates as the board may desire under the plan.  

(6) 	
Any formula, percentage share, amounts and/or limitations on amounts which eligible officers and employees may contribute under the plan.  

(7) 
Time and methods of payment of benefits under the plan.  

(8) 	
A method for voluntary nonparticipation for otherwise eligible officers and employees under the plan. 

(9) 
The schedule of vesting of benefits under the plan.  

(10) 
The trustee, administrator and all other fiduciaries of the plan.  

(11) 
The handling of forfeitures under the plan.  

(12) 	
The appropriate township personnel who shall be responsible for daily administration, accounting, reporting and/or supervisory functions for the plan on the township's behalf.  


(Code 1992, § 2-98) 
Sec. 2-63. - Authority to modify or terminate plan. 
The township board shall have authority, by resolution, to amend, modify or even terminate the pension plan at any future time as may be needed or desired to conform with applicable federal and state statutes, regulations and common law or otherwise as the board may determine.  
(Code 1992, § 2-99) 
Secs. 2-64—2-73. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Deferred Compensation Program 
Sec. 2-74. - Created and established. 
Pursuant to Public Act No. 77 of 1989 (MCL 41.110b), the township hereby creates and establishes a program of deferred compensation for certain of its officers and employees, the assets of which shall be subject to the general creditors of the township, and does hereby ratify and confirm the validity of all programs of deferred compensation in existence on adoption of this Code.  
(Code 1992, § 2-100) 
Sec. 2-75. - Terms. 
The township board shall, by resolution, determine the precise terms of all programs and plans of deferred compensation, including but not limited to:  
(1) 	
The definition and classes of employees and officers eligible to participate in the plan or program. 

(2) 	
The age, length of service and any other requirements for eligibility and enrollment under the plan or program.  

(3) 	
Any formula, percentage share, amounts or limitation on the amounts of compensation which eligible officers and employees may elect to defer under the plan or program. 

(4) 
The normal retirement age under the plan or program.  

(5) 
Any early or late retirement ages or dates as the board may desire under the plan or program. 

(6) 	
The contractual obligation of the township for the payment of benefits to participating employees under the plan or program including, but not limited to, time and methods of payment of benefits under the plan or program and the purchase of annuity contracts on the lives of participants and/or beneficiaries of participants.  

(7) 
The administrator and all other fiduciaries of the plan or program. 

(8) 	
The appropriate township personnel who shall be responsible for daily administration, accounting, reporting and/or supervisory functions for the plan or program on the township's behalf. 


(Code 1992, § 2-101) 
Sec. 2-76. - Authority to modify or terminate. 
The township board shall have authority, by resolution, to amend, modify or even terminate any program of deferred compensation at any future time as may be needed or desired to conform with applicable federal and state statutes, regulations and common law, or otherwise as the board may determine.  
(Code 1992, § 2-102) 
Secs. 2-77—2-86. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Employee Benefit Programs 
Sec. 2-87. - Ratification. 
Pursuant to Public Act No. 77 of 1989 (MCL 41.110b), the township hereby ratifies and confirms the validity of all other employee benefit programs for the benefit of certain of its officers and employees, and their dependents, as in existence on the adoption of this Code, including but not limited to life, accident, health, hospitalization, and medical insurance programs.  
(Code 1992, § 2-103) 
Sec. 2-88. - Determination. 
The township board shall, by resolution, determine all employee benefit programs to be offered to certain of the township's officers and employees, including but not limited to:  
(1) 
The type, term and circumstances of any particular benefit program. 

(2) 	
The definition and classes of employees and officers, and their dependents, eligible to receive such benefits. 

(3) 
The age, length of service, and any other requirements for eligibility for such benefits.  

(4) 
The amounts, if any, which the township will expend to procure such benefits.  

(5) 	
The formula, amounts, and/or limitations on amounts which may be deducted from the compensation of eligible officers and employees in payment of any portion of the premiums or charges established by the township board as being payable by the officers or employees for such benefits. 

(6) 	
A method for voluntary nonparticipation for officers and employees otherwise eligible for any such benefits. 

(7) 	
The appropriate township personnel who shall be responsible for daily administration, accounting, reporting, and/or supervisory functions for such benefits on the township's behalf.  


(Code 1992, § 2-104) 
Sec. 2-89. - Authority to modify or terminate programs. 
The township board shall have authority, by resolution, to amend, modify or even terminate any such employee benefit programs at any future time as may be needed or desired to conform with applicable federal and state statutes, regulations and common law, or otherwise as the board may determine.  
(Code 1992, § 2-105) 
Secs. 2-90—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 2-101—2-114. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sec. 2-115. - Authorization. 

This article is enacted under the authority of the state planning enabling act, Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3801 et seq.); the state zoning enabling act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.); and the charter township act, Public Act No. 359 of 1947 (MCL 42.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1992, § 14-26; Ord. No. 265, § 1, 7-16-1979; Ord. No. 08-42, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 2-116. - Membership. 
(a) 	
The planning commission shall consist of nine members. The members shall be appointed by the township supervisor, subject to approval by a majority vote of the members of the township board. 

(b) 	
All members shall be qualified electors of the township. There shall be no ex officio members on the planning commission, except that one member of the planning commission shall be a member of the zoning board of appeals appointed thereto by a majority vote of the commission. 

(c) 	
The membership shall be representative of the important segments of the township, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development; and be in accordance with major interests in the township, such as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public health, 

government, transportation, industry, and commerce. The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the township to the extent practicable.  

(d) 	
Members shall be appointed for three-year terms. If a vacancy occurs, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for an original appointment. As nearly as possible, appointments shall be made such that the terms of one-third of all the planning commission members will expire each year. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed.  

(e) 
Members may be compensated at a rate to be determined by the township board.  

(f) 	
The township board may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing.  


(Code 1992, § 14-27; Ord. No. 265, § 3, 7-16-1979; Ord. No. 08-42, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 2-117. - Functions. 
The planning commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the township board and shall exercise all the functions, duties and powers of planning commissions under the provisions of the state planning enabling act, Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3801 et seq.), and the state zoning enabling act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.; and so long as not inconsistent therewith, carry out such other duties, obligations and responsibilities as may be from time to time directed by the township board or any duly enacted township ordinance or resolution.  
(Code 1992, § 14-28; Ord. No. 265, § 4, 7-16-1979; Ord. No. 08-42, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 2-118. - Staffing. 
(a) 	
The township board shall employ a planning director and other planning personnel, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil employees of the township. 

(b) 	
The township board may contract for the parttime or fulltime services of planning or other consultants, experts, or technicians, and pay or authorize the payment of expenses within the funds budgeted and provided for planning purposes.  


(Code 1992, § 14-29; Ord. No. 265, § 5, 7-16-1979; Ord. No. 08-42, 11-17-2008) 
Secs. 2-119—2-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) ---  
State Law reference— Power of inhabitants to tax or vote money, MCL 41.3, 42.24 et seq.; local government fiscal responsibility act, MCL 141.1201 et seq.; revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq.  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Secs. 2-150—2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES SYSTEM[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) ---  
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-88, § 1, adopted December 1, 2014 , amended the title of div. 2 to read as set out herein. Previously div. 2 was titled cost recovery for emergency services. 
State Law reference— Collection of fees for emergency police or fire service, MCL 41.806a; expenses for which court may order person convicted to reimburse the local unit of government, MCL 769.1f; remediation, MCL 324.20101 et seq. 
Sec. 2-166. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Charter Township of Delta Fee for Emergency medical services Ordinance."  
( Ord. No. 14-88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Sec. 2-167. - Purpose. 
This article is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the township to charge fees for the provision of an emergency medical services system providing advanced life support, utility related emergency response, response to unauthorized open burning, criminal acts, and services relating to motor vehicle accidents and/or motor vehicle fires, including but not limited to, vehicle extrication, vehicle fire services, accident scene clean-up, accident scene extensive clean-up, and traffic redirection, to more nearly equalize payments of users for operation and maintenance of the emergency medical services system, and to authorize the township, through the fire chief and township manager, subject to approval of the township board, to enter into agreements with third parties for administration of a billing system to collect such fees.  
(Code 1992, § 6.5-22; Ord. No. 304, § 2, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 14­88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Sec. 2-168. - Definitions. 
Unless the context of this article specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Advanced life support means patient care that may include any care a paramedic is qualified to provide by paramedic education that meets the educational requirements established by the state department of public health under MCL 333.20912, MSA 14.15(20912) or is authorized to provide by the protocols established by the local medical control authority under MCL 333.20919, MSA 14.15(20919) for a paramedic.  
Ambulance means a motor vehicle or rotary aircraft that is primarily used or designated as available to provide transportation and basic life support, limited advanced life support, or advanced life support. 
Approval of the township board means a majority vote of the full board of the township. 
Emergency medical services personnel means a medical first responder, emergency medical technician, emergency medical technician specialist, paramedic, emergency medical services instructor-coordinator, or firefighter. 
Emergency medical services system means a comprehensive and integrated arrangement of the personnel, facilities, equipment, services, communications, and organizations necessary to provide emergency medical services within a particular geographic region.  
Fire chief means the individual whose job title is "fire chief" or, in the absence of a classification of "fire chief," the individual who performs the top supervisory and administrative functions of the fire department. 
Nonresident means a person who neither resides in nor pays property taxes to the charter township. 
Resident means an individual who is personally a property taxpayer or who lives within the geographical boundaries of the township and is subject directly, or indirectly, to the specific tax for the provision of an emergency medical services system. The fire chief and the township manager, subject to the approval of the township board, may formulate guidelines and shall make final residency determinations.  
Township manager means the individual whose title is "township manager" or, in the absence of a "township manager," the individual who is responsible for overseeing the fiscal budget of the township.  
(Code 1992, § 6.5-23; Ord. No. 304, § 3, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 07­35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 14-88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Sec. 2-169. - Charges for service. 
On behalf of the township, the fire chief and the township manager, subject to the approval of the township board, are responsible for and have the authority to charge fees for the costs of an emergency medical services system. The fees shall be binding upon all persons receiving such services as well as their successors in interest, assigns, estates and heirs. The motor vehicle owner or operator shall be assessed a full fee for services as applicable. In the case of multiple vehicles, each motor vehicle owner or operator shall be assessed an equal fee, with the total sum of which shall be the full cost of all applicable. 
(Code 1992, § 6.5-24; Ord. No. 304, § 4, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 07­35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 14-88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Sec. 2-170. - User fee. 
All users of an emergency medical services system shall be responsible for payment of user fees. For so long as the township has a specific tax for the provision of an emergency medical services system; however, the township shall pay on behalf of all residents all noninsured amounts assessed for their use of emergency medical services, as applicable. The township shall submit the above described payment on behalf of all township residents as follows:  
(1) 	
The township shall require that it be provided monthly emergency medical services system line item bills for emergency medical services system use, identifying:  

a. 	
Those individuals using the emergency medical services system who are township residents;  

b. 	
Whether the individual carries insurance coverage for any portion of emergency medical services; and  

c. 	
Each resident's emergency medical services system charges for which insurance coverage is unavailable, including but not limited to copays, deductibles, and amounts assessed over the insurance carrier's limiting charge.  



(2) 	
The township manager or the manager's designee shall pay on behalf of township residents all uninsured amounts charged for their use of emergency medical services system use within the township, as applicable, from tax funds allocated for the emergency medical services system. 

(3) 
Such payments shall be made on the residents' behalf on a monthly basis.  


(Code 1992, § 6.5-25; Ord. No. 304, § 5, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 01-03, § 1, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 07­35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 14-88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Sec. 2-171. - Fee schedule. 
The fees provided under this article shall be based on the attached fee schedule which is subject to review as needed by the township board. The fee schedule will encompass personnel, equipment, material and maintenance costs in such a form as to insure proper charges for services rendered. 
(Code 1992, § 6.5-26; Ord. No. 304, § 6, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 14­88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Sec. 2-172. - Disposition of funds. 
All monies received under the provisions of this article shall be placed in an account set up for the express purpose of funding expenses necessary to furnish an emergency medical services system.  
(Code 1992, § 6.5-27; Ord. No. 304, § 7, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 14­88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Sec. 2-173. - Contract with third parties. 
To facilitate the collection of fees to pay the costs for emergency services system, the fire chief and township manager, subject to the approval of the township board, may contract with third parties.  
(Code 1992, § 6.5-28; Ord. No. 304, § 8, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 14­88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Sec. 2-174. - Settlement or compromise of fees. 
To facilitate the collection of fees to pay the costs for emergency services, the fire chief and township manager, subject to the approval of the township board, may authorize the settlement or compromise of fees when such is deemed to be in the best interest of the parties. Additionally, the fire chief and township manager may establish a new, or revise any existing, policy related to the waiver of fees for accident clean-up and traffic redirection for township residents in those instances where the resident's insurance company has failed or refused to pay all or a portion thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 6.5-29; Ord. No. 304, § 9, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 14­88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Sec. 2-175. - Litigation. 
The township may enforce the provisions of this article by civil actions in court, for the collection of amounts due or other appropriate relief.  
(Code 1992, § 6.5-30; Ord. No. 304, § 10, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 14­88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Sec. 2-176. - Service not to be refused for nonpayment. 
Nothing in this article shall authorize any township department or township personnel to refuse or delay any service to any person, firm or corporation that has not paid for service or that owes for previous services or owes any money.  
(Code 1992, § 6.5-31; Ord. No. 304, § 11, 3-2-1992; Ord. No. 07-35, § 1, 3-5-2007; Ord. No. 14­88, § 1, 12-1-14 ) 
Secs. 2-177—2-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COST RECOVERY FOR HAZARDOUS WASTE CLEANUP[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) ---  
State Law reference— Collection of fees for emergency police or fire service, MCL 41.806a; expenses for which court may order person convicted to reimburse the local unit of government, MCL 769.1f; remediation, MCL 324.20101 et seq. 
Sec. 2-206. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Compressed gas means any material regulated as a compressed gas by the United States Department of Transportation through regulations found in 49 CFR 173.300. 
Emergency response means the providing, sending and/or utilizing of police, firefighting, emergency medical and rescue services by the township, or by a private industrial entity, corporation or other assisting government agency operating at the request or direction of the township or the state, for an incident resulting in a hazardous materials release or threatened release or the cleanup or abatement of same. 
Expenses of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the township, or by a private person, corporation or other assisting government agency, which is operating at the request or direction of the township, when making an emergency response to the hazardous materials incident, including the costs of providing police, firefighting, rescue services, emergency medical services, containment, storage, cleanup and abatement of all hazardous materials and conditions at the scene of the incident. The costs further include all salaries, wages, or fringe benefits of township personnel responding to the incident, salaries and wages of township personnel engaged in the investigation, supervision and report preparation regarding the incident, all salaries, wages or fringe benefits of personnel of assisting government agencies operating at the request or direction of the township, and all costs connected with the administration of the incident relating to any prosecution of the person responsible, including those relating to the production and appearance of witnesses at any court proceedings in relation thereto.  
(1) 
Costs shall also include:  

a. 
Such items as disposable materials and supplies used during the response to said incident;  

b. 	
The rental or leasing of equipment including, protective equipment and clothing, used for the specific response;  

c. 	
Replacement of equipment which is contaminated beyond reuse or repair during the response to said incident;  

d. 	
Special technical services and equipment, laboratory costs and equipment, services and supplies purchased for any specific evacuation relating to the incident.  



(2) 
Additional costs may include:  

a. 	
Decontamination of equipment contaminated during the response; 

b. 	
Other special services required for the emergency response; 

c. 	
Costs associated with the services; 

d. 	
Medical expenses incurred as a result of response activities;  

e. 	
Legal expenses that may be incurred as a result of the emergency response, including efforts to recover expenses pursuant to this division.  




Explosive means any material regulated as a class A or class B explosive by the United States Department of Transportation through regulations found in 49 CFR 173.53 and 173.88.  
Flammable liquid means any material regulated as a flammable liquid by the United States Department of Transportation through regulations found in 49 CFR 173.115. 
Flammable solid means any material regulated as a flammable solid by the United States Department of Transportation through regulations found in 49 CFR 173.150. 
Hazardous material means explosives, pyrotechnics, compressed gas, flammable liquid, flammable solid, combustible liquid, oxidizing material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid, poisonous solid, irritating material, etiological material, radioactive material, corrosive material or liquefied petroleum gas and also including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1) 	
Any material listed in the list of toxic pollutants found in 40 CFR 401.15, as amended, or in any other federal law or regulation;  

(2) 	
Any material designated as hazardous material by state or federal law or regulation, or township ordinance; or 

(3) 	
Any otherwise nonhazardous material released is a hazardous material for the purposes of this article if its presence causes a potential hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 


Owner means any person having a vested or contingent interest in the premises, real property, personal property, container or vehicle involved in the hazardous materials incident, including but not limited to any duly authorized agent or attorney, purchaser, devisee or fiduciary of said person having said vested or contingent interest.  
Oxidizing material means any material regulated as an oxidizing material by the United States Department of Transportation through regulations found in 49 CFR 173.151. 
Person means individuals, firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, contractor, employee, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assignees thereof.  
Poison means any liquid or gas that is life threatening when mixed with air in small amounts, and shall also include all those materials regulated as poison class A by the United States Department of Transportation through regulations found in 49 CFR 172.101 app. A. 
Premises means any lot or parcel of land, exclusive of building, and includes a parking lot, tourist camp, trailer camp, airport, stockyard, junkyard, wharf, pier, public roadway and any other place or enclosure, however owned, used or occupied. 
Radioactive material means any material required by the United States Department of Transportation to have type A packaging or other special protection or closed transport vehicles, under regulations found in 49 CFR 173.425.  
Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing which causes damage or harm to persons, property, natural resources, the public health or the environment. 
Threatened release means any imminent or impending event potentially causing but not resulting in a release which causes the township to undertake emergency response.  
Vehicle means any mode which is used as an instrument of conveyance, including but not limited to motor vehicles, railroads, boats, aircraft, etc.  
(Code 1992, § 12-207; Ord. No. 95-2, 5-15-1995; Ord. No. 03-11, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 2-207. - Findings and purpose. 
The township finds that a significant potential exists for responses to incidents involving the release or threatened release of hazardous materials. Such incidents create a great likelihood of personal injury or property damage. The control and abatement of such incidents places a significant financial and operational burden upon a township's firefighting, rescue and emergency medical services and other township resources. The township finds that this division is necessary to establish the liability for such incidents and to establish a policy and methods which will allow the township to seek recovery of township costs associated with emergency responses to hazardous material incidents. 
(Code 1992, § 12-206; Ord. No. 95-2, 5-15-1995) 
Sec. 2-208. - Liability for costs. 
(a) 	
Any person causing or contributing to the causing of a release or threatened release shall be liable to the township for the expenses of emergency response. 

(b) 	
The following persons shall be jointly and severally liable to the township for the payment of all costs and expenses incurred by the township as a result of emergency response, cleanup or abatement activity:  

(1) 	
Any person whose negligent or willful act or omission proximately causes such release or threatened release;  

(2) 	
The owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the operation, maintenance and/or condition of any building, premises, property or vehicle;  

(3) 	
The person who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous material or the material at the time of such release or threatened release without regard to fault or proximate cause; and 

(4) 	
The person who owned or had custody or control of the container which held hazardous material at the time of or immediately prior to such release or threatened release without regard to fault or proximate cause. 


(Code 1992, § 12-208; Ord. No. 95-2, 5-15-1995) 
Sec. 2-209. - Recovery of costs. 
(a) 	
The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expenses under this division. The charge constitutes a debt of the person and is collectible by the township in the same manner as an obligation under contract, express or implied.  

(b) 	
The township personnel and departments involved in an emergency response shall keep an itemized record of recoverable costs resulting from a release or threatened release including an emergency action/response. Promptly after completion of any emergency response, the appropriate township department shall certify those expenses to the township manager. 

(c) 	
Costs of the township shall not include costs of actual fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the fire department in situations not involving hazardous materials.  

(d) 	
The township may, within ten days of receiving itemized costs, or any part thereof incurred for an emergency response, submit a bill for those costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this division. The bill shall require full payment within 30 days from the date of mailing or service of said bill upon the responsible person. 

(e) 	
Any failure by the person described in this division as liable or responsible for expenses of an emergency response to pay said bill within 30 days of mailing or service of the bill shall constitute a default on said bill. In case of default, the township, by resolution of the township board, shall have the right and power to add all emergency response costs to the tax roll of such property involved in the hazardous materials incident, and to levy and collect such costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real property taxes against said property or premises. The township shall also have the right to bring action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect said costs if the township deems such action to be necessary. 

(f) 	
The township board may, by resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs included within the expense of an emergency response. This schedule shall be available at the office of the township clerk for inspection by the public during regular business hours. 


(Code 1992, § 12-209; Ord. No. 95-2, 5-15-1995) 
Sec. 2-210. - Conflict with state or federal law. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to conflict with state or federal laws requiring persons responsible for or causing a release or threatened release from engaging in remediation activities or paying the cost thereof, or both.  
(Code 1992, § 12-210; Ord. No. 95-2, 5-15-1995) 
Sec. 2-211. - Nonexclusive remedy. 
The remedies provided by this division shall be in addition to any other remedies available in equity or at law and such penalties as provided by law or ordinance.  
(Code 1992, § 12-211; Ord. No. 95-2, 5-15-1995) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 4-1—4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  

State Law reference— Licensing, MCL 436.1501 et seq.  
Sec. 4-19. - Definitions. 
Words shall be considered to have their common and customary meanings, except as further defined by the state liquor control code of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.), or by the liquor control commission. 
(Code 1992, § 2.5-2; Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 8-16-1993) 
Sec. 4-20. - Application for new license. 
(a) 	
Application. An application for a license to sell beer or wine and/or spirits on premises by the glass shall be made to the township board via the clerk, in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual; or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a partnership or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information:  

(1) 	
The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; or, in the case of a copartnership, the person entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the objects for which organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and, if a majority interest in the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, the name and address of such person. 

(2) 	
The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 

(3) 
The character of business of the applicant.  

(4) 	
The length of time said applicant has been in business of that character, or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued.  

(5) 	
The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 

(6) 	
A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application. 

(7) 	
A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason for any matter or thing contained in this article or the laws of the state. 

(8) 	
A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States or any ordinances of the township in the conduct of its business.  

(9) 	
The application shall be accompanied by building and plat plans showing the entire structure and premises and, in particular, the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans and specifications shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and, where appropriate, adequate plans for screening and noise control.  

(b) 	
Receiving applications. The clerk shall refuse to accept an application which does not contain all the required information listed in subsection (a) of this section. The clerk may also refuse to accept an application if aware the applicant does not meet the requirements of subsection (c)(1), (6), (7), (8), 

(12) 
or (13) of this section. Applications which do not meet subsection (c)(14) of this section shall be accepted by the clerk only if the proper petitions for rezoning and/or special land use permits, as applicable, have been filed.  

(c)  
Restrictions on granting new licenses. No new licenses shall be issued to:  

(1) 
A person whose license has previously been revoked.  

(2) 	
A person who, at the time of application or renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.  

(3) 	
A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership shall qualify to obtain a license. 

(4) 	
A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or a stock owner or stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason.  

(5) 	
A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or agent possess the same qualifications required of the licensee.  

(6) 	
A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor. 

(7) 	
A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full period for which the license is issued.  

(8) 	
For premises where there exists a violation of the applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable zoning regulations, or applicable public health regulations.  

(9) 	
For any premises unless the sale of beer, wine or spirits is shown to be incidental and subordinate to other permitted business uses upon the site, such as but not limited to food sales, motel operations or recreational activities.  

(10) 	
For premises where it is determined by a majority of the board that the premises do not or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, noise or nuisance control.  

(11) 	
Where the board determines that the proposed location is inappropriate, considering any one or more of the following factors:  

a. 	
The desirability of establishing a location in developed, commercial areas, in preference to isolated undeveloped areas, the attitude of residents and property owners;  

b. 	
Traffic safety; 

c. 	
Accessibility to the site from abutting roads;  

d. 	
Capability of abutting roads to accommodate the commercial activity; 

e. 	
Distance from public or private schools for minors;  

f. 
Proximity of an inconsistent zoning classification; and  

g. 	
Accessibility for primary roads or state highways.  



(12) 	
For premises where any real or personal property taxes, special assessments, sewer charges or water charges are delinquent and remain unpaid.  

(13) 	
For premises lacking public water supply, public sanitary sewer, or adequate stormwater control, unless the applicant has signed agreements with the appropriate governmental agencies to provide said facilities. (Stormwater control must also be acceptable to the township board.) 

(14) 
For premises lacking the proper zoning and/or special land use permits as may be applicable.  

(15) 	
For premises and/or proposed licensees who are in violation of any provisions of this Code of Ordinances.  

(16) 	
For any premises unless it contains a full service restaurant, which is open to the public, having dining facilities that seat no less than 50 persons, wherein food is prepared and consumed on the premises, and whereby at least 50 percent of the gross receipts of the premises are derived from the sale of the food consumed on the premises.  

(17) 	
For any premises where applicant or license suffers or allow or intends to allow in or upon the premises a person who exposes to public view any pubic region, whole or part of the anus, whole or part of the buttocks, whole or part of the genitals, the breast area exposing any portion of the breast below a line immediately above the top of the areola, either directly or indirectly, including but not limited to see through clothing articles, as well as other types of nudity prohibited by statute or local ordinance.  

(d) 	
Terms and licenses. Approval of a license shall be for a period of one year, subject to annual renewal by the township board upon continued compliance with the regulations of this article. Approval of a license shall be with the understanding that any necessary remodeling or new construction (including utilities) for the use of the license shall be commenced within six months of the action of the township board or the state liquor control commission approving such license, whichever last occurs. Any unreasonable delay in the completion of such remodeling or construction may subject the license to revocation.  

(e) 	
License hearing. The township board shall conduct a public hearing before granting or denying the license application. Following such hearing, the board shall submit to the applicant a written statement of its finding and determination. The board's determination shall be based upon satisfactory compliance with the restrictions set forth in subsection (c) of this section.  

(f) 	
Nongranting of new licenses. Nothing in this article shall be construed to dictate that new licenses must be granted if available even though qualified applicants have applied. The township board may reserve licenses for classes of facilities it believes would especially benefit the community. The board may refuse to grant licenses based upon its perception of the best interest of the community.  


(Code 1992, § 2.5-3; Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 02-07, § 1, 9-3-2002) 
Sec. 4-21. - Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation of licenses. 
The township board may recommend revocation or nonrenewal of a license upon a determination by it that, based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at hearing, any of the following exist:  
(1) 
The license was originally obtained or previously renewed by fraud.  

(2) 
A person's license was previously revoked.  

(3) 	
A person, at the time of renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application.  

(4) 	
A member of a copartnership would not qualify to retain a license under subsection (3) of this section. 

(5) 	
A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or a stock owner or stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason.  

(6) 	
A person's business is conducted by a manager or agent, unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee.  

(7) 	
A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of wine, beer or spirits.  

(8) 	
A person who does not own the licensed premises or does not have a lease therefor for the full period for which the license would be renewed.  

(9) 	
There exists a violation on the licensed premises of the applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable zoning regulations, or applicable public health regulations.  

(10) 	
The sale of beer, wine or spirits is not shown to be incidental and subordinate to other permitted business uses upon the site, such as but not limited to food sales, motel operations or recreational activities.  

(11) 	
Any real or personal property taxes, special assessments, sewer charges or water charges on the licensed premises, are delinquent and remain unpaid.  

(12) 	
It is determined by a majority of the board that the premises have been allowed to fall into a state of disrepair, off-street parking has become inadequate, lighting deteriorated, refuse accumulated, noise increased, screening has deteriorated or nuisances developed upon the premises.  

(13) 	
The licensee, its employees or agents, have caused, suffered, permitted, committed or allowed a violation of the state liquor laws or any penal statute of the state to occur on the licensed premises.  

(14) 	
There occurs on the premises a violation of the administrative rules of the state liquor control commission or of such rules or regulations of such agency as may supersede the liquor control commission. 

(15) 
Fighting has occurred on the premises.  

(16) 
The premises and/or licensees are in violation of any provisions of this Code of Ordinances.  


(Code 1992, § 2.5-4; Ord. No. 93-7, § 1, 8-16-1993) 
Sec. 4-22. - Objections to renewal and request for revocation. 
(a) 	
Procedures. Before filing an objection to the renewal or request for revocation of a license with the state liquor control commission, the township board shall serve the license holder, by first class mail, to the holder's last known address, mailed not less than ten days prior to hearing with notice of a hearing, which notice shall contain the following: 

(1) 
Notice of proposed action.  

(2) 
Reasons for proposed hearing.  

(3) 
Date, time and place of hearing. 

(4) 	
A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony and confront adverse witnesses. 


Following the hearing, the township board shall submit to the license holder and the commission a written statement of its findings and determinations. 
(b) 	
Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. The township board shall recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license upon a determination by it that, based on a preponderance of the evidence presented at hearing, any of the following exists:  

(1) 	
Violation of any of the restrictions on licenses set forth in section 4-21, except that free­standing bar buildings established prior to the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be refused a license renewal on the grounds they may not meet the requirements of section 4-21(10);  

(2) 
Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises; or 

(3) 	
Discontinuance or termination of the sale of beer and wine or spirits under the license at the premises for 12 consecutive months. 


(Code 1992, § 2.5-5; Ord. No. 937, § 1, 8-16-1993) 
Sec. 4-23. - Nonrefundable application fee. 
Before considering any application submitted in accordance with the requirements of section 4-20, a nonrefundable fee shall be collected by the township clerk in order to defray the cost of the investigation of the applicant as mandated. The application fee shall apply to new and transfer liquor license applications.  
(Code 1992, § 2.5-6; Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 12-30-2002) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
State Law reference— Authority of township to regulate public amusements, MCL 41.181; carnival-amusement safety act of 1966, MCL 408.651 et seq.; public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq.; crimes relating to public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 6-1. - Township clerk certification; investigation of applicant's character. 
(a) 	
In all cases where the certification of the township clerk is required prior to the issuance of any license by the township clerk, such certification shall be based upon a finding that the person making application for such license is of good moral character.  

(b) 	
The term "good moral character," when used in this Code for the purpose of licensing, means the propensity on the part of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner.  

(c) 	
A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used, in and of itself, as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination, and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that at the current time he has the ability and is likely to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner, that he is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he seeks to be licensed.  

(d) 	
The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or requested by the township in a determination of good moral character: 

(1) 
Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction.  

(2) 	
Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction.  

(3) 	
Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner.  

(4) 	
Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 

(e) 	
When a person is found to be unqualified for a license because of a lack of good moral character, or similar criteria, the person shall be furnished by the township clerk with a statement to that effect. The statement shall contain a complete record of the evidence upon which the determination was based. The person shall be entitled, as of right, to a rehearing on the issue before the township board if he has relevant evidence not previously considered regarding his qualifications. 


(Code 1992, § 3-1) 

State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 338.41 et seq. 
Sec. 6-2. - Conditions prerequisite to license issuance. 
The township clerk shall not issue a new license, nor issue a renewed license, nor submit a license application to the township board for approval (new or renewal) until the applicant has met all applicable conditions of this chapter. Applicant must continue to meet all conditions of a new license as a minimum to qualifying for a license renewal. No licenses shall be issued (new or renewed) under this chapter until the applicant has met all applicable township regulations and ordinances and has paid all required township fees, utility bills, and taxes when due.  
(Code 1992, § 3-2; Ord. No. 93-8, § 1, 10-4-1993) 
Secs. 6-3—6-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENTERTAINMENTS AND PERFORMANCES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 6-15. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly advertise, produce, operate, exhibit or cause to be advertised, produced, operated or exhibited, in the township, any activity regulated in this article without first having obtained a license. 
(Code 1992, § 3-109; Ord. No. 243, § 8.00, 10-21-1974) 
Sec. 6-16. - Operational requirements. 
After issuance of a license under this article, the licensee shall meet the following requirements:  
(1) 	
The insurance and bond required shall continue in full force and effect until expiration or termination of the license.  

(2) 	
The licensee shall permit township, county and state officials to enter upon the licensed premises at all reasonable times to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and other applicable township, county and state ordinances and statutes.  

(3) 	
The licensee shall not knowingly permit violations of any township ordinance, county ordinance or state statute by any of his patrons. 

(4) 	
The licensee shall provide off-street parking facilities sufficient to accommodate all persons to be admitted to his place of business.  

(5) 	
The licensee shall not admit to his premises any person who is then under the influence of intoxicating beverages or of drugs, nor shall he knowingly permit the possession, sale or consumption of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances on his business premises.  

(6) 	
The licensee shall provide sufficient fences or barriers or shall so patrol the boundaries of his business premises as to efficiently prevent his patrons from directly trespassing on neighboring premises.  

(7) 	
The licensee shall so conduct his business that it shall not give rise to a nuisance by reason of noise, vibration, smoke, odor or dust.  

(8) 
The licensee shall limit his business activities to the hours specified in his license. 

(9) 	
The licensee shall post a copy of this article and a copy of his license in his place of business in a location where they can be read easily by his patrons.  

(10) 
The license shall pay all required fees, utility bills and taxes by the due dates.  


(Code 1992, § 3-108; Ord. No. 123, § 5, 7-6-1971; Ord. No. 93-8, § 7, 10-4-1993) 
Secs. 6-17—6-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 
Sec. 6-30. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor, operate, exhibit, perform or cause to be operated, exhibited or performed any public amusement, entertainment, bingo game, exhibition, circus, carnival, sporting event or religious service under canvas or in the open air, within the township without first obtaining a license therefor from the township clerk. The listing is illustrative only and is not meant to be all inclusive. The township clerk is hereby authorized to grant such license for the aforesaid purposes subject to the approvals and requirements contained within the ordinances, code, laws and regulations of township, the county and the state.  
(Code 1992, § 3-101; Ord. No. 243, § 3.00, 10-21-1974; Ord. No. 93-8, § 5, 10-4-1993) 
Sec. 6-31. - Exceptions to requirement. 
(a) 	
No license shall be required under this article where the sponsor, operator, exhibitor or performer of such show is the state or a political subdivision thereof.  

(b) 	
This article shall not require a license for any exhibition, entertainment, amusement or performance conducted by established businesses in the township for the purpose of stimulating business or sales. 


(Code 1992, § 3-102; Ord. No. 123, § 1, 7-6-1971; Ord. No. 243, § 3.00, 10-21-1974) 
Sec. 6-32. - Application. 
(a) 	
Applications for a license to operate any activity regulated by this article shall be made by the owner, manager, sponsor or operator thereof on forms to be furnished by the township clerk and shall be sworn to and filed with the township clerk not less than 30 days prior to the date upon which the license applied for shall become effective; provided, however, that the township clerk may, upon good cause shown, allow the filing of an application less than 30 days prior to the effective date.  

(b) 
The application shall contain the following information:  

(1) 	
The name and address of the person applying for the permit; the full name and address of the owner, operator and sponsor of such show.  

(2) 	
The proposed location and dates of operation of such show, or a statement that operation will be on a continuous basis and the hours of such operation.  

(3) 
A brief description of the type of activity.  

(4) 
A statement setting forth all admission charges. 

(5) 	
Such other information as the township clerk shall deem reasonably necessary and proper for the full protection of the township, as well as the applicant in order to effectuate the purposes of this article and determine whether the terms of this article and state statutes have been complied with. 


(Code 1992, § 3-104; Ord. No. 243, § 4.00, 10-21-1974) 
Sec. 6-33. - Fees. 
(a) 	
A fee for each license required by this article shall be in an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. The fee, as determined by the township board, must be paid prior to the time that the license is issued. 

(b) 	
In the case of the circus and/or a carnival or activity where rides, concessions and amusements are provided that are in the nature of a circus or carnival operated or sponsored by a person who is classified as a nonprofit organization for federal internal revenue purposes, the township board may designate such fees for the license as it deems necessary.  


(Code 1992, § 3-105; Ord. No. 243, § 5.00, 10-21-1974) 
Sec. 6-34. - Insurance and bond prerequisite to issuance. 
(a) 	
Prior to issuance by the township clerk of any license under this article, each person applying for a license shall file with the township clerk a public liability and property damage insurance policy, insuring such persons and the township against any liability imposed on such person and/or the township arising out of the operation of such show in the township by such persons. Such policy shall provide for payment as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. Such policy shall bear an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the township clerk at least ten days prior to the expiration of such policy, whether by way of cancellation or limitation of term.  

(b) 	
Prior to issuance by the township clerk of any license under this article, each person applying for a license shall file with the township clerk a bond in the penal sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time, indemnifying the township against any and all violations of any ordinance, regulation or rule of the township, to indemnify the township for any and all damage to public property of any kind or nature, and conditioned that such licensee will pay to the township all fines or penalties which may be assessed against the licensee for breach of any ordinance relating to the show carried on by such person and conditioned further that such licensee will fulfill any obligation to a resident of the state, which obligation is incurred as a result of the operation of such show by the licensee within the township.  

(c) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person required to have a license under this article, to sponsor, operate, exhibit, perform or cause to be operated, exhibited or performed such show within the township unless a policy of insurance and a bond as required by this section are in force at the time of such operation, exhibition or performance. 


(Code 1992, § 3-106; Ord. No. 123, § 4, 7-6-1971; Ord. No. 243, § 6.00, 10-21-1974) 
Sec. 6-35. - Approval, issuance. 
Upon approval by the township board and when the township clerk is satisfied that the licensee has complied with all provisions of this article and state statutes, the township clerk shall immediately issue the license provided for in this article. The township board may require as a condition to the issuance of the license approval by the chief of the fire department, by the county sheriff's department and by the township treasurer. 
(Code 1992, § 3-107; Ord. No. 243, § 7.00, 10-21-1974; Ord. No. 93-8, § 6, 10-4-1993) 
Secs. 6-36—6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -EXOTIC CABARETS 
Sec. 6-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Exotic cabaret means an establishment which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. Any establishment which attempts to engage in activities prohibited by this article shall also fall under this definition for enforcement purposes. 
Operator or owner means any corporation, partnership, association, owner, agent, operator, employee, firm, person, group or other party who is responsible for the establishment and/or operation or control of an exotic cabaret.  
Person means all parties included in the definition of the term "operator" or "owner" plus any other persons, customers, patrons, employees, individuals, groups or parties present on the premises of the exotic cabaret at any time. 
(Code 1992, § 8-142; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-21-1994) 
Sec. 6-52. - Application. 
(a) 	Required. Any operator operating or proposing to operate an exotic cabaret, as herein defined by section 6-51, shall be required to obtain a license from the township clerk upon payment of the prescribed license fee. Application for such license shall be made to the township clerk upon a form to be supplied by the township clerk for that person. When an application has been reviewed by the township clerk, township treasurer, the township building official, and the township fire chief, and when the township board has approved the application, a license shall be granted. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any operator to conduct the business of an exotic cabaret as defined in section 6-51, without first obtaining a license as herein provided. 
(b) Contents; age restrictions; separate application for each exotic cabaret. 
(1) 
The application for such license shall contain the following information:  

a. 	
Name and address of the licensee, and the name and address of the owner of the exotic cabaret. If a partnership, the name and address of each partner thereof. If a corporation, the name and address of the local officer or resident agent of such corporation. 

b. 	
Whether applicant has ever been convicted of violations of this article or has ever been convicted of any felony.  

c. 	
Place where exotic cabaret is to be established, and the type of entertainment to be provided.  



(2) 	
No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he shall be over 18 years of age and a citizen of the United States. A separate application shall be made for each exotic cabaret.  

(3) 	
In the event of any change in the information furnished pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section, it shall be the duty of the licensee to inform the township clerk, township treasurer, township fire marshal, township building official and the county sheriff of such change.  


(c)  To be in duplicate; investigation; forwarding to township board. 
(1) 	
Application for license shall be made in duplicate, both copies of which shall be filed with the township clerk who shall investigate same and cause:  

a. 	
The township treasurer to determine if all applicable fees such as taxes, special assessments, and utility bills have been paid on the proposed location;  

b. 	
The township clerk to ascertain if the applicant has a criminal record; 

c. 	
The township building official to ascertain from an investigation of the location where it is proposed to operate such exotic cabaret whether such operation would violate any state construction code or zoning ordinances or statutes; and  

d. 	
The township fire marshal to determine from an investigation of the location where it is proposed to operate such exotic cabaret whether such operation would violate any fire safety ordinance or statute. 



(2) 	
Upon the township clerk's determination that the applicant meets the requirements contained in this article, and upon receipt of approvals from the township treasurer, the township clerk, the township building official, and the township fire marshal, the township clerk shall submit one copy of the application to the township board with a recommendation of approval. The township board, upon receipt of an application with the township clerk's recommendation of approval, may approve such application.  


(Code 1992, §§ 8-144—8-146; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-21-1994) 
Sec. 6-53. - Fees and expiration date. 
Every operator shall pay an annual license fee to the township clerk for the privilege of operating or maintaining an exotic cabaret as defined in section 6-51 hereof as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time. Each license shall expire at 12:00 midnight on the following March 31.  
(Code 1992, § 8-147; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-21-1994) 
Sec. 6-54. - Display license, transfer of location or to new owner. 
(a) 	
If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location within the township, the license may be transferred to such new location upon application to the township clerk, giving street and number of new location, and approval being given by the township treasurer, township building official, township fire marshal and township board. 

(b) 	
When the business of a licensee is sold or transferred, the licenses of such licensee may be transferred to the new owner or transferee with the consent of the township treasurer, county sheriff, township building official and township fire marshal upon application to the township clerk, and upon approval by the township board.  

(c) 	
The license granted by the township shall be displayed together with the text of section 6-56 next to the documents required by section 6-56(4)b. 


(Code 1992, § 8-148; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-21-1994) 
Sec. 6-55. - Revocation of license. 
Each license issued under this article is subject to the right which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same, should the licensee, directly or indirectly; permit any violation of the provisions of this article or any other provisions of this Code of Ordinances, or the law of the state. Such license may be revoked by the township board as provided in article II of this chapter.  
(Code 1992, § 8-149; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-21-1994) 
Sec. 6-56. - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations shall govern all exotic cabarets licensed under this article: 
(1) 
It shall be unlawful for any operator, his agent or employee, or any person on the premises to:  

a. 	
Engage in or permit any disorderly conduct in or on the premises, or permit such place to become a resort for thieves, prostitutes or other disorderly persons. 

b. 	
Engage in or permit, in or upon the premises, the inviting, annoying, molesting or accosting and soliciting for sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation or for any other act by a person involving the touching or contacting of the genitals of another, whether the act is to be performed on or off the premises.  



(2) 
Engage in or permit on the licensed premises any of the following conduct:  

a. 	
The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation or any other act by a person involving the touching or contacting of the genitals of another. 

b. 	
The erotic caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, pubic region or genitals.  

c. 	
The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, pubic region, anus, vulva or genitals.  

d. 	
The exposure of the post-pubertal female breast by any person other than an entertainer while appearing on stage. For the purpose of this subsection, a female breast is considered exposed if any portion of the breast, below a line immediately above the top of the areola, is exposed.  

e. 	
Permit any person to smoke or hold a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe on the dance floor while dancing is permitted or to engage in such activity himself.  



(3) 
It shall be unlawful for any operator, or his agent or employer, to: 

a. 	
Employ any entertainers except under written contract, and secured from booking agencies licensed by the state. A copy of the contract signed by the booking agent and the operator or his authorized agent, specifying the names of the entertainers to be provided, shall be kept on the premises where the entertainment is provided, and shall be made available for inspection at the request of any officer of the law having jurisdiction, by the operator or by the person designated by the operator to be in charge of the licensed premises. Such entertainers shall comply with the labor laws of the state. Booking agents and booking agencies shall be responsible for and shall, upon demand of any officer of the law having jurisdiction, furnish a validated certificate of birth as proof of the age of any entertainer thus employed. It shall be unlawful for any entertainer to engage in any activity prohibited by this article or to arrange a contract with any operator or agent of an exotic cabaret for the services of an entertainer knowing that it is the practice of such exotic cabaret to permit or allow such prohibited activities.  

b. 	
Fail to provide separate and adequate dressing rooms for male and female entertainers, if entertainment is provided.  

c. 	
Permit or allow any patron to take any active part in any entertainment; except, that patrons may engage or participate in group or community singing.  

d. 	
Permit overcrowding of the dance floor, or provide less than 200 square feet of dance space in establishments which have a seating capacity of less than 100 persons, or less than 400 square feet in establishments which have a seating capacity of 100 or more persons. Such dance space shall be plainly indicated by floor markings and shall be kept free of tables, chairs or any other obstacles during the time that dancing is permitted.  

e. 	
Permit any intoxicated person to be sold or served any alcoholic liquors, or permit such person to dance, loiter or be employed on the premises.  

f. 	
Permit employees, including entertainers, to eat, drink, solicit drinks or otherwise mingle with the patrons. Entertainers under 18 years of age shall not be permitted to remain in that portion of the licensed premises that is open to the public excepting during periods of actual performance or when accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or spouse over 18 years of age.  

g. 	
Engage in or permit any illegal act or occupation on or adjacent to the premises.  

h. 	
Engage in, permit or allow gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling apparatus or paraphernalia. Only those amusement devices which have been licensed by the township shall be permitted.  

i. 	
Permit any person to remain in or on the license premises who engages in conduct prohibited in subsection (2)a or b of this section, or who exposes to public view any portion of his private parts as described in subsection (2)c or d of this section.  

j. 	
Permit the exhibition of pictures or films depicting any of the conduct prohibited in subsection (2) of this section.  



(4) 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or manage an exotic cabaret unless:  

a. 	
He, or an employee designated by him to be temporarily in charge of operations, is on the premises whenever patrons are present on the premises;  

b. 	
His name, and the name of the employee designated by him to be temporarily in charge of operations, together with photographs of such persons clearly identifying their facial features, shall be prominently displayed in full view of the licensed premises together with any license issued by the state liquor control commission; and 

c. 	
The names and addresses of the owners, operators and managers are registered with the township clerk.  



(5) 	
It shall be unlawful for any licensee of any exotic cabaret, his agent or employee, to employ any person as a dancer or entertainer unless such person possesses a valid entertainer's identification card from the township.  

(6) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to provide his services as a dancer or entertainer in an exotic cabaret unless such person possesses at the place of employment a valid entertainer's identification card issued by the township.  

(7) 	
The clerk of the township shall issue or renew an entertainer's identification card to an applicant after having completed a criminal record check through the county sheriff's department and the state police identification bureau, provided that the clerk may issue a temporary or probationary card pending the determination of the applicant's eligibility for a permanent identification card. A record of conviction for an offense involving gambling, narcotics, prostitution, pandering or pornography, or a violation of any provision of this article within the preceding two years, shall constitute grounds for refusal to issue or renew an entertainer's identification card. The entertainer's identification card shall be renewed annually. Such identification card shall remain the property of the township and shall be surrendered on demand upon proof being submitted to the township clerk of any violation of any of the conditions of issuance. 


(Code 1992, § 8-150; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-21-1994) 
Sec. 6-57. - Validity and severalty clause. 
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this article to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this article not specifically included in said ruling. Further, if any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this article to a particular exotic cabaret, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other exotic cabaret not specifically included in said ruling.  
(Code 1992, § 8-151; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-21-1994) 
Sec. 6-58. - Conflict with other ordinances or laws. 
Where any condition imposed by any provision of this article is either more restrictive or less restrictive than any comparable condition imposed by any other provision of this article or by the provision of any other provision of this Code of Ordinances, state or federal law, the provision which is more restrictive or which imposes the higher standard or requirement shall govern. 
(Code 1992, § 8-152; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-21-1994) 
Sec. 6-59. - Penalty and forfeiture of license. 
In addition to any other penalty provided for violation of this article, any licensee hereunder who shall be second time convicted of any of the provisions in this article, shall ipso facto, upon such second conviction, forfeit any and all rights or privileges granted or conferred by any license issued by virtue of this article.  
(Code 1992, § 8-153; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-21-1994) 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  

State Law reference— State construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq.; electrical administrative act, MCL 338.881 et seq.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 8-1. - Violations and penalties. 

(a) 	
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction as prescribed by section 1-7. 

(b) 	
This chapter shall be enforced by the township building official or designee who is hereby designated as the authorized township official to issue municipal civil infraction citations, directing alleged violators to appear in court, or issue municipal civil infraction violation notices, directing alleged violators to appear at the township municipal violations bureau as provided by this Code.  

(c) 
The issuance of municipal civil infraction citations shall be pursuant to chapter 20, article II. 


(Code 1992, § 4-365; Ord. No. 98-7, 8-3-1998; Ord. No. 19-106 , § 1, 5-6-2019) 
Secs. 8-2—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 8-21. - Enforcement. 
In accordance with section 8b(6) of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1508b(6)), the building official of the township is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the township under Public Act 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), to enforce the state construction code. The township assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of such code throughout its corporate limits.  
(Code 1992, § 4-26; Ord. No. R-01-01, § 1, 8-6-2001) 
Secs. 8-22—8-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -MANUFACTURED HOUSING 
Sec. 8-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Manufactured housing means a mobile home, residential building, dwelling unit, dwelling rooms or a building component which is designed for long-term residential use and is wholly or substantially constructed at an off-site location. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities and which is, or is intended to be, attached to the ground, to another structure, or to a utility system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days, but not including a recreational vehicle. 
(Code 1992, § 10-1; Ord. No. 277, § 3, 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-47. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to establish minimum standards for the installation of mobile homes on individual lots outside of a mobile home park. Such standards are intended to ensure that the mobile home is anchored to protect against wind damage, connected to utility facilities, properly mounted on a foundation, constructed to nationally accepted standards and compatible in appearance with existing residential development in the vicinity.  
(Code 1992, § 10-26; Ord. No. 277, § 2, 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-48. - Variance. 
The township zoning board of appeals shall have the power and duty to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the provisions of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty. A variance shall be granted pursuant to the provisions of chapter 23 of the township zoning ordinance, as amended.  
(Code 1992, § 10-28; Ord. No. 277, § 7, 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-49. - Installer's license. 
A person who installs or repairs mobile homes within the township for compensation shall be licensed as a mobile home installer and repairer with the state manufactured housing commission.  (Code 1992, § 10-29; Ord. No. 277, § 6(A), 7-19-1982) State Law reference— State licensing of installers, MCL 125.2325. 
Sec. 8-50. - Removal of wheels. 
The towing mechanism, wheels, tires and running lights shall be removed from a mobile home after it is placed on the pillars. 
(Code 1992, § 10-30; Ord. No. 277, § 6(B), 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-51. - Additions to a mobile home. 
(a) 	
Any structural addition to a mobile home shall be constructed in compliance with the state construction code provisions for one-family dwellings if the addition is site built. If the addition is a premanufactured expando, add-a-room or similar construction, it shall comply with the provisions of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development's mobile home construction and safety standards. 

(b) 	
The addition shall not cover any exterior bathroom or bedroom window of the mobile home. No bathroom, except where mechanical ventilation is provided or bedroom window shall exit, vent or open into an addition. 

(c) 	
A building permit shall not be issued for an addition which necessitates or results in structural alterations, such as the removal of a portion of a roof or wall, which invalidates the mobile home's compliance with the provisions of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development's mobile home construction and safety standards.  


(Code 1992, § 10-31; Ord. No. 277, § 6(C), 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-52. - Number per lot. 
A lot or parcel shall contain no more than one mobile home. This section shall not apply to mobile homes located within a planned unit development or multifamily development.  
(Code 1992, § 10-32; Ord. No. 277, § 6(D), 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-53. -Mobile homes on individual lots. 
The regulations contained in this article shall not apply to mobile homes located in a licensed mobile home park except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required herein.  
(Code 1992, § 10-33; Ord. No. 277, § 6(E), 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-54. - Permitted mobile homes. 
As required by the provisions of the township zoning ordinance, as amended, the mobile home shall meet the following standards:  
(1) 	
The mobile home, and the lot on which it is situated, shall comply with the minimum development standards contained within schedules A, B and D, as amended, of the zoning ordinance.  

(2) 	
Any one floor of a mobile home shall contain a dwelling area which is a minimum of 20 feet square exclusive of garage, basement or porch.  

(3) 	
A mobile home's construction, plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation within and connected to a mobile home shall comply with the mobile home construction and safety standards as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), being 24 CFR 3280 as amended. In addition, all mobile homes shall comply with applicable roof snow load and strength requirements.  


(Code 1992, § 10-34; Ord. No. 277, § 4, 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-55. - Installation of pillars. 
(a) 	
For all new mobile homes, the manufacturer shall provide express written instructions for the installation specifying the location and required minimum imposed load capacity of pillars and the location and the required minimum imposed load capacity of any other recommended stabilizing devices.  

(b) 
The installation of mobile homes shall, at a minimum, comply with the following specifications: 

(1) 	
Pillars shall be installed directly under each main frame beam. If the distance between the main frame beams does not conform to the pillars that are permanently installed on the mobile home site, cross beams shall be used. These cross beams may be of steel or pressure-treated wood which resists decay, and has an imposed load capacity of 3,000 pounds per square foot (psf). The cross beams shall extend a minimum of six inches beyond each main frame beam, but shall not extend beyond the sides of the mobile home. A wood beam shall not rest on the ground, but shall rest on the cap. If the cross beam interferes with a utility to the mobile home, the cross beam placement may be between blocks. If a cross beam is used between blocks, it shall be a minimum of six inches by eight inches.  

(2) 	
Pillars shall be placed on ten-foot centers along the length of each main frame beam, but may be placed at less than ten-foot centers. If the pillars interfere with the axle area, they may be placed to a maximum of 13-foot centers, but the pillar placement shall not be less in number than if placed on ten-foot centers.  

(3) 
The pillars nearest each end of the mobile home shall be within three feet of either end. 

(4) 	
All grass and organic material shall be removed and the pillar shall be placed on stable soil a minimum of 42 inches below grade.  

(5) 
All pillars shall be backfilled with a suitable material. 

(6) 	
That portion of a mobile home pillar installed below ground shall be constructed of solid concrete with a minimum diameter of 18 inches for its entire length. A cap shall be placed on top of the pillar. A wood plate one inch by eight inches by 16 inches may be placed on top of the cap for leveling. Shims may be fitted and driven tight between the wood plate or cap and the main frame and shall not take up more than one inch of vertical height.  

(7) 
Pillars shall be installed perpendicular to the main frame of the mobile home.  

(c) 	
If the manufacturer's recommended installation specifications exceed the minimum specifications stated herein, the manufacturer's specifications shall in all cases be complied with.  

(d) 	
Mobile homes may be installed on a basement or crawl space-type foundation, provided the foundation complies with the state construction code, and meets the manufacturer's specifications for pillar placement and imposed load capacity.  


(Code 1992, § 10-35; Ord. No. 277, § 5(A), 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-56. - Utility connections. 
(a) 	
Water and sewer line connections to a mobile home shall be in compliance with the applicable township ordinance or resolution.  

(b) 	
The mobile home shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer and water supply or to such private facilities as approved by the Barry-Eaton District Health Department. 

(c) 	
Mobile homes served by the township water service shall use a water meter. A proper location for each meter shall be provided by the customer at the end of the service line. The location shall be readily accessible, well-ventilated, and have a drain of sufficient capacity to allow for drainage of the maximum possible flow rate through the meter. Such space shall be kept free of all obstructions, fixtures, etc., within a distance of three feet from the meter, and shall be in a heated area or other approved location. Where an approved location is not available for a meter setting at the end of the customer's service connection, the meter shall be located as determined by the township utility department. 


(Code 1992, § 10-36; Ord. No. 277, § 5(B), 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-57. - Skirting. 
(a) 	
Skirting shall be installed around the entire perimeter of a mobile home prior to the occupancy of the home. 

(b) 	
Mobile home skirting shall consist of an opaque material and shall be vented. Louvered or similar vents shall be at a minimum of 600 square inches per 1,000 square feet of living space. A minimum of one vent shall be placed at the front and rear of the mobile home and two to each exposed side. An access panel of sufficient size to allow full access to utility hookups located beneath the mobile home shall be installed.  

(c) 	
Skirting shall be manufactured of fire resistant material and certified as such by the manufacturer. Tar paper, rolled felt, straw or hay shall not be allowed to be placed around the perimeter of the mobile home in lieu of or in addition to skirting. 

(d) 	
Skirting shall be installed in a manner so as to resist damage under normal weather conditions to include, but not be limited to, damage caused by freezing and frost, wind, snow and rain. 


(Code 1992, § 10-37; Ord. No. 277, § 5(C), 7-19-1982) 
Sec. 8-58. - Anchoring system. 
(a) 
A mobile home shall be anchored to protect against wind damage.  

(b) 	
A mobile home anchoring system installed in the township shall comply with the following regulations:  

(1) 	
The anchoring system shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) regulations entitled mobile home construction and safety standards, which are adopted herein by reference. 

(2) 
The system shall be installed in compliance with the manufacturer's specifications. 

(3) 	
The system shall be approved for sale and use within this state by the state construction code commission. 

(4) 	
A manufacturer shall furnish and ship with each approved anchor system information pertaining to the types of soil the system has been tested and certified to be installed in, and instructions as to the method of installation and periodic maintenance required. 

(5) 
A model number shall be permanently marked on each anchor system. 


(Code 1992, § 10-38; Ord. No. 277, § 5(D), 7-19-1982) 
Secs. 8-59—8-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) ---  
State Law reference— Dangerous buildings, MCL 125.538 et seq.  
Sec. 8-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Building official means the individual who has been duly appointed by the township, or his authorized representative, to administer the state construction code.  
Hearing officer means a person appointed for a designated term of office by the board to hold office at the pleasure of the board, for the purpose of conducting hearings and taking testimony of the building official or other officials, property owners and interested persons as to the alleged unsafe and dangerous conditions of buildings and structures.  
Owner means the owner of the freehold of the premises or lessor estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, an assignee of rent, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or any other person directly or indirectly in control of a building, structure or real property, or his duly authorized agent.  
Unsafe building means any building or structure which has any of the following defects or is in any of the following conditions:  
(1) 	
Whenever it is determined by the building official that any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit located in a building at any time does not conform to any officially adopted fire code, or does not conform to any officially adopted state construction code in existence at the time of the building's construction or at the time the building came into the owner's possession. 

(2) 	
Whenever any portion has been damaged by fire, wind, flood, or by any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability is materially less than it was before such occurrence, and is less than the minimum requirements of this article or the state construction code for a new building of similar structure, purpose or location.  

(3) 	
Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance is likely to fall or to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.  

(4) 	
Whenever any portion has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is required in the case of new construction by the state construction code.  

(5) 	
Whenever the building or structure or any part, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the removal of some portion of ground necessary for the purpose of support of such building or portion thereof, or for some other reason is likely to partially or completely collapse; or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way. 

(6) 	
Whenever, for any reason whatsoever, the building or structure or any portion is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.  

(7) 	
Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated so as to:  

a. 	
Become an attractive nuisance to children who might play there and to their danger;  

b. 	
Afford a harbor for vagrants or criminals; or 

c. 	
Enable a person to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful acts. 



(8) 	
Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise is:  

a. 	
Unsanitary or unfit for human habitation;  

b. 	
In a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease when so determined by the county health officer; or  

c. 	
Likely to cause an injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within or nearby. 



(9) 	
Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated, and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 

(10) 	
Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known at common law or equity jurisprudence. 


(Code 1992, § 11-115; Ord. No. 283, § 4, 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-91. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide a just, equitable, and practical method whereby buildings or structures which from any cause, endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished.  
(Code 1992, § 11-111; Ord. No. 283, § 1(B), 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-92. - Administration. 
The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 11-112; Ord. No. 283, § 2(A), 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-93. - Inspections. 
The building official is hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this article.  
(Code 1992, § 11-113; Ord. No. 283, § 2(B), 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-94. - Right of entry. 
(a) 	
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or ordinance violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same, to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this article, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.  

(b) 	
When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article.  


(Code 1992, § 11-114; Ord. No. 283, § 2(C), 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-95. - Commencement of proceedings. 
(a) 	
Whenever the whole or any part of any building or structure is found by the building official to be unsafe, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause repair, vacation or demolition of the building by issuing a notice of the unsafe condition.  

(b) 
Such notice shall be directed to the owner.  

(c) 	
The notice shall be in writing and shall set forth to the owner the conditions of such building or structure which shall be found by the building official to constitute an unsafe building or structure within the standards set forth in this article.  

(d) 	
The notice shall also set forth a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure unsafe and a legal description, parcel number or address of the property on which the building or structure is located. 

(e) 	
The notice shall instruct the person to whom the notice is directed to show cause why the building or structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made safe.  

(f) 	
The notice shall be given in writing to the owner or other party in interest and shall be given by personal service or certified mail, or may be sent by regular mail if certified mail is refused or undeliverable, to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records.  

(g) 	
The failure of the building official to give notice to any person required to be given notice by this article shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly given notice or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this article. 

(h) 	
If, in fact, compliance with this article or arrangements satisfactory to the building official to bring about compliance within a reasonable time have not been made within 30 days of the date of the notice, then the building official shall issue a notice of a hearing to be held by the hearing officer on the condition of the building or structure at which time and place the person to whom the hearing notice is directed shall have the opportunity to be heard, as well as any other interested party. This hearing notice shall be given in writing to the owner or party in interest and shall be given by personal service or certified mail or may be sent by regular mail if certified mail is refused or undeliverable. The hearing notice shall be sent at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The hearing notice shall set forth a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of particulars which make the building or structure unsafe and the legal description, parcel number or address of the property on which such building is located.  

(i) 	
The failure of the building official to give notice to any person required herein to be given notice shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly given notice or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this article. 


(Code 1992, § 11-116; Ord. No. 283, § 5, 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-96. - Duties of a hearing officer. 
(a) 	
The hearing officer shall receive a report and a copy of the notice of the building official that the owner or any other interested party has a dangerous or unsafe building or structure in the township, and such notice shall set forth the date, time, and place for a hearing before the hearing officer.  

(b) 	
The hearing officer at this scheduled hearing shall take the testimony of the building official, the owner of the property (if present) and any other interested party. The hearing officer shall render his decision, either closing the proceedings or finding the building to be an unsafe structure and ordering the building to be vacated, demolished, or otherwise made safe. 

(c) 	
If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building or structure should be vacated, demolished or otherwise made safe, the hearing officer shall state his justifications in writing within three days after the hearing; and furthermore, he shall fix a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days after such hearing date for the owner to comply therewith.  

(d) 	
If the owner fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall within the same three-day period, serve a copy of his findings and order on the owner by personal service, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or if refused or undeliverable, then by regular mail addressed to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records.  


(Code 1992, § 11-117; Ord. No. 283, § 6, 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-97. - Noncompliance by owner. 
If the hearing officer has determined that the building or structure should be vacated, demolished or otherwise made safe and within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date of the hearing the owner has failed, neglected, or refused to comply with his findings and order, then the hearing officer shall file a report of his findings and a copy of his order with the township clerk and request the necessary legal action be taken to vacate, demolish or otherwise make safe the building or structure as has been recommended by the hearing officer. 
(Code 1992, § 11-118; Ord. No. 283, § 7, 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-98. - Township board hearing; notice and opportunity to be heard. 
(a) 	
Upon receipt of report of the hearing officer that the owner or any other interested party has failed to demolish or make safe a building in the township upon order of the hearing officer, the township clerk shall fix a date for a hearing for the purpose of reviewing the findings and order of the hearing officer and shall also give notice of such hearing before the board to the property owner thereby stating the time and place of such hearing.  

(b) 	
The notice regarding the hearing before the board shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner or other parties of interest and shall be given either by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested; or if refused or undeliverable, may be sent by regular mail, addressed to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records. Such notice shall be given at least ten days before the date of the hearing described in the notice.  

(c) 	
The failure of the township clerk to give notice to any person required herein to be given notice shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly given notice or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed upon him by the provisions of this article.  

(d) 	
The hearing shall be conducted by the board. At the hearing, the owner or any other interested party in such property, shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the building shall not be vacated, demolished, or otherwise made safe, and the board shall determine, after receiving testimony, whether or not the building or structure, the subject matter of the hearing, shall be vacated, demolished or made safe within the provisions of this article or the state construction code. The board shall then approve, disapprove or modify the order of the hearing officer for, the vacation, demolition, or making safe, the building or structure. The findings made by the board shall be in writing. 

(e) 	
If the board either approves or modifies the order of the hearing officer finding the building to be an unsafe building under this article, the board shall file with the county register of deeds a certificate describing the property and certifying that the building is an unsafe building. Whenever the corrections ordered have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as an unsafe building on the property described in the certificate, the board shall file a new certificate with the county register certifying that the building has been demolished, or that all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer dangerous, whichever is appropriate.  


(Code 1992, § 11-119; Ord. No. 283, § 8, 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-99. - Unsafe buildings declared nuisances. 
All unsafe buildings and structures which are determined to be in violation of the terms of this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided by this article.  
(Code 1992, § 11-120; Ord. No. 283, § 9, 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-100. - Assessment of costs. 
The owner or other interested party responsible for the existing nuisance shall bear all costs relating to the abatement of the nuisance, including court costs and reasonable township attorney fees incurred in the enforcement of this article.  
(Code 1992, § 11-121; Ord. No. 283, § 10, 11-21-1983) 
Sec. 8-101. - Enforcement, criminal and civil. 
If the owner or other interested party fails to comply with the order of the board as outlined in section 8-98 within a period of 15 days from receipt of their notice in writing:  
(1) 	
The violation shall be referred to the township attorney for legal action in county circuit court in order to secure an abatement of the nuisance; and 

(2) 	
The owner or other interested party responsible for the existing unsafe building shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 


(Code 1992, § 11-122; Ord. No. 283, § 11, 11-21-1983) 
Secs. 8-102—8-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 8-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. If not specified in this article, or elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances, the term shall have its ordinary accepted meaning within the context used.  
Authorized township official refers to the building official of the township and his agents and designees. 
Code means any code or ordinance adopted by the township. 
Common area means the area in a rental dwelling or rental complex not within a tenant's private rental unit. The term "common area" may include, but is not limited to, hallways, basement areas, common exterior stairways, balconies and spaces which contain mechanical, electrical or plumbing equipment.  
Owner. 
(1) 	
The term "owner" means any individual holding legal or equitable title to a property or to real improvements upon a property solely, jointly, by the entireties, in common, or as a land contract vendee or title to a mobile home or house trailer. The term "owner" also means any individual, association of individuals, a public, private or not-for-profit corporation, a firm or partnership.  

(2) 
The term "owner" does not mean a tenant.  


Owner occupied dwelling means a dwelling which a person both owns as an owner and lives in as his true, fixed and permanent home to which, whenever absent, the person intends to return. 
Rental complex means a group of rental dwellings. 
Rental dwelling means any dwelling containing a rental unit, a rooming unit, or hotel/motel unit, including single-family homes and mobile homes occupied by a tenant or tenants.  
Rental property refers generally to all rental complexes, rental dwellings and rental units.  
Rental unit means a particular living quarters within a dwelling intended for occupancy by a tenant or person other than the owner and the family of the owner, including mobile homes, single-family homes, apartments, hotel/motel units, rooming units, and for which a remuneration or consideration of any kind is paid. 
Tenant means a person residing in a rental property who is not an owner, as defined by this article, of the rental property, and who pays a remuneration or consideration of any kind for residing in the rental property.  
Violation notice means a written correspondence issued by an authorized township official advising an owner, or his agent, of a violation of this article or a code. Violation notices shall list all infractions and corrective measures necessary to comply with this article or a code and a time period within which such corrections must be completed.  
(Code 1992, § 4-114; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 
Sec. 8-132. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person or any others acting on behalf of said person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this article, or who shall hamper, impede or interfere with the performance of the duties of any authorized township official or agent of the official or other officer under the provisions of this article are responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine not to exceed $500.00 plus court costs. Each act of violation and every day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. Abatement shall not be considered as payment or part of a violation's penalty. Any and all costs (including the township's attorney and consultant fees) incurred by the township as a result of enforcement under this article may be recoverable if the township prevails as determined by the court.  
(Code 1992, § 4-121; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 
Sec. 8-133. - Purpose. 
(a) 	
The township finds that the act of renting or leasing dwelling units is a business activity. The township also finds that dwellings or dwelling units which are leased or rented to the public, when improperly maintained, by reason of their structures, equipment, sanitation, use or occupancy, may adversely affect public health, safety and general welfare as well as the aesthetic value of surrounding property and community. To correct unsuitable conditions which exist within rental properties and to establish mechanisms for the continued maintenance of a sound rental housing stock within the township, and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, the township establishes these regulations which shall require the registration of rental dwelling units and provide for the enforcement of minimum rental housing standards.  

(b) 	
This article supplements and augments the existing International Property Maintenance Code in protecting and promoting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the township by requiring the registration of all rental dwelling units in the township. This registration, combined with regular systematic inspections, will help prevent overcrowding, the incidence of communicable diseases, and will aid in the enforcement of the International Property Maintenance Code, which sets minimum allowable standards for adequate maintenance of habitable dwellings. This article is not intended nor shall it be used for the purpose of including the township in civil disputes between rental owners and tenants involving, but not limited to, nonpayment of rent, evictions and/or personal disputes. 


(Code 1992, § 4-113; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 
Sec. 8-134. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all persons owning or exercising control over any building or premises used for dwelling purposes, or which subsequently may be constructed or so designated, which is in total or in part, rented or leased, and which is located within the township. An owner of any rental dwelling located within the township shall not rent to another any rental dwelling, or rental unit, unless such rental dwelling or rental unit is registered pursuant to this article and is in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, and ordinances and regulations.  
(Code 1992, § 4-115; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 
Sec. 8-135. - Adopted by reference. 
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the clerk of the township, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the township; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-136. 
(Code 1992, § 4-111; Ord. No. 02-04, § 1, 4-15-2002; Ord. No. 03-19.5, § 1, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 06-27, 4-17-2006) 
Sec. 8-136. - Amendments. 

The following sections are hereby revised:  
Throughout the document.  
Delete: "International Zoning Code"  
Insert: International Building Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code and ICC Electrical Code with Michigan Building Code, Michigan Residential Code, Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings 2006, Michigan Plumbing Code, Michigan Electrical Code, and Michigan Mechanical Code.  
Section 101.1. Title. 
Insert: Delta Charter Township 
Section 101.3. Intent. 
Delete: "Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide minimum level of health safety as required herein."  
Insert: "The legal occupancy of any building existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is deemed necessary by the code official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public."  
Section 103.5. Fees. 
Delete: The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be indicated in the following schedule.  
Insert: Any fees for services and activities associated with enforcement of this article shall be established by resolution of the Delta Township Board.  
Section 106.3. Prosecution of violation. Delete: "shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor" Insert: "shall be found responsible for a municipal civil infraction" 
Section 108.1.4. Unlawful structure. 
Delete: "occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was" 
Section 111.1. Application for appeal. 
Insert: "calendar" after 20. 
Section 302.2. Grading and drainage. 
Delete the entire section. 
Section 302.4. Weeds. 
Delete the entire section 
Section [F]304.3. Premises identification. 
Delete: "These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch."  
Section 304.14. Insect screens. 
Delete: "During the period from ________ to ________."  
Section 602.3. Heat supply. 
Delete: "during the period from ________ to ________."  
(Code 1992, § 4-112; Ord. No. 02-04, § 2, 4-15-2002; Ord. No. 03-19.5, § 2, 1-18-2005; Ord. No. 06-27, 4-17-2006) 
Sec. 8-137. - Registration of rental properties. 
(a) Initial registration. 
(1) 	
Within 90 days following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, all owners of rental properties shall register with the township building department each rental complex, rental dwelling, and rental unit within the boundaries of the township. 

(2) 	
Newly constructed rental properties will be registered by the township at the time a certificate of occupancy is issued, and then must be subsequently reregistered and inspected as required by section 8-139.  

(b) 	
Registration requirements. The registration of any rental property shall require at least the following information on forms provided by the township: 

(1) 	
The address of the rental property with each rental unit contained therein enumerated. If the rental units are within a rental complex, the property manager's address shall also be included.  

(2) 
If applicable, the number of buildings, including rental dwellings, in the rental complex.  

(3) 
The number of rental units per rental dwelling. 

(4) 	
The individual square footage of each bedroom, the kitchen, the living room, the dining room and the total number of occupants currently residing in each rental unit.  

(5) 	
The name, address and telephone number of the registered agent or other responsible person designated by the owner, to receive official notices, legal processes, tenant concerns and correspondence from the township. 

(6) 
The applicant shall sign the registration attesting to the truth and accuracy of its contents.  

(7) 	
Payment of all applicable fees as established by resolution of the township board and published in the township schedule of fees.  

(c) 	
Changes in registration information. The owner or his agent shall provide written notification to the township building department of any change in the information set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 

(d) 	
Agreement to permit inspections. Included with the registration application shall be an agreement, signed by the owner, permitting inspections of his rental properties by officials or agents of the township and affirming that all tenants of the subject properties have been informed of the regulations contained in this article and of inspections of the rental properties, including common areas, by authorized township officials. Owners shall provide, or cause to be provided, a copy of the agreement to all existing tenants, as well as tenants who enter into leases or come to reside on a rental property after the agreement takes effect. All leases executed after the effective date of this 

article shall contain a provision requiring the tenants to consent to such inspection upon notice as provided in section 8-138.  

(e) 	
Additional requirements. An authorized township official may, with written notice, require additional information of any or all registrants in order to reasonably further the purposes of this article.  


(Code 1992, § 4-116; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 
Sec. 8-138. - Inspections. 
(a) 	
Scheduled inspections. The owner shall be notified of the date and time of a rental inspection via first class mail at least 30 days prior to the inspection date. Owners shall be required to provide all notices of inspection to the tenants as required by law. A list of inspection guidelines, prepared by the township building department, shall be given to all owners at the time of rental property registration.  

(b) 	
Periodic inspections. An authorized township official may systematically inspect rental properties, including common areas, at least one time every three years. However, this article shall not be construed as creating a responsibility for the township to inspect such properties.  

(c) 	
Probable cause inspections. Any rental property, even though not previously scheduled for inspection, may be inspected without prior notice to the owner and/or tenant if an authorized township official has probable cause to believe that there exists on the rental property any condition which makes such rental property or any portion thereof substandard or unsafe, or there is evidence that a violation of a code may exist.  

(d) 	
Court orders. If access to a structure, premises or area for the purpose of inspection authorized by this section is refused, an authorized township official, upon showing that probable cause exists for the inspection and for the issuance of an order directing compliance with the inspection requirements of this article with respect to such rental dwelling or rental unit, may petition and obtain such order from a court which has jurisdiction.  

(e) 	
Inspections in general. Except for probable cause inspections, rental property may only be inspected during reasonable hours upon presentation of proper identification by an authorized township official. It shall be the rental property owner's responsibility to coordinate access to all areas of their rental property, including common areas.  


(f) 	Inspection of rental complex. 
(1) 	
In a manner best calculated to secure compliance with this article, the authorized township official may inspect a portion of a rental complex when conducting a periodic inspection. 

(2) 	
In the event the authorized township official inspects a portion of a rental complex as set forth in subsection (f)(1) of this section, the following shall apply:  

a. 	
A minimum of one-third of the total number of rental units contained within a rental complex shall be inspected annually such that all rental units within any rental complex shall be inspected at least once every three-year period.  

b. 	
The rental units annually inspected which comprise one-third of the total number of rental units, as set forth within subsection (f)(2)a of this section, shall be selected at random.  

c. 	
The authorized township official reserves the right to increase the number of rental units inspected should significant code violations be found or if the authorized township official has reasonable cause to believe other violations exist in the uninspected rental units.  

d. 	
The fees associated shall apply as set forth within sections 8-140 and 8-143.  




(Code 1992, § 4-117; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 

Sec. 8-139. - Registration, expiration, and reregistration. 
All residential rental properties within the township shall be registered with the building department within 90 days from the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Thereafter, all residential rental properties shall be registered once every three years, or with change in ownership, at least 30 days before the expiration date assigned by the township, following the same requirements set forth in section 8-137.  
(Code 1992, § 4-118; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 
Sec. 8-140. - Violations, notices, and inspections. 
(a) 	
Violations not imminently dangerous. Upon inspection by an authorized township official, if a violation of a code is discovered, but the violation is deemed by the official not to be immediately dangerous to health, welfare or safety, a violation notice shall be issued to the owner in accordance with the applicable codes and ordinances. The owner shall be advised of the time period to correct the violation. 

(b) 	
Reinspection and fees. Reinspections of a rental property shall occur on the date specified on the violation notice, or sooner if requested by the owner and township scheduling permits such inspection. It shall be the owner's responsibility to coordinate the access to all areas of their rental properties. A fee as established by resolution of the township board shall be charged for each reinspection after the first reinspection. 

(c) 	
Schedules. Time schedules for the correction of violations shall be reasonable as determined by the authorized township official. Correction periods exceeding 60 days require an application for extension be filed by the owner or his designee and approved by the building official.  


(Code 1992, § 4-119; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 
Sec. 8-141. - Vacation of rental dwellings or cause to have violations remedied. 
(a) 	
Violations that threaten life, limb or property. If upon inspection of a rental property the authorized township official determines that a violation is of such serious nature so as to immediately threaten the health, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, the official shall demand that the violations be corrected immediately and/or the rental property be vacated immediately in accordance with applicable codes. 

(b) 	
Notices and orders. All notices and orders of the building department shall be in accordance with section 107 of the International Property Maintenance Code and/or the ordinances of the township. 


(Code 1992, § 4-120; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 
Sec. 8-142. - Transfer of rental property registration and change of status. 
(a) 	
Registration transfers and fees. A purchaser of a rental property shall cause a registration to be transferred upon the sale of a rental property. The new owner shall sign all appropriate agreements and affidavits for registration and shall complete a new registration application. All the above shall be provided to the township by the new owner or the real estate closing institution within 30 days of closing the sale. There is no fee for transferring registration.  

(b) 	
Existing violations. It shall be unlawful to sell a rental property having outstanding violations unless the transfer of ownership stipulations of the International Property Maintenance Code, as amended, have been satisfied.  

(c) 	
Change of status. If a dwelling previously used as a rental property is no longer to be used as a rental property, a statement and affidavit to this effect must be provided to the township building department. No inspections or transfer shall be required.  


(Code 1992, § 4-122; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 
Sec. 8-143. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a) 	Building and trade permits. Owners shall procure the appropriate building, mechanical, plumbing, and/or electrical permits from the building department for all corrections requiring such permits. Those violations discovered which require such permits will require a reinspection by a licensed and certified the township building or trade inspector. All state and local licensing requirements must be observed. 
(b) Fees. 
(1) 	
Owners shall be required to pay a fee for registration and for any inspections, including reinspections. If an owner and/or his agent fail to coordinate access to a rental property for any reason for inspection or reinspection, the owner may be subject to no show/reinspection fees. The township board shall establish by resolution and publish a schedule of fees. Registration fees shall be paid at the time of registration. Inspection and reinspection fees shall be paid at the time of registration and reregistration. 

(2) 	
In the event the authorized township official inspects or reinspects a portion of a rental property as set forth herein, the fee associated with that inspection may be calculated to reflect the portion of rental units inspected.  

(3) 	
All fees under this article must be paid at the township administration building. The authorized township official may not accept payment while conducting an inspection under this article. 

(4) 	
A failure to pay any fee required by this article shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to fines and costs as set forth herein. In addition, if any owner fails to pay any fees required by this article at the time said fees are due an administrative service fee as established by the township board by resolution may be assessed.  

(5) 	
Any unpaid fee and/or cost under this article may be collected by the township as allowed by law. 


(Code 1992, § 4-123; Ord. No. 06-28, § 1, 4-9-2006) 
Secs. 8-144—8-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE 
Sec. 8-170. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Mechanical contractor means any person doing mechanical work as outlined in Public Act No. 192 of 1984 (MCL 338.971 et seq.), and shall include all classifications as contained therein.  
(Code 1992, § 4-66; Ord. No. 287, § 2, 8-5-1985) 
Sec. 8-171. - Authority. 
This article is hereby adopted pursuant to Public Act No. 192 of 1984 (MCL 338.971 et seq.).  
(Code 1992, § 4-67; Ord. No. 287, § 3, 8-5-1985) 
Sec. 8-172. - Registration. 
(a) 	
Required. Mechanical contractors licensed under the state and who intend to perform such work in this township shall register their licenses with the township prior to performing such work and prior to applying for permits covering such work. Registration shall be valid until the expiration date of the state mechanical contractor's license, at which time the registrations must be renewed.  

(b) 	
Fees. The fees for registrations under this article for each license registration or renewal of such registration shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board. 


(Code 1992, §§ 4-68, 4-69; Ord. No. 287, §§ 4, 5, 8-5-1985) 
Chapter 10 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
State Law reference— Authority to acquire and maintain cemeteries, MCL 128.1 et seq.; cemetery regulations act, MCL 456.521 et seq.  
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Burial space means a single plot, group of plots or lot under the ownership of one person or family. 
Cemetery lot means an area of two or more cemetery plots.  
Cemetery plot means an area of sufficient size to accommodate an interment. 
Cemetery supervisor means the person appointed by and under the supervision of the director who is responsible for day-to-day operations of the cemeteries, including, but not limited to, lot sales, grave openings and closings, enforcement of rules and regulations, contact with funeral directors, installation of monument/marker foundations, cemetery maintenance and public relations.  
Commission means the township parks, recreation and cemeteries commission appointed by the township board to oversee and recommend policy concerning the township's parks, recreation programs and cemeteries.  
Director means the parks, recreation and cemeteries department director, responsible for the overall operation of the department. The director, within his duties, has the responsibilities associated with cemetery sexton.  
Immediate family means the spouse, parent, grandparent, children, and grandchildren of the original lot owner. The term "immediate family" also includes "great" to the above where applicable. 
Marker means a stone or plaque either flush or above the ground indicating the given and/or family name of the deceased. It is located on the west side of the plot. 
Monument means a stone extending above the ground inscribed with the family name only. It is placed at a location approved by the cemetery supervisor or director.  
(Code 1992, § 5-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Rules and regulations. 
The commission shall recommend to the board rules and regulations governing the operation, maintenance and use of cemeteries located within the township and owned by the township. Such rules and regulations as proposed by the commission shall become effective when approved by resolution by the township board and publication of notice of adoption of rules with the minutes of the township board and filing of the same in the office of the township clerk, notice of which filing shall be included in the publication of notice of adoption of the rules.  
(Code 1992, § 5-2; Ord. No. 293, § 3, 4-7-1986) 
Sec. 10-3. - Operation and maintenance. 
The parks, recreation and cemetery commission of the township shall be responsible for the development of policy and operating procedures which shall be carried out under the general management and day-to-day supervision of the director of parks, recreation and cemeteries department.  
(Code 1992, § 5-3; Ord. No. 293, § 4, 4-7-1986) 
Sec. 10-4. - Burial rights. 
(a) 	
Procedures for purchasing. Burial rights shall be evidenced by certificates to be issued through the township clerk's office which shall be responsible for the maintenance of records concerning ownership of burial space within the cemeteries. The issuance of a certificate of ownership of burial space shall not constitute a right in land, but rather a right to burial within the township cemetery subject to the rules and regulations of the township and the laws of the state.  

(b) 	
Conditions. Burial rights purchased through the office of the township clerk shall be subject to the following conditions which may be further defined in the rules and regulations to be adopted hereunder: 

(1) 	
No burial shall take place unless lot purchase price has been paid in full. The cost of any services required to open or close the lot have been paid to the township and all other fees and charges have been satisfied in full.  

(2) 	
Burial rights may revert to the township for any cemetery plot, lot or burial space which may remain unused for a period of 50 years. 

(3) 	
Cemetery lots shall not be purchased for speculative purposes or for resale to third parties not defined as immediate family members.  


(Code 1992, §§ 5-4, 5-5; Ord. No. 293, §§ 5, 6, 4-7-1986) 
Sec. 10-5. - Perpetual care fund. 
The perpetual care fund is a separate trust and agency account of the township. It is established to receive such funds as are generated by fees and charges established by the rules and regulations to be adopted hereunder shall be deposited and maintained by the township treasurer or controller, the interest from which and shall be applied to offset the cost of cemetery operation and maintenance, improvement and development of township cemeteries.  
(Code 1992, § 5-6; Ord. No. 293, § 7, 4-7-1986) 
State Law reference— Authority to operate trust for cemetery purposes, MCL 128.72. 

Chapter 12 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  

State Law reference— Housing and slums clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq.; housing corporation law, MCL 125.601 et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq.; principal shopping districts and business improvement districts, MCL 125.981 et seq.; economic expansion, MCL 125.1201 et seq.; regional economic development commission, MCL 125.1231 et seq.; state housing development authority act of 1966, MCL 125.1401 et seq.; downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq.; economic development corporations, MCL 125.1601 et seq.; tax increment finance authority act, MCL 125.1801 et seq.; Michigan economic and social opportunity act of 1981, MCL 400.1101 et seq.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 
Sec. 12-19. - Approval, adoption of documents. 

The application dated October 20, 1975, and the articles of incorporation for the economic development corporation of the township are hereby approved and adopted.  
(Code 1992, § 6-26; Ord. No. 252, § 1, 1-19-1976) 
Sec. 12-20. - Copy of ordinance filed; incorporation. 
A copy of the ordinance from which this article was derived is directed to be filed with the corporation division of the state department of commerce in accordance with section 5, subsection 1(1) of Public Act No. 338 of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.), and the applicants in such application dated October 20, 1975, are therefore authorized to incorporate the economic development corporation of the township as a nonprofit corporation pursuant to Public Act No. 162 of 1982 (MCL 450.2101 et seq.).  
(Code 1992, § 6-27; Ord. No. 252, § 2, 1-19-1976) 
Secs. 12-21—12-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -TAX ABATEMENT FOR STATE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT 
Sec. 12-44. - Tax abatement. 

The township shall not grant any municipal tax abatement to any class of housing projects within its boundaries to which section 15a(1) of Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.) as amended, shall apply.  (Code 1992, § 2-156; Ord. No. 254, § 2, 2-22-1977) State Law reference— State housing development authority act, MCL 125.1401 et seq. 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  

State Law reference— Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL Sec. 14-1. - Civil infractions. 
(a) 	
Failure to comply with sections 14-23, 14-51, 14-85 or sections 14-117, 14-118 and 14-119, or the creation of a construction activity nuisance under section 14-149 shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction as prescribed in section 1-7. 

(b) 	
Except as otherwise provided, this chapter shall be enforced by the township building official or his designee who is hereby designated as the authorized township official to issue municipal civil infraction citations, directing alleged violators to appear in court or issue municipal civil infraction violation notices, directing alleged violators to appear at the township municipal violations bureau as provided by this Code. 

(c) 
The issuance of municipal civil infraction citations shall be pursuant to section 20-21.  

(d) 	
Misdemeanor. A person who violates any provision of this chapter, except section 14-23, 14-51, 14­85, 14-117, 14-118, 14-119 or 14-149 is responsible for a misdemeanor. 


(Code 1992, § 11-131; Ord. No. 97-4(C), 12-1-1997; Ord. No. 07-38, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 19-106 , § 1, 5-6-2019) 
Secs. 14-2—14-20. - Reserved. ARTICLE II. -NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: --- (2) ---  
State Law reference— Public nuisances and abatement, MCL 600.3801 et seq.  
Sec. 14-21. - Generally. 
Whatever injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this chapter. No person shall commit, create or maintain any nuisance.  
(Code 1992, § 11-1) 
Sec. 14-22. - Remedial rights of township. 
Any action taken by the township to abate any nuisance shall not affect the right of the township to institute proceedings against the person committing, creating or maintaining any nuisance for violation of this Code, nor affect the imposition of the penalty prescribed for such violation. As an additional remedy, upon application by the township to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation or threatened violation restrained and enjoined.  
(Code 1992, § 11-2) 
Sec. 14-23. - Nuisances enumerated. 
The following acts, services, apparatus and structures are declared to be public nuisances and are unlawful and prohibited:  
(1) 
The maintenance of any pond, pool of water or vessel holding stagnant water.  

(2) 	
The throwing, placing, depositing or leaving in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place, square or sidewalk, or in any private place or premises where such throwing, placing, depositing or leaving is in the opinion of the health officer dangerous or detrimental to public health, or likely to cause sickness or attract flies, insects, rodents and/or vermin, by any person, of any animal or vegetable substance, dead animal, fish, shell, tin cans, bottles, glass or other rubbish, dirt, excrement, filth, rot, unclean or nauseous water, liquid or gaseous fluids, hay, straw, soot, garbage, swill or animal bones, hides or horns, rotten soap, grease or tallow, offal or any other offensive article or substance whatever.  

(3) 	
The pollution of any stream, lake or body of water by, or the depositing into or upon any highway, street, lane, alleys, public street or square, or into any adjacent lot or grounds of, or depositing or permitting to be deposited any refuse, foul or nauseous liquid or water, creamery or industrial waste, or forcing or discharging into any public or private sewer or drain any steam, vapor or gas.  

(4) 	
The emission of noxious fumes or gas in such quantities as to render occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities.  

(5) 	
The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples are placed in the hands of an adult person.  

(6) 	
All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner or in any amount contrary to the provisions of this Code or statutes of the state.  

(7) 	
All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise and all excavations remaining unfilled or uncovered for a period of 30 days or longer, and which are so situated so as to endanger the safety of the public.  

(8) 	
All dangerous, unguarded excavations or machinery in any public place, or so situated, left or operated on private property as to attract the public.  

(9) 	
The owning, driving or moving upon a public street or alley of a truck or other motor vehicle which is constructed or loaded so as to permit any part of its load or contents to blow, fall or be deposited upon any street or alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, or which deposits from its wheels, tires or other parts on to the street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private 

place, dirt, grease, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind; provided, however, that under circumstances determined by the township manager to be in the public interest, the township manager may grant persons temporary exemptions from the provisions of this subsection conditioned upon cleaning and correcting the violating condition at least once daily and execution of an agreement by such person to reimburse the township for any extraordinary maintenance expenses incurred by the township in connection with such violation. Any person who shall violate this subsection shall be responsible for a civil infraction. Each day a violation exists may be considered a separate violation and a fine so imposed.  

(10) 	
No person shall cast, place, sweep, rake or deposit in any manner whatsoever, or allow to accumulate, in or upon any street, highway, road, cul-de-sac, sidewalk, drain, sewer, gutter or receiving basin adjacent to a lot or parcel occupied by them, any rubbish, litter, leaves, yard waste or debris.  

(11) 	
Garage sales, rummage sales, yard sales, estate sales and similar activities shall not be conducted on residentially zoned properties for more than three consecutive days or more than twice per calendar year on the same property.  


(Code 1992, § 11-3; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 9-16-2002; Ord. No. 03-19, 10-18-2004) 
Secs. 14-24—14-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -GRASS AND NOXIOUS WEEDS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) ---  
State Law reference— Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq.  
Sec. 14-50. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Margin means the property outside a property owner's lot and property lines and inside the curblines upon the public streets, or in the absence of a curb, from the traveled portion of the public street to the lot or property line.  
Noxious weeds means as contained in section 2 of Public Act No. 359 of 1941 (MCL 247.62).  
(Code 1992, § 11-31; Ord. No. 296, § 4, 3-20-1972; Ord. No. 03-18, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 14-51. - Growing prohibited. 
No person owing or occupying any premises in platted subdivisions or property on which single-family and two-family dwellings are permitted by right of two acres or less, being within 200 feet of platted subdivisions or commercial lots and on improved streets shall permit or maintain on any such premises or the abutting margin, or on any portion of any such premises or the abutting margin, any growth of noxious weeds, nor any growth of grass or other rank vegetation, to a greater height than eight inches on the average; nor permit any accumulation of dead weeds, grasses or brush to a height greater than eight inches on the average. In addition, no person owning or occupying any developed commercial property, office zoned property on improved streets, or property on which multiple family dwellings and/or condominiums are permitted by right shall permit or maintain on any such premises or the abutting margin, or on any portion of any such premises or the abutting margin, any growth of noxious weeds, nor any growth of grass or other rank vegetation, to a greater height than eight inches on the average; nor permit any accumulation of dead weeds, grasses or brush to a height greater than eight inches on the average.  
(Code 1992, § 11-32; Ord. No. 296, § 1, 3-20-1972; Ord. No. 97-3, § 1, 11-17-1997; Ord. No. 03-05, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-18, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 16-93 , 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 14-52. -Duty of occupant or owner. 
It shall be the duty of the occupant of every premises and the owner of unoccupied premises within the township to cut and remove or destroy by lawful means all such noxious weeds and grass, as described in section 14-51, as often as may be necessary throughout the growing season, which shall be May 1 through October 31 of each year, to remain in compliance with the provisions herein. 
(Code 1992, § 11-33; Ord. No. 296, § 2, 3-20-1972; Ord. No. 03-05, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-18, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 16-93 , 10-17-2016) 
Sec. 14-53. - Commissioner of noxious weeds. 
There shall be appointed by the township board a commissioner of noxious weeds who shall take an oath required of the township officers and shall hold office for the term of two years and until a successor is appointed and qualified who shall receive for compensation such sum as may be fixed by the township board. The commissioner of noxious weeds as herein provided for shall have duties and responsibilities and be subject to the provisions of Public Act No. 359 of 1941 (MCL 247.61 et seq.). The commissioner of noxious weeds shall also have the duty of enforcement of this article.  
(Code 1992, § 11-34; Ord. No. 296, § 3, 3-20-1972; Ord. No. 03-18, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 14-54. - Cutting by township. 
If any person shall fail to comply with the provisions of section 14-52 within the specified time, the township shall cause all such grass and noxious weeds to be cut or destroyed upon the lands owned and/or occupied by the person not complying with the provisions hereof and any abutting margin, and the cost thereof plus ten percent for overhead shall be assessed against the property of the taxpayer as shown on the tax roll. The township may cause the weeds to be cut as many times as is necessary. 
(Code 1992, § 11-35; Ord. No. 296, § 5, 3-20-1972; Ord. No. 03-18, 9-7-2004) 
Sec. 14-55. - Notice to owner. 
The township shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the county during the month of March that weeds not cut by May 1 of that year and further maintained as often as necessary to remain in compliance with the provisions herein, will be cut by the township and the owner of the property charged with the costs. The publication shall contain such information as required in the provisions of section 4 of Public Act No. 359 of 1941 (MCL 247.64).  
(Code 1992, § 11-36; Ord. No. 296, § 6, 3-20-1972; Ord. No. 03-05, 3-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-18, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 16-93 , 10-17-2016) 
Secs. 14-56—14-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BLIGHT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) ---  
State Law reference— Rehabilitation of blighted area, MCL 125.71 et seq.  
Sec. 14-84. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to prevent, reduce or eliminate blight or potential blight in the township by the prevention or elimination of certain environmental causes of blight or blighting factors which exist or which may in the future exist in the township, and to provide the penalties for violations and to provide for the issuance of court appearance tickets.  
(Code 1992, § 11-57; Ord. No. 262, § 3, 3-5-1979) 
Sec. 14-85. - Cause of blight or blighting factors. 
(a) 	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Junk includes, but not limited to, dismantled motor vehicles, or parts of motor vehicles; dismantled machinery or parts of machinery, unlicensed or inoperable trailers, discarded stoves, refrigerators, water heaters or other appliances; scrap metal; building materials, unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the township for construction upon such property and such materials are intended for use in connection with such construction, garbage, trash or other miscellaneous cast-off items; organic refuse, exterior display or shelving units; racks; food wastes, food containers or wrappings, cans, bottles, jars, or crockery; discarded furniture; cartons, boxes, or crates; rags; discarded clothing, bedding, floor covering or wallpaper; sweepings; waste paper, newspapers or magazines; excrement; rot; yard debris or rubbish (including, but not limited to, grass clippings, clippings from hedges or shrubs, or detached tree branches); industrial waste; unclean or nauseous fluids or gases; and other junk, trash or refuse of any kind, except domestic refuse stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance.  
Junk vehicles includes any motor vehicle that: 
(1) 
Is not currently licensed for use upon the highways of the state;  

(2) 
Does not display a current, valid license plate; or 

(3) 
Is inoperable for any reason. 

(b) 	
It has been determined that the uses, structures and activities set forth in this subsection are causes of blight or blighting factors which, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods. No person shall create or permit to be maintained any of the following causes of blight or blighting factors upon any property in the township owned, controlled, rented or occupied by such a person, in any area of the township:  

(1) 	
The parking upon any property of junk vehicles, except in a completely enclosed building. This provision shall not apply to commercial garages, automobile dealerships, body shops, and similar establishments that provide for the storage of such vehicles within fences that completely obscure such vehicles from view.  

(2) 	
The storage or accumulation of junk. This provision shall not apply to the outside storage of farm machinery or parts thereof on agricultural zoned properties, provided that the machinery is owned by the occupant of such premises for use on that owner's or occupant's properties, is not stored or maintained for purpose of salvage or resale, and is operable.  


(Code 1992, § 11-58; Ord. No. 262, § 4, 3-5-1979; Ord. No. 02-06, § 1, 12-30-2002) 
Secs. 14-86—14-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NOISE CONTROL[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) ---  
State Law reference— Motor vehicle mufflers, MCL 257.707 et seq. 
Sec. 14-114. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Agricultural areas means those areas where township ordinance permits the possession and keeping of animals such as, but not limited to, horses, cows, sheep, chickens and other animals commonly found on agricultural use properties.  
Ambience means surrounding or background noise associated with a given environment, usually a composite of sounds from many sources.  
Animal means any living creature other than human beings, including, but not limited to, reptiles, amphibians, insects, fish, birds and mammals. 
Audible means being heard or the capability of being heard by a person with ordinary hearing.  
Construction means any site preparation, building assembly, building erection, building repair, building alteration, building maintenance, or similar action, but excludes demolition for or of public or private right-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.  
Continuous means any sound or noise whose level varies less than three dB(A) during the course of a period of at least two minutes.  
dB(A) means the intensity of sound expressed in decibels read from a calibrated sound level meter that utilizes the A-level weighing scale and the fast meter response, as specified by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) S1.4-1971.  
Decibel means a unit to express the magnitude of sound pressure and sound intensity, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure which is 20 micropascals. 
Demolition means any dismantling, intentional destruction, or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property.  
Emergency means any situation or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency following a public or private calamity or accident.  
Harmonic or pure tones means sounds which have a specific frequency or pitch associated with them. 
Impulsive sounds means sounds of very short duration, although they may be repeated at regular or irregular intervals, including but not limited to explosions, firearm discharge or motor vehicle backfire sounds.  
Industrial property means property zoned industrial under township ordinance.  
Legal firework display means the intentional display of ignited or exploded display fireworks, as that term is defined by the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, being Public Act 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq. for entertainment conducted by individuals or organizations possessing a valid permit issued by the township board in accordance with Section 16 of the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act.  
Muffler means a device used for lessening the sound of escaping gasses of an internal combustion engine.  
Noise or noise disturbance means any sound that is in excess of the maximum decibel limits according to the regulations set forth in section 14-118, or which is loud, unnecessary, unusual, or unreasonable and which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of persons with normal sensitivities.  
Noise sensitive zone means an area of potential noise disturbance, including but not limited to any area where a school, institution of learning, hospital, house of worship, day care center, nursing home, public library, senior citizen center, residence or residential area is located.  
Person means any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
Pet means a domesticated animal which is generally recognized as being kept for noncommercial purposes, including but not limited to dogs, cats and birds.  
Public service department means any public agency or department operated under the supervision or authorization of the state or a political subdivision thereof, or a private agency performing emergency work, which shall include but not be limited to ambulances, police vehicles and fire department vehicles. 
Public space means any publicly or privately owned properties that are available to the public in general.  
Residence or residential area means any areas used for living purposes, such as one- and two-family homes, apartments, condominiums, and hotels or motels.  
(Code 1992, § 11-84; Ord. No. 7-34, § 1, 2-19-2007; Ord. No. 13-77, § I, 6-3-2013) 
Sec. 14-115. - Purpose. 
An article to control sound and noise; to prohibit specific noise; and to provide for penalties for violation thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 11-82; Ord. No. 7-34, § 1, 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 14-116. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to the control of sound and noise, originating from property within the limits of the township, unless an exception is set forth in section 14-120.  
(Code 1992, § 11-83; Ord. No. 7-34, § 1, 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 14-117. - General prohibition. 
(a) 	
Except as provided in section 14-120, or with a special permit under section 14-122, it shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made or continued any excessive or unreasonably loud noise or any noise, measured or unmeasured, which either disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any person within the borders of the township.  

(b) 	
The acts enumerated in sections 14-118 and 14-119 are declared to be loud, disturbing noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive.  


(Code 1992, § 11-85; Ord. No. 7-34, § 1, 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 14-118. - Noise limitations based on dB(A) criteria. 
(a) 	
Generally. Except as provided in section 14-120, or with a special permit under section 14-122, any noise in excess of the maximum decibel limits according to the regulations set out in this section shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of section 14-117. 

(b) 	
Noise from private property. The maximum decibel limits on noise originating from private property shall be as set forth in the table in subsection (b)(1) of this section. Noise will be measured at the boundaries of the lot at issue.  

(1) 	
To be in violation, the source of noise must be identifiable in relation to the ambience, and must exceed the limitations established for the zoning districts and times listed in the following table:  

(2) 
The following provisions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this section:  

a. 	
At boundaries between zones, the lower of the dB(A) levels shall be applicable.  

b. 	
Harmonic or pure tones and periodic or repetitive impulsive sounds shall be in violation when such sounds are at a sound pressure level of five dB(A) less than those listed above. 

c. 	
Time restrictions imposed by this section shall apply seven days a week, 365 days a year including all holidays and weekends.  




Zoning District  Maximum Limitations dB(A)  

 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.  10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.   
Residential Districts RA, RB, RC, and RM  60 dB(A)  50 dB(A)  
Commercial Districts O and C  70 dB(A)  60 dB(A)  

(Code 1992, § 11-86; Ord. No. 7-34, § 1, 2-19-2007; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 14-119. - Specific prohibited acts. 
No person shall make, continue, or cause or permit to be made, any unreasonable noise disturbance prohibited by this article. Making, continuing, causing or permitting to be made the following acts are declared to be in violation of this article. Each such act which either continues or is repeated more than one-half hour beyond its inception shall be considered and may be prosecuted as a separate violation of this article.  
(1) 	
Sound producing equipment. Radios, televisions, stereos, musical instruments, loud speakers, etc., amplified or unamplified: The use, operation, or permitting to be played, used, or operated any television radio receiving set, musical instrument, stereos or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to create a noise disturbance in a noise sensitive zone or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, chamber, vehicle, or on private or public space, where such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 

a.m. in such a manner as to be audible at a distance of 50 feet from the source of such sound or building or structure in which it is located, or the operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner so as to be in violation of section 14-118, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article.  

(2) 	
Horns, signaling devices, squealing tires. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle on any street or public place of the township for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, and the use of any such device when traffic is for any reason held up. The operation of any motor vehicle in a manner so as to cause intentional squealing of tires. 

(3) 	
Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place (including private property) so as to unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.  

(4) 	
Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other excessive noise. 

(5) 	
Animals and pets. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or pet which frequently or for continued duration makes sounds which create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone. Such sounds made in such a manner as to be audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building or structure at which said animal or pet is located, or in such a manner so as to be in violation of section 14-118 herein, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article.  

(6) 	
Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler. The provisions of this section shall not apply to motor vehicles operated on a highway or public street and subject to the noise regulations of the state motor vehicle code or comparable provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code, and in such case, violations shall be enforced under the procedures set forth therein for civil infractions.  


(Code 1992, § 11-87; Ord. No. 7-34, § 1, 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 14-120. - Exceptions. 
None of the terms or prohibitions of the sections 14-117 through 14-119 shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1) 	
Noises usually created by industrial, manufacturing, assembly, electrical power plants and similar uses when located on property zoned industrial under township ordinance.  

(2) 	
Noises usually created by agricultural operations, including animals, birds, etc., usually kept on property zoned agricultural under township ordinance.  

(3) 	
Noises of public or governmental safety signals, warning devices, and emergency devices when used as intended for warnings in case of emergency or danger or when tested, and also noises of all fire alarms. 

(4) 	
Noises resulting from any authorized public service department responding to an emergency or acting in an emergency or while performing emergency work. 

(5) 
Noise resulting from the operation of snow removal equipment either public or private.  

(6) 
Any vehicle of the township while engaged upon necessary public business. 

(7) 
Noise caused by lawn mowing and garden equipment with mufflers between the hours of 7:00 

a.m. and 10:00 p.m.  

(8) 	
Athletic activities or events, including practices, conducted by or under the auspices of public or private schools, colleges or universities.  

(9) 	
The use for noncommercial purposes of one or more bells or chimes which does not exceed 90 seconds in duration in an hour. 

(10) 	
Parades, concerts, musical activities, cultural events, festivals, fairs, or similar activities subject to the approval of a special permit for the activity under section 14-122, and subject to any sound limitations provided in the approval for such activity by the township. 

(11) 
Public parks and public recreational areas. 

(12) 	
Any aircraft operated in conformity with or pursuant to federal law, federal air regulations, and air traffic control instruction used pursuant to and within the duly adopted federal air regulations.  

(13) 
Legal firework displays.  

(14) 
All railroad operations.  

(15) 	
Noise caused by construction between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. provided it does not exceed 90 dB(A) at a distance of 50 feet from the source of the noise. Emergencies and/or emergency work shall be excluded from the limitations of this subsection. 

(16) 	
Noise caused by demolition between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. provided it does not exceed 90 dB(A) at a distance of 50 feet from the source of the noise. Emergencies and/or emergency work shall be excluded from the limitations of this subsection. 

(17) 	
Noise caused by home repair between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday excluding all holidays, provided it does not exceed 90 dB(A) at the property line or at a distance of 50 feet, whichever is furthest from the source of the noise. Emergencies and/or emergency work shall be excluded from the limitations of this subsection. 

(18) 	
Noise caused by the removal of solid waste, recyclables, or similar material from any premises between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. provided it does not exceed 90 dB(A) at a distance of 50 feet from the source of the noise. 

(19) 	
Noise caused by stationary air conditioners, generators, and pool pumps and similar equipment provided it does not exceed 90 dB(A) as measured at the property line.  


(Code 1992, § 11-88; Ord. No. 7-34, § 1, 2-19-2007; Ord. No. 09-45, 9-21-2009) 
Sec. 14-121. - Enforcement. 
In addition to the employees and officers regularly assigned to enforce township ordinances generally, the township manager may assign duties of enforcement of this article to township personnel qualified to enforce the provisions of this article.  
(Code 1992, § 11-89; Ord. No. 7-34, § 1, 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 14-122. - Application for special permit. 
(a) 	
Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this article on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the township board or its duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the township board hereunder shall contain all conditions upon which said permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective. The township board, or its duly authorized representative, may grant the relief as applied for if it finds:  

(1) 	
Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to comply with this article, or the activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with other subsections of this section; and 

(2) 
That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.  

(b) 	
The following factors shall be considered by the township board, or its duly authorized representative, in determining whether to grant the relief as applied for:  

(1) 	
The balance of the hardship to the applicant, the community and other persons in not granting the requested relief against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons adversely affected and any other adverse effects of granting the requested relief.  

(2) 	
The proximity of any residence or any other use which would be adversely affected by sound in excess of the limits prescribed by this article.  

(3) 
The anticipated level of the sound to be generated by the event or activity. 

(4) 	
Whether the type of sound to be produced by the event or activity is usual or unusual for the location or area for which the relief is requested.  

(5) 	
The density of the population of the area in which the event or activity is proposed to take place. 

(6) 
The time of day or night which the event or activity is proposed to take place.  

(7) 	
The nature of the sound to be produced, including but not limited to, whether the sound will be steady, intermittent, impulsive, or repetitive.  

(c) 	
The township board may prescribe any conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood, including but not limited to dates, times and the dB(A) levels authorized.  

(d) 	
Property owners who own property within 300 feet of the property where the noise for which the special permit is requested shall be notified by first class mail.  

(e) 
The fees shall be set by resolution of the township board. 

(f) 	
A special permit may be granted only for the period of time that is reasonably necessary to conduct an event or activity, which in no case may exceed 30 days.  

(g) 	
No more than two 30-day special permits shall be issued to the same person or entity within a one-year time period.  


(Code 1992, § 11-90; Ord. No. 7-34, § 1, 2-19-2007) 
Sec. 14-123. - Retaliation. 
If there is any evidence of retaliation by any offender against any complainant or witnesses, such evidence shall be communicated to the district court. In sentencing any violator, the court shall first examine the evidence of retaliation, and if such be shown, shall consider such acts and sentence the violator accordingly.  
(Code 1992, § 11-91; Ord. No. 7-34, § 1, 2-19-2007) 
Secs. 14-124—14-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSTRUCTION IMPACT ABATEMENT 
Sec. 14-145. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Construction activity means the clearing of vegetation, demolition, excavation, filling, paving and transportation of excavated and fill materials to and from properties, the installation of utilities, and the building of structures, streets or highways on properties.  
Developer means the person responsible for the improvement of any land, or responsible for any construction activity upon any property, as those terms are defined in this section.  
Dust means airborne soil, rock, and any other particulate liberated from a parcel of property as a result of construction activity, improvement, excavation, filling, grading, demolition or vehicle movement.  
Improvement means activities that include, but shall not be limited to, the clearing of vegetation, demolition, excavation, filling, paving, transportation of excavated and fill materials to and from properties, the installation of utilities, and the building of structures, streets or highways on properties.  
Utilities means all public or private lines and facilities related to the provision, distribution, collection, transmission or disposal of water, stormwater and sanitary sewage, oil, gas, power, information, telecommunication and telephone cable, including facilities for the generation of electricity.  
(Code 1992, § 11-142; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 14-146. - Violations and penalties 
(a) 	
Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction as prescribed within this Code of Ordinances.  

(b) 	
In addition to the authority to issue a citation, the sheriff's department, the zoning administrator, or a township official appointed by the township manager, shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders immediately upon evidence that a construction activity is being conducted within the township in violation of any of the terms of this article. 

(c) 	
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude any township official from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct, remove, or otherwise abate a violation of this section. 


(Code 1992, § 11-149; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 08-44, 5-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-147. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the deleterious impacts of construction activities in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the township. This article shall not be deemed to provide for soil erosion and sedimentation control nor seek to assume responsibility for or jurisdiction over such activities under part 91 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.9101 et seq.).  
(Code 1992, § 11-141; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 14-148. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to construction activity and/or improvements on all property located within the township except property whereupon the construction of single-family and two-family dwellings is currently underway pursuant to appropriate permits and approvals. The regulations in this article are applicable to the development of residential construction sites but not to individual dwellings. 
(Code 1992, § 11-143; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 14-149. - Construction activity nuisances. 
The following acts are hereby considered construction activity nuisances: 
(1) 	
The trespass of dust from a property such that the dust accumulates on or discolors adjacent roadways or properties.  

(2) 	
Depositing of soil, mud, rocks and any other type of foreign matter from a property onto streets or highways including all materials deposited by the wheels and tires of construction vehicles. 


(Code 1992, § 11-144; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 14-150. - Abatement and mitigation procedures. 
(a) 	
Where a property is determined to be a nuisance due to the creation of dust, the developer shall be required to spray the disturbed area, including the haul route if necessary, with water or an appropriate dust laying material as mandated by the zoning administrator and maintain a water truck or similar equipment for spraying purposes on the premises.  

(b) 	
Where a property is determined to be a nuisance due to the accumulation of dust, dirt, and other materials on streets or highways, the developer shall be responsible for sweeping the affected streets and highways or contract to have the affected streets and highways swept as mandated by the zoning administrator. Failure by the developer to sweep streets and highways as mandated by the zoning administrator shall cause the township to perform the sweeping and seek reimbursement.  

(c) 	
Where a property is determined to be a nuisance due to the tracking of dirt/mud onto adjacent roadways, the zoning administrator may require the installation of an improved haul road for the subject parcel. The haul road may consist of aggregate, crushed concrete, limestone chips, roto­milled asphalt, asphalt or other materials found to be acceptable by the township engineer. 


(Code 1992, § 11-145; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 08-44, 5-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-151. - Administration. 
The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator.  
(Code 1992, § 11-146; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 7-16-2007) 
Sec. 14-152. - Enforcement. 
(a) 	
It shall be the responsibility of the sheriff's department, the zoning administrator, or a township official appointed by the township manager, to enforce the terms of this article. 

(b) 	
The zoning administrator shall have the right of entry upon a construction activity site at all reasonable times to aid in the enforcement of this article.  


(Code 1992, § 11-147; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 7-16-2007; Ord. No. 08-44, 5-18-2009) 
Sec. 14-153. - Application for special permit. 

Applications for a permit for relief from the abatement and mitigation procedures designated in this article on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the township board or its duly authorized representative. Any permit granted by the township board, or its duly authorized representative, hereunder shall contain all conditions upon which said permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective. The township board, or its duly authorized representative, may grant the relief as applied for if it finds:  
(1) 	
Literal application of the abatement and mitigation procedures would result in exceptional, practical difficulty to the applicant.  

(2) 	
An alternative mitigation procedure proposed by the applicant is found adequate for the cited construction activity nuisance which shall not deviate from the performance that would be obtained by strict enforcement of this article.  

(3) 	
The granting of the special permit shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 


(Code 1992, § 11-148; Ord. No. 07-36, § 1, 7-16-2007) 
Secs. 14-154—14-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) ---  
State Law reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, MCL 324.9101 et seq.; soil conservation districts law, MCL 324.9301 et seq.; building and construction in floodplain, MCL 324.3108; plat requirements for subdivision within or abutting floodplain, MCL 560.138; conditions for approval of subdivisions within floodplain, MCL 560.194.  
Sec. 14-175. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Flood or flooding means:  
(1) 	
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 

a. 	
The overflow of inland or tidal waters;  

b. 	
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;  

c. 	
Mudflows; and 



(2) 	
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a river, lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding, as defined in subsection (1)a of this definition.  


Flood hazard area means an area susceptible to flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or related erosion as designated on the flood hazard boundary map, issued by the FEMA, as zones A, M and/or E.  
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as zones A, M and/or E.  
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See Flood or flooding. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.  
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, the state construction code, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance), and other applications of police power that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.  
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, gas or liquid storage facility, as well as a mobile home or manufactured unit. 
(Ord. No. 10-55, § 7.25-3, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 14-176. - Purpose. 
(a) 	
The purpose of this article is to designate an enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of floodplain management for the township, and to designate regulated flood hazard areas under the provisions of the state construction code act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.).  

(b) 	
The township participates in the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) by complying with the program's applicable statutory and regulatory requirements for the purposes of significantly reducing flood hazards to persons, reducing property damage, and reducing public expenditures, and providing for the availability of flood insurance and federal funds or loans within the township.  


(Ord. No. 10-55, § 7.25-2, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 14-177. - Agency designated. 
The township zoning administrator is hereby designated as the floodplain management enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the township under Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). The township assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout the corporate limits of the township. 
(Ord. No. 10-55, § 7.25-4, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 14-178. - Code appendix enforced. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1508b(6)), as amended, appendix G of the state construction code shall be enforced within the township.  
(Ord. No. 10-55, § 7.25-5, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 14-179. - Designation of regulated floodprone hazard areas. 
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance study (FIS) entitled "Eaton County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)" and dated 11-26-2010 and the flood insurance rate maps (FIRMS) panel numbers of 26045C; 0088E, 0089E, 0093E, 0094E, 0113E, 0201E, 0202E, 0203E, 0204E, 0206E, 0207E, 0208E, 0209E, 0215E, 0216E, 0217E, 0228E and 0236E, and dated 11-26-2010 are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the state construction code, and declared to be a part of section 1612.3 of the state construction code, and to provide the content of the flood hazards section of table R301.2(1) of the state residential code.  
(Ord. No. 10-55, § 7.25-6, 11-15-2010) 
Sec. 14-180. - Agency responsibilities. 
The following are the responsibilities of the floodplain management enforcing agency:  
(1) 	
Obtain, review, and reasonably utilize flood elevation data available from federal, state, or other sources pending receipt of data from the FEMA to identify the flood hazard area and areas with potential flooding.  

(2) 	
Ensure that all permits necessary for development in floodplain areas have been issued, including, but not limited to: township certificates of zoning compliance; township building permits; state department of environmental quality floodplain permits, approvals, or letters of no authority under the floodplain regulatory provisions of part 31, Water Resources Protection of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.).  

(3) 	
Review all permit applications to determine that proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.  

(4) 	
Review all proposed subdivisions to determine whether such proposals are reasonably safe from flooding and to ensure compliance with all applicable floodplain management regulations.  

(5) 	
Assist in the delineation of flood hazard areas; provide information concerning uses and occupancy of the floodplain or flood-related erosion areas; maintain floodproofing and lowest floor construction records; cooperate with other officials, agencies, and persons for floodplain management. 

(6) 
Advise FEMA of any changes in community boundaries, including appropriate maps.  


(Ord. No. 10-55, § 7.25-7, 11-15-2010) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
State Law reference— State fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq.; explosives act, MCL 29.41 et seq.; arson and burning, MCL 750.71 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 16-1—16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. -FIRE CODE 

Sec. 16-19. - Adoption. 
That a certain document, of which a copy is on file in the office of the clerk of the township, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2015 edition; including appendix chapters B, C, and D; as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the township, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the charter township are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 16-20(a).  
(Code 1992, § 7-26; Ord. No. 01-04, § 1, 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 03-16, § 1, 9-7-2004; Ord. No. 06-30, § 1, 9-5-2006; Ord. No. 10-47, 2-1-2010; Ord. of 12-2-2013, § 1; Ord. No. 15-89, § 1, 10-5­2015 ) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 42.23. 
Sec. 16-20. - Amendments. 
(a) The following sections of the 2015 International Fire Code are hereby amended as follows:  
Section 109.5 Authority. The Fire Chief, Fire Inspector, fire code official, or approved personnel have the specific authority to enforce the provisions of the International Fire Code, and this ordinance and its amendments, by the issuance of civil citations, district court appearance tickets and/or legal process, as permitted by law.  
Section 308.1.4.1 Violations. Violations shall be designated as a civil infraction punishable by a fine as established by Chapter 1, Section 1-7. — General Penalty, of the Township Code.  
Section 308.1.6.3.1 Violations. Violations shall be designated as a civil infraction punishable by a fine as established by Chapter 1, Section 1-7. — General Penalty, of the Township Code.  
(b) The following township amendments shall be in effect:  
105.6.43 Temporary membrane structures, tents, and canopies is hereby amended to read as follows:  
105.6.43 Temporary membrane structures, tents, and canopies: An operational permit is required to erect or operate an air-supported temporary membrane structure or tent 200 square feet or larger, or a canopy 400 square feet or larger, except for structures used exclusively for camping. Tents shall be in accordance with the Delta Township Tent Ordinance in its most current effect.  
302.1 Definitions. New definitions added as follows:  
All references throughout the Delta Fire Code to open burning or burning barrels shall be referred to the Delta Township Open Burning Ordinance in its most current effect.  
307.5 Regulated Activities is a new section added as follows:  
307.5.3 Training Burns. Training burns may be permitted any time during the calendar year at the discretion of the fire chief or his designee. 
906.3 Exceptions is a new section added as follows: 

Section 906.3. Exceptions. Occupancy classifications Group A divisions 1—5; Group B; Group M and Group R divisions 1—4 shall be as follows:  
1. 	
Portable fire extinguisher(s) in occupancies not equipped with automatic fire protection systems shall have a minimum rating of 4A-60BC (10 lbs. multipurpose) or equivalent with the maximum travel distance not to exceed 50 feet in any direction to an extinguisher. 

2. 	
Portable fire extinguisher(s) in occupancies equipped with automatic fire protection systems shall have a minimum rating of 4A-60BC (10 lbs. multipurpose) or equivalent with the maximum travel distance not to exceed 75 feet in any direction to an extinguisher. 


907.3.1 Duct Smoke Detectors is hereby amended with the following addition: 
907.3.1 Duct smoke detectors connected to the fire alarm control until shall be a "smart" type detector capable of sending condition information and being reset from to fire alarm panel. Detectors shall, upon activation, perform the intended function and activate the alarm notification appliances or activate a visible and audible full alarm.  
907.6.5 Monitoring is hereby amended with the following addition:  
907.6.5 Monitoring: Addition: An IP transmitter for fire alarm transmission is allowed but must be UL Standard listed. Any IP transmitters must have two modes of communication, one of which must be a POTS (Plain Old Telephone System) line. 
1006.1 Illumination required is hereby amended to read as follows:  
1006.1 Illumination required: Addition: The emergency egress lighting shall be tested in dark conditions and witnessed by the Delta Township Electrical Inspector and/or the Fire code Official.  
3309. Section 3309. Division 1.4G Fireworks is a new section as follows:  
Section 3309. Division 1.4G Fireworks.  
3309.1 Definition of Division 1.4G Fireworks. Fireworks means that term as defined by the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq.  
3309.2 The sale, display, storage, transportation, or distribution of fireworks shall comply with the provisions of the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq. Nothing in this section shall modify generally applicable township ordinances, including, without limitation, those regulating vendors, peddlers, transient merchants, solicitors, and hucksters.  
(Code 1992, § 7-27; Ord. No. 01-04, § 2, 3, 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 10-47, 2-1-2010; Ord. No. 13­78, § 1, 6-3-2013; Ord. of 12-2-2013, § 2; Ord. No. 14-85, § 1, 10-20-14 ; Ord. No. 15-89, § 2, 10-5­2015 ; Ord. No. 16-90, § I, 4-18-2016 ) 
Secs. 16-21—16-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -OPEN BURNING[2] 
Footnotes: 

--- (2) ---  
State Law reference— Open burning of leaves and grass clippings, MCL 324.11522; prevention and suppression of forest fires, MCL 324.51501 et seq.; arson and burning, MCL 750.71 et seq. 
Sec. 16-44. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Open burning means the outdoor burning of any type of combustible materials, except for such burning which is contained within outdoor grills or barbecues, and is intended and commonly used for purposes of food preparation.  
Permit means the authorization granted by the fire chief or his designee, pursuant to the criteria established in this article, consideration of weather conditions, and any other basis relative to health, safety and welfare of township residents.  
Recreational fire means an open fire set on the ground and fueled only by wood, brush or charcoal. The materials fueling such a fire are limited to an area of three feet by three feet by three feet.  
Training burn means any fire set by the fire chief, or his designee, for the purpose of training members of the fire department in techniques of fire control, management or prevention.  
Yard waste means lawn clippings, leaves, twigs and branches (excluding stumps) not more than three inches in diameter and not more than four feet in length, weeds, brush, shrub clippings, and other plant matter which do not emit a foul or offensive odor when burned.  
(Code 1992, § 7-47; Ord. No. 95-1, 3-20-1995; Ord. No. 99-1, 2-15-1999; Ord. No. 14-86, § 1, 10­20-14 ) 
Sec. 16-45. - Violations and penalties. 
(a) 	
Persons found to be in violation of this division shall be subject to response fees as identified in the Delta Township Fire Department Emergency Services and Haz-Mat fee Schedule. At the discretion of the fire chief or their designee, the response fee for a 1st time offense not requiring fire department suppression, may be waived.  

(b) 	
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be punished by a fine in an amount not exceeding $50.00. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.  


(Code 1992, § 7-51; Ord. No. 95-1, 3-20-1995; Ord. No. 99-1, 2-15-1999; Ord. No. 14-86, § 1, 10­20-14 ) 
Sec. 16-46. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of open burning within the township.  
(Code 1992, § 7-46; Ord. No. 95-1, 3-20-1995; Ord. No. 99-1, 2-15-1999; Ord. No. 14-86, § 1, 10­20-14 ) 
Sec. 16-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-86, § 1, adopted October 20, 2014, repealed § 16-47, in its entirety. Former § 16-47 pertained to prohibited activities and was derived from Code 1992, § 7-48; Ord. No. 95-1, adopted March 20, 1995; Ord. No. 99-1, adopted February 15, 1999 and Ord. No. 99­2, adopted March 15, 1999. 
Sec. 16-48. -Regulated and prohibited activities. 
(a) Areas zoned residential. 
(1) 	
A permit is required for all burning in the township; residents must call beforehand to ensure appropriate weather conditions as instructed on the permit.  

(2) 
Burning barrels are not allowed in areas zoned residential.  

(3) 	
Only recreational fires are allowed in areas zoned residential. The material to be burned shall consist of natural firewood only. No construction materials, yard waste, brush, leaves, rubbish, etc. may be burned at any time.  

(4) 	
Permits are issued annually and expire on December 31st of the calendar year for which it is obtained.  

(5) 	
A burning permit shall only be issued to the property owner. Renters must receive permission to burn from the property owner.  

(6) 
Recreational burning permits are valid from sunrise to 12:00 a.m. (midnight).  

(7) 
There shall be no burning within 25 feet of any structure or combustible material.  

(8) 
The burning area must be at least five feet within your property line.  

(9) 
The burning area may not exceed three feet in diameter and two feet in height.  

(10) 	
Firewood shall be smaller than four inches in diameter. No stumps, logs or building materials shall be burned.  

(11) 	
The burning area shall be constantly attended by an individual over the age of 18 years old and knowledgeable in the use of fire extinguishing equipment. The attendant shall supervise the fire until it has been extinguished. A source of water must be near the fire.  

(12) 
You shall not use any petroleum products to start the fire or keep it going. 

(13) 	
The fire chief and/or his/her authorized representative have the authority to discontinue the permit if the smoke creates a nuisance or hazardous condition. 

(14) 	
The fire chief and/or his/her authorized representative reserve the right to enter the premises to ensure proper compliance to the burning rules and regulations.  

(15) 	
The resident is responsible to provide the burning permit for inspection and/or surrender upon request. 


(b) Areas zoned agricultural. 
(1) 	
Burning of yard waste may be permitted in all areas of the township zoned AG1 or AG2 any time during the calendar year between the hours of sunrise and sunset.  

(2) 	
A permit is required for all burning in the township, permits are issued annually and expire on December 31st of the calendar year for which it is obtained. Residents must call beforehand to ensure appropriate weather conditions as instructed on the permit.  

(3) 
The burning permit may be obtained on-line or in-person between the hours of 8:00 a.m. — 

5:00 p.m. at Fire Station No. 1 Monday through Friday (excluding holidays).  

(4) 	
Permits are issued annually; the resident is responsible to provide the burning permit for inspection and/or surrender upon request.  

(5) 	
You must be physically in attendance at the fire at all times. The permit is valid from sunrise to sunset.  

(6) 	
You must burn in your own yard, at least five feet from the property line and a minimum of 25 feet from any structure or combustible material.  

(7) 
You shall not use any petroleum products to start the fire or to keep it going.  

(8) 
You shall burn only what grows in your own yard (yard waste).  

(9) 
A source of water must be near the fire.  

(10) 	
The brush shall be smaller than four inches in diameter. No stumps, logs or building materials shall be burned.  

(11) 
The brush pile cannot be any larger than four feet by four feet by four feet. 


(c)  Burning barrels. 
(1) 
Burning barrels are allowed only in agriculturally zoned areas (A-1 or A-2).  

(2) 	
The container must be fire proof, constructed of metal or masonry, with an approved spark arrester or screen with openings not more than ¾ inches in diameter.  

(3) 	
The container must be at least five feet from the property line and 15 feet from any combustible object.  

(4) 
You can only burn on your own property.  

(5) 	
You may burn only class A (paper, cardboard and yard waste) products. No food, plastics, diapers, cans or garbage can be burned at any time.  

(6) 	
You may burn only yard waste that is grown or has originated on your own property. No material may be brought in from another residence or location to be burned in the township. 

(7) 	
You may burn only between the hours of sunrise and sunset. The fire must be completely out by dark. 

(8) 
You shall not use any petroleum products to start the fire or keep it going. 


(d) Special activities. 
(1) 	
Training burns may be permitted at any time during the calendar year at the discretion of the fire chief or his designee.  

(2) 	
The fire chief may issue a permit for open burning on any public or private property being cleared for the purpose of development, or in cases deemed emergencies by the fire chief or his designee.  


(Code 1992, § 7-49; Ord. No. 95-1, 3-20-1995; Ord. No. 99-1, 2-15-1999; Ord. No. 14-86, § 1, 10­20-14 ; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-86, § 1, adopted October 20, 2014, amended the title of § 16-48 to read as set out herein. Previously § 16-48 was titled regulated activities. 
Sec. 16-49. - Supplemental rules and regulations. 
The chief is authorized to render interpretations of this Code and to make and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to carry out the application and intent of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this Code and shall be available to the public during normal business hours. 
(Code 1992, § 7-49.5; Ord. No. 99-1, 2-15-1999; Ord. No. 14-86, § 1, 10-20-14 ) 
Sec. 16-50. - Discretion of fire chief regarding burning. 
All burning of any kind may be curtailed under extreme conditions as determined by the fire chief.  
(Code 1992, § 7-50; Ord. No. 95-1, 3-20-1995; Ord. No. 99-1, 2-15-1999; Ord. No. 14-86, § 1, 10­20-14 ) 
Secs. 16-51—16-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS 
Sec. 16-74. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
False alarm means the activation of a fire alarm system for the purpose of summoning the fire department, not including fire alarm systems within inhabited single family residential premises, which causes notification of such to be registered by the fire department which necessitates a response by the fire department, when that alarm is activated for a reason other than a fire, potential fire, or other emergency.  
Fire alarm system means a detection device or assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of any hazard requiring urgent attention and to which fire department personnel are expected to respond. 
Fire department means the township fire department.  
(Code 1992, § 12-39; Ord. No. 03-08, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 14-84, 10-20-14 ) 
Sec. 16-75. - Purpose; false fire alarms. 
The article is intended to provide the township with a means of applying reasonable regulations to reduce false fire alarm activity. False fire alarms pose a detriment to the public health, safety and welfare of residents, businesses, and all persons within the township through the misallocation of fire department resources. A reduction of false fire alarms will allow fire department personnel to be more available and to respond more readily to actual fire alarms and emergency situations which require immediate attention. The prohibition of false fire alarms and the regulation of fire systems are also necessary to preserve peace and tranquility within the township and to reduce the frequency and to defray the cost of response to false alarms by fire department personnel.  
(Code 1992, § 12-38; Ord. No. 03-08, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 14-84, 10-20-14 ) 
Sec. 16-76. - Generally. 
Whenever the fire department responds to a false alarm, the property owner whose property is served by the fire alarm system shall be in violation of a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to a civil fine in the form of a false alarm fine. Each instance shall be considered a separate offense and punishable as such. 
(Code 1992, § 12-40; Ord. No. 03-08, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 14-84, 10-20-14 ) 
Sec. 16-77. -False alarm fines. 

The false alarm fines shall be as follows:  
(1) 	
First occurrence. There shall be no fine imposed for the first occurrence of a false alarm during a calendar year, but notice shall be given of the false alarm and the existence of this article.  

(2) 	
Second occurrence. There shall be a $50.00 fine imposed for the second occurrence of a false alarm during a calendar year.  

(3) 	
Third occurrences. There shall be a $100.00 fine imposed for the third occurrence of false alarms during a calendar year. 

(4) 	
Fourth occurrence. There shall be a $250.00 fine imposed for the fourth occurrence of a false alarm during a calendar year.  

(5) 	
Subsequent occurrences. There shall be a $500.00 fine imposed for the fifth and all subsequent occurrences of false alarms during a calendar year. 

(6) 	
Payment due. Payment of all fines and/or costs associated with this article shall be due within 30 days of the issuance of a citation. A late payment fee equaling 15 percent of the original fine shall be imposed for payment after 30 days.  

(7) 	
Penalty. If any fines and or costs associated with this article are not paid, the municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court in accordance with section 20-22(g).  

(8) 	
Set by resolution of township board. The fines associated with this section may be set from time to time by the township board by resolution.  


(Code 1992, § 12-41; Ord. No. 03-08, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 14-84, 10-20-14 ) 
Sec. 16-78. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforceable by the chief of the fire department, and those fire department personnel so appointed by the fire chief, who shall have the authority to issue and serve civil infraction citations. Civil infraction citations shall be issued and served to the owner of the property or business upon which the violation has occurred. 
(Code 1992, § 12-42; Ord. No. 03-08, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 14-84, 10-20-14 ) 
Sec. 16-79. - Exceptions. 
The following circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm: 
(1) 	
An alarm condition activated by damage to public utility lines, when the affected public utility corroborates that the damage to such lines caused the alarm. 

(2) 	
An alarm condition caused by storm, tornado or other violent condition beyond the control of the property owner whose property is served by the fire alarm system.  


(Code 1992, § 12-43; Ord. No. 03-08, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 14-84, 10-20-14 ) 
Sec. 16-80. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply only to fire alarm system false alarms as described herein.  

(Code 1992, § 12-44; Ord. No. 03-08, 6-2-2003; Ord. No. 14-84, 10-20-14 ) 
Secs. 16-81—16-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) ---  
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19-107 , § I, adopted August 19, 2019, set out provisions intended for use as article VI, §§ 16-81—16-87. To preserve the style of this Code, as well as to reserve sections for future expansion, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as article V, §§ 16-91—16­
97. 
Sec. 16-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Act means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011 (MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended).  
Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101.  
Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects of combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1, 3.1.2., 3.1.3., or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks.  
Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA Standard 87-1, 4.1.  
Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5.  
All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act.  
(Ord. No. 19-107 , § I, 8-19-2019) 
Sec. 16-92. - Ignition, discharge, or use of consumer fireworks. 
No person shall ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks in the township; except that this prohibition shall not preclude any person from igniting, discharging, or using consumer fireworks within the township after 11:00 a.m. on the following days: 
(1) 
December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1; 

(2) 	
The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days;  

(3) 
June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days; 

(4) 
July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m.; or  

(5) 	
The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 


(Ord. No. 19-107 , § I, 8-19-2019) 
Sec. 16-93. - Exception. 
If the state department of natural resources fire division elevates fire conditions to extreme or very high for 72 consecutive hours, the fire chief in consultation with the department of natural resources may enforce a no burning restriction that includes a ban on the ignition, discharge, or use of consumer fireworks notwithstanding the days generally exempt and listed in section 16-92. The fire chief shall be responsible for ensuring that adequate advance notice of the burning restriction is provided to the public. 
(Ord. No. 19-107 , § I, 8-19-2019) 
Sec. 16-94. - Enforcement. 
A person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil fine of $1,000.00 for each violation, unless specifically provided otherwise. If such a civil fine is assessed, $500.00 of the fine collected will be remitted to the local law enforcement agency responsible for enforcing this article.  
(Ord. No. 19-107 , § I, 8-19-2019) 
Sec. 16-95. - Prohibited conduct; penalties. 
(a) 	
No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission to use those fireworks on those premises. A violation of this subsection is punishable by a state civil infraction and a civil fine of $500.00. 

(b) 	
No person shall sell consumer fireworks to a minor. A violation of this subsection is punishable by a civil fine of $1,000.00, and, for a second or subsequent violation, a civil fine of $2,500.00. 

(c) 	
No person shall discharge, ignite or use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, controlled substance, or a combination thereof. A violation of this subsection is punishable by a state civil infraction and a civil fine of $1,000.00.  


(Ord. No. 19-107 , § I, 8-19-2019) 
Sec. 16-96. - Low-impact fireworks. 
A person may use low-impact fireworks year-round.  
(Ord. No. 19-107 , § I, 8-19-2019) 
Sec. 16-97. - Ignition, discharge, or use of articles pyrotechnic and display fireworks; application and permit required. 
(a) 	
No person shall discharge, ignite, or use articles pyrotechnic nor display fireworks without first submitting an application to the township on the form available online and prescribed by the state department of licensing and regulatory affairs, or its successor, and receiving a permit from the township in compliance with the Act.  

(b) 	
An application submitted under this section shall be made in writing at least 30 days before the day of the proposed use.  

(c) 	
The township may charge and collect a fee to issue a permit, which fee shall be retained by the township. 

(d) 
A permit is not transferable and shall not be issued to a minor. 


(Ord. No. 19-107 , § I, 8-19-2019) 
Chapter 18 - LAND DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
State Law reference— Michigan planning enabling act, MCL 125.3801 et seq.; land division act, MCL 
560.101 et seq.; condominium act, MCL 559.101 et seq.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. -LAND DIVISIONS 
Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
40 acres or the equivalent means either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than 30 acres.  
Accessible, in reference to a parcel, means the parcel meets one or both of the following requirements: 
(1) 	
Has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access to an existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards of the state transportation department or the county road commission under Public Act No. 200 of 1969 (MCL 247.321 et seq.), or has an area where a driveway can provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and meet all applicable location standards.  

(2) 	
Is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access to an existing road or street and that meets all applicable location standards of the state transportation department or the county road commission under Public Act No. 200 of 1969 (MCL 247.321 et seq.), or can be served by a proposed easement that will provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and that will meet all such applicable standards.  


Applicant means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not.  
Assessor means the township assessor or his designee.  
Divide or division. 
(1) 	
The term "divide" or "division" means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by its proprietor or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development that 

results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of the state land division act.  

(2) 	
The term "divide" or "division" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the state land division act, or the requirements of other applicable local ordinances.  


Exempt split. 
(1) 	
The term "exempt split" means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by its proprietor or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent.  

(2) 	
The term "exempt split" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the state land division act, or the requirements of an applicable local ordinance.  


(Code 1992, § 7.5-3; Ord. No. 98-1, 3-16-1998) 
Sec. 18-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to carry out the provisions of the state land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), formerly known as the subdivision control act), to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with the Act by establishing standards for prior review and approval of land divisions within the township.  
(Code 1992, § 7.5-2; Ord. No. 98-1, 3-16-1998) 
Sec. 18-21. -Prior approval requirements for land divisions. 
Land in the township shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of the assessor or designee in accordance with this article and the state land division act; provided that the following shall be exempted from this requirement:  
(1) 	
A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to the state land division act.  

(2) 
A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with the state land division act.  

(3) 	
An exempt split or other partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract that only results in parcels of 20 acres or more in size that are not accessible and one of the following applies:  

a. 	
The parcel or tract was in existence on March 31, 1997.  

b. 	
The parcel or tract resulted from an exempt split or other partitioning or splitting under this section. 




(Code 1992, § 7.5-4; Ord. No. 98-1, 3-16-1998) 
Sec. 18-22. - Application for land division approval. 
An applicant shall file all of the following with the planning department for review and approval of a proposed land division before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year, or for building development. A completed application with the following information:  
(1) 
Ownership of the land to be divided.  

(2) 	
A tentative parcel map drawn to scale including an accurate legal description of each proposed division, and showing the boundary lines, approximate dimensions, and the accessibility of each division for vehicles and, if the parcel is a development site, for public utilities.  

(3) 
All standards of the state land division act and this article have been met.  

(4) 	
A fee, the amount of which shall be set by the board from time to time by resolution, shall be paid at the time of filing the application. 


(Code 1992, § 7.5-5; Ord. No. 98-1, 3-16-1998) 
Sec. 18-23. - Procedure for review of applications for land division approval. 
(a) 	
The assessor or designee shall approve or disapprove the land division applied for within 45 days after receipt of a complete application conforming to the ordinance's requirements and the state land division act, shall promptly notify the applicant in writing of the decision, and if denied, all of the reasons for denial.  

(b) 
The assessor or designee shall maintain an official record of all approved land divisions or transfers. 

(c) 	
Approval of a division is not a determination that the resulting parcels comply with other ordinances or regulations. Approval of a division is not a determination that the resulting parcels have public water and sewer or have approval for on-site water supply or sewage disposal facilities and any notice of approval of a division shall include a statement to this effect.  


(Code 1992, § 7.5-6; Ord. No. 98-1, 3-16-1998) 
Sec. 18-24. - Standards for approval of land divisions. 
A proposed land division reviewable by the township shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
(1) 	
The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by the division does not exceed a four to one ratio except for the remainder of the parent parcel or parent tract retained by the proprietor. The depth of a parcel shall be the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the midpoint between side lot lines. The width of a parcel shall be measured as the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front setback line.  

(2) 	
It is recognized that occasionally parcels which were originally divided on a section line basis are not true when surveyed. Thus, parcels which only exceed the four to one depth to width ratio by two percent or less shall be considered a conforming parcel. 

(3) 	
The ratio of depth to width requirement does not apply to any parcel resulting from a division if it is ten acres or larger. 

(4) 
Each resulting parcel is accessible. 

(5) 	
The number of parcels created does not exceed the number permitted by the state land division act.  

(6) 	
For resulting parcels that are development sites, each resulting parcel has adequate easements for public utilities from the parcel to existing public utility facilities by public right-of­way or by easements. 


(Code 1992, § 7.5-7; Ord. No. 98-1, 3-16-1998) 
Secs. 18-25—18-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 18-52. - Rules of construction. 
The following rules of construction shall apply:  
(1) 	
Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:  

a. 	
"And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply.  

b. 	
"Or" indicates the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination.  

c. 	
"Either … or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 



(2) 	
In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.  

(3) 
The term "days" means calendar days unless otherwise stated.  


(Code 1992, § 16-5; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-53. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Alley means a public or private right-of-way shown on a plat which provides secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land. 
As-built plans means revised construction plans in accordance with all approved field changes.  
Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or highways, excepting alleys, and excepting the exterior boundaries of the subdivision. 
Building line or setback line means a line which defines the minimum distance (as determined by the minimum front, side, or rear yard setback) which any building shall be located from a property line, existing street right-of-way, easement line of an approved private street, proposed right-of-way line as indicated in the township's comprehensive plan, or ordinary high-water mark. 
Caption means the name by which the plat is legally and commonly known.  
Clear vision corner shall have the same meaning as the term "sight triangle" defined in this section.  
Comprehensive plan or master plan means a plan adopted by the township for the physical development of the township showing the general location for major streets, parks, schools, public building sites, land use and other similar information. The plan may consist of maps, data and other descriptive matter.  
County engineer means the engineer-manager of the Eaton County Road Commission.  
Critical gap (GAP) means the median time headway between vehicles in a major traffic stream which will permit side-street vehicles at a stop or yield controlled approach to cross, through or merge with the major traffic stream under prevailing traffic and roadway conditions, in seconds.  
Developer has the same meaning as the term "proprietor," as defined in this section. 
Easement means a right of use over the property of another. 
Filing date means the date upon which any application pursuant to this article is submitted and the required filing fee is paid.  
Floodplain (100-year) means that area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, or watercourse which, on the basis of available floodplain information, is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Future street improvement plan means that portion of the comprehensive plan which sets forth the location and alignment of proposed streets.  
Health department means the Barry-Eaton District Health Department.  
Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, driveway approaches, sidewalks, water mains and appurtenances, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, waterways, detention/retention facilities and other modifications to the natural state of land.  
Land division act means Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.).  
Level of service means a qualitative measure describing operational conditions within a traffic stream; generally described in terms of such factors as speed and travel time, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort and convenience, and safety.  
Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
Lot, corner, means any lot having at least two contiguous sides abutting upon one or more streets, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting a curved street shall be a corner lot if the arc has a radius less than 150 feet.  
Lot, cul-de-sac, means a lot which has more than one-half of its required frontage on a cul-de-sac street. 
Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between side lot lines. 
Lot frontage means the length of the front lot line, which is the line separating the lot from any street right-of-way. 
Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot, with the exception of a through lot, which has only one lot line fronting on a street.  
Lot, through, means an interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets. 
Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front setback line.  
Outlot means a lot set aside for designated purposes other than a building site, park or land dedicated to public or private use. 
Parcel or tract means a continuous area, parcel, site, piece of land or property which is the subject of a development application. 
Pedestrian walkway means a right-of-way providing pedestrian access to streets, parcels, lots, tracts, outlots, or land.  
Planned unit development means a form of land development comprehensively planned as an entity via a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in building, siting, usable open spaces, and the preservation of significant natural features. Such a development may contain a mix of housing types and nonresidential uses.  
Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land.  
Plat, final, means a map of a subdivision of land, which is approvable and recordable.  
Plat, preliminary, means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision of land submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
Proprietor, subdivider or developer means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them which may hold any recorded or unrecorded ownership interest in land. 
Public open space means land dedicated or reserved for use by the general public including, but not limited to, parks, parkways, recreation areas, streets, and highways and public parking spaces.  
Public utility means all persons, firms, corporations, co-partnerships, or municipal or other public authorities providing gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, transportation, cable television or other services. 
Record drawings means construction plans revised in accordance with all field changes.  
Replat means the process of changing, or the map or plat which changes, the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of the outlot is not a replat. 
Right-of-way means an easement permanently dedicated and established for passage of persons or vehicles, or the location of utilities. The right-of-way is delineated by legally established lines or boundaries. 
Security for performance means a deposit by the proprietor with the clerk in the form of cash, a certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit, whichever the proprietor selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the township board in an amount sufficient to ensure completion within the time specified. 
Setback line shall have the same meaning as the term "building line" as defined in this section.  
Sight distance means the length of roadway visible to the driver. Generally related to the distance or time (perception/reaction time) sufficient for the driver to execute a maneuver (turn from driveway or side street, stop or pass) without striking another vehicle or object in the roadway.  
Sight triangle means a triangular shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is permitted which would limit or obstruct the vision of motorists.  
Street, arterial, means those streets where the movement of through traffic is the primary function, with service to adjacent land uses a secondary function.  
Street, collector, means those streets used to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, including principal entrance streets to large residential developments.  
Street, cul-de-sac, means a dead-end street which terminates in a circular or semi-circular section of street which allows for vehicular turnarounds.  
Street, expressway, means those streets designed for high speed, high volume traffic with full or partially controlled access, some grade crossings, and no private driveway connections.  
Street, freeway, means those streets designed for high speed, high volume through traffic with completely controlled access, no grade crossings, and no private driveway connections.  
Street, frontage road, means a public or private drive which generally parallels a public street between the right-of-way and the front building setback line. Frontage roads can be one-way or bi­directional in design. The frontage road provides specific access points to private properties while maintaining separation between the street and adjacent land uses. 
Street, major thoroughfare, means an expressway or arterial street as defined in this article.  
Street, minor/local, means a street which is intended primarily for access to abutting properties.  
Street, private, means any road or thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is privately owned and maintained and which provides the principal means of access to abutting property.  
Street, public, means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.  
Street, service drive, means a drive which generally parallels the public right-of-way but runs along the back of a land use which fronts on the public street. A service drive may provide access to properties on both sides.  
Street, stub, means a street extended to the boundary line of the tract to provide for the future projection of streets into adjacent areas.  
Street width means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of streets.  
Subdivide or subdivision. 
(1) 	
The term "subdivide" or "subdivision" means the partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease for more than one year, or of building development, where the act of division creates five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of ten years.  

(2) 	
The term "subdivide" or "subdivision" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of this article or the requirements of an applicable township ordinance.  


Subdivider means the same as proprietor as defined in this article.  
Subdivision regulations, county road commission means the compiled rules pertaining to the design and construction of streets within subdivisions in the county, including the township.  
Surveyor means either a land surveyor who is licensed in the state as a licensed professional surveyor or a civil engineer who is licensed in the state as a licensed professional engineer.  
Topographical map means a map showing existing physical characteristics, with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of proposed grades and drainage.  
Trip means a one-direction movement which begins at an origin and ends at a destination. A subdivision with 100 trips per day would include 50 entering (ingress) and 50 exiting (egress) movements over an average period.  
Variance means a relaxation or modification of the requirements of this article as authorized by the township board under the provisions of this article.  
Wetland means land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances, does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp or marsh. 
Wetland, regulated, means a wetland that falls under the provisions of part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30301 et seq.). 
Wetland, nonregulated, means a wetland, as defined in this article, consisting of one acre or more of contiguous area.  
(Code 1992, § 16-7; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-54. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the subdivision of land within the township, in order to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. These regulations are specifically designed to: 
(1) 
Provide for orderly growth and the harmonious development of the community. 

(2) 	
Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with proper relation to existing streets and highways, adjoining subdivisions and vacant land, and public utilities.  

(3) 
Create individual lots of maximum utility and livability. 

(4) 	
Establish standard procedures for processing preliminary and final plats thoroughly and efficiently.  

(5) 	
Establish subdivision requirements for design, site preparation and public improvement installation. 

(6) 	
Provide procedures to ensure that public improvements are installed according to the appropriate standards.  


(Code 1992, § 16-2; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-55. - Legal basis. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority granted by the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), Public Act No. 246 of 1945 (MCL 41.181 et seq.), township ordinances authorizing township boards to adopt ordinances and regulations to secure the public health, safety and general welfare; Public Act No. 359 of 1947 (MCL 42.1 et seq.), Charter Township Act, authorizing charter townships, and Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3801 et seq.), the Michigan planning enabling act, authorizing the planning commission to review subdivision plats. 
(Code 1992, § 16-3; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-56. - Scope. 
This article shall not apply to any lot forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except for the further subdividing of lots. This article does not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances, comprehensive plan provisions or regulations. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of any other ordinance, law or comprehensive plan or regulations of this township, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Code 1992, § 16-4; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-57. - Fees. 
Fees for activities regulated under this article shall be established by resolution of the township board. Fees may be amended by resolution of the township board and shall be deemed effective immediately upon adoption of said resolution and shall apply to all applications thereafter filed.  
(Code 1992, § 16-6; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Secs. 18-58—18-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLATTING PROCEDURES AND DATA REQUIRED[2] 
Footnotes: --- (2) ---  
State Law reference— Platting, MCL 560.111 et seq.  
Sec. 18-88. - Tentative approval of the preliminary plat; filing procedures. 
(a) 	
Submittal. The subdivider shall submit a reproducible copy of the preliminary plat for tentative approval to the clerk. The subdivider shall also submit the required application and fees. The signature of the property owner on the application shall grant permission to the township to make on-site investigations as it deems necessary. The clerk shall forward the plat and application to the planning director who shall be responsible for placing the plat on a future planning commission agenda.  

(b) 	
Review of applicable documents. Prior to submitting the preliminary plat to the clerk, the subdivider shall have reviewed the following:  

(1) 
Township zoning ordinance.  

(2) 
Township subdivision ordinance.  

(3) 
Township comprehensive plan. 

(4) 
Township sewer and water ordinances.  

(5) 
Township water/wastewater installation standards.  

(6) 
Township drain ordinance.  

(7) 
Township sidewalk ordinance. 

(8) 
State subdivision control act and manual of instructions. 

(9) 
County road commission subdivision regulations.  

(10) 
County drain commissioner's office compiled rules. 

(11) 
Barry-Eaton District Health Department regulations.  

(12) 
Such other ordinances applicable to the subdivision of land. 

(c) 	
Concurrent approvals prohibited. Tentative and final approvals of the preliminary plat shall not be concurrent.  

(d) 	
Soils investigation. Prior to submitting the preliminary plat to the clerk, the subdivider shall have undertaken a soils investigation of sufficient detail to determine that the soil conditions of the property to be platted are suitable, or can be modified, such that buildings can be constructed on the proposed lots.  

(e) 	
General investigation. Prior to submitting the preliminary plat to the clerk, the subdivider shall have verified the zoning, inquired of the county road commission the adequacy of adjacent streets and investigated the availability and adequacy of sewage disposal, water supply, storm drainage, gas, telephone and electricity in regard to the proposed subdivision.  

(f) 	
Ownership When the subdivider files an application for tentative approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant shall verify that he is the owner of the property or officially acting in the owner's behalf. If there are any options or liens on the property they shall be so noted.  


(Code 1992, § 16-8; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-89. -Tentative approval of preliminary plat; information requirements. 
The plat shall show the subdivision's entire development scheme including the area for immediate development, and shall include the following: 
(1) 
Existing conditions. 

a. 	
An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet, showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings within one-half mile of the boundary of the proposed subdivision, such as section lines and/or major streets and township and/or county boundaries.  

b. 	
Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property dimensions.  

c. 	
Property lines of adjacent tracts of land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for subdivision including those of areas across abutting roads. 

d. 	
Location, widths and names of existing or prior platted streets and private streets, and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those located across abutting roads. 

e. 	
Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within and adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision. 

f. 	
Topography and contours with an interval of two feet. Contours to be based on NGVD datum. 

g. 	
Location and elevation of the 100-year floodplain on the property and an indication of the limits of the floodplain as well as an indication as to the amount of acreage in the 100-year floodplain. 

h. 	
Location of rivers, streams, lakes, drainage sources, high-tension towers, excavations, bridges, culverts and other features unique to the proposed subdivision.  

i. 	
The names and addresses of all property owners of undeveloped or unplatted land abutting the proposed subdivision as they appear on the tax records of the township.  

j. 	
A general indication of the soil types in the area and their boundaries. Areas which have soil types which possess severe limitations for dwellings with basements shall be noted.  

k. 	
A legal description of the proposed site including an indication of the total land area expressed in acres. 

l. 
Location and boundaries of regulated and nonregulated wetlands.  

m. 	
Any areas suspected of containing hazardous waste, as defined in part 111 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.11101 et seq.), shall be noted.  



(2) 
Proposed conditions. 

a. 	
Layout of streets, right-of-way widths, and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways. The proprietor shall arrange with the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission to reserve nonconflicting street names.  

b. 	
The layout and approximate dimensions of lots. Within a box scribed on the plat map shall be itemized the number of lots, anticipated square footage of the smallest lot, the anticipated minimum lot frontage and the anticipated minimum frontage at the building setback line for lots with curved frontage. None of these dimensions shall be less than the minimums required by the zoning ordinance. 

c. 	
Indication of the use of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or reserved for the use of property owners in the subdivision. 

d. 	
An indication of the ownership, and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as "excepted" on the preliminary plat.  

e. 	
Where the subdivider proposes to use a system other than county-approved storm drains, the engineer may:  

1. 	
Require the proprietor to submit such data as is required to determine compatibility of the proposed plat with the future installation of public storm drains; 

2. 	
Require changes in the tentative plat and/or easements to facilitate future installation of public storm drains.  



f. 	
In the case where a subdivider wishes to submit a tentative preliminary plat for only part of the land available, he shall indicate the entire tract on the map showing such existing items as listed in subsection (2)a of this section. The approximate location of anticipated future streets shall be illustrated on the entire tract. This requirement shall not be construed as requiring the proprietor to plat the remaining land according to his original sketch of anticipated future streets. 




(Code 1992, § 16-9; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994; Ord. No. 00-05, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 18-90. -Tentative approval of the preliminary plat; planning commission review. 
(a) 	
The planning director shall review the submitted subdivision data for completeness. If the plat or application is incomplete, he shall notify the subdivider outlining the deficiencies and instruct the subdivider that the application and plat will not be reviewed by the planning commission until the required data is submitted.  

(b) 	
If the application and the plat are complete, the planning director shall transmit copies of the proposed plat to the county road commission, county drain commissioner, school district, fire chief, the sheriff's department, and other agencies as deemed necessary.  

(c) 	
Upon receipt of an application for tentative approval of the preliminary plat, one notice of the pending plat shall be sent by the planning director by mail to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the school district in which the property is located. The notice shall be given not less seven days before the date the plat will be considered by the commission at a public hearing. The notice shall: 

(1) 
Describe the general nature of the tentative preliminary plat request.  

(2) 
Indicate the property which is the subject of the request. 

(3) 
State when and where the request will be considered by the commission.  

(4) 
Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request.  

(d) 	
At least one sign stating when and where the request will be considered by the commission shall be posted, visible to the public, on the subject property at least seven days before the scheduled commission meeting. One notice of the pending plat shall be published not less than seven days before the meeting in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. 

(e) 	
The planning director shall review the preliminary plat for compliance with applicable codes and ordinances and then prepare a report citing his findings which shall be submitted to the planning commission. 

(f) 	
The planning commission shall recommend to approve, modify or deny tentative approval of the preliminary plat and shall report its action to the township board.  


(Code 1992, § 16-10; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994; Ord. No. 08-42, 11-17-2008) 
Sec. 18-91. -Tentative approval of the preliminary plat; township board review. 
(a) 	
The township board shall not approve, modify, or deny tentative approval of the preliminary plat until it has received the planning commission's report, unless no action has been taken by the planning commission as set forth in section 18-90(f).  

(b) 	
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the township board shall approve, modify, or deny tentative approval of the preliminary plat.  

(c) 	
If the township board grants tentative approval of the preliminary plat, the clerk shall so notify the subdivider. If the board rejects the plat the reasons for the rejection shall be stated in writing and the requirements for approval noted.  


(Code 1992, § 16-11; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-92. - Conditions and duration of tentative approval of the preliminary plat. 
Tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the township board shall confer upon the subdivider for a period of one year from the date of approval, approval of lot sizes, lot orientation and street layout. Such approval may be extended by the township board if applied for by the subdivider before the expiration date. 
(Code 1992, § 16-12; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-93. - Model homes. 
The subdivider may be permitted to begin construction on one to no more than four model homes prior to tentative approval of the preliminary plat, provided that the following guidelines are met: 
(1) 	
A metes and bounds legal description and a plot plan for each building site shall be provided to the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review the status of the subject parcels to ensure that the proposed metes and bounds divisions do not violate the provisions of the subdivision control act.  

(2) 	
The houses shall be located on the site such that the houses will be appropriately situated on the lot if the final plat is approved, or can meet the applicable zoning ordinance requirements if the final plat is not approved.  

(3) 	
The township engineer shall determine that adequate public water and sanitary sewer services are available to serve the houses. 

(4) 	
A certificate of zoning compliance shall be secured from the zoning administrator prior to beginning construction on the houses.  


(Code 1992, § 16-13; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994; Ord. No. 00-05, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 18-94. - Final approval of the preliminary plat; filing procedures. 
(a) 	Submittal. The subdivider shall submit a reproducible copy of the preliminary plat for final approval to the clerk. The subdivider shall also submit an application form, the required fees and copies of approval letters from the appropriate agencies. A signature on the application shall grant permission to the township to make any on-site investigations it deems necessary.  
(b) Information required on plat. 
(1) 
Name of proposed subdivision.  

(2) 	
Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the subdivider and the surveyor preparing the plat, and the seal of the surveyor preparing the plat.  

(3) 
Legal description of the subject parcel. 

(4) 	
The names of abutting subdivisions and the names and addresses of owners of adjacent properties.  

(5) 	
Statement of intended use of the proposed plat, such as, single or multiple-family residential; commercial; office or industrial. The statement shall identify any sites proposed for open or recreational uses, and indicate all known natural resources and features to be preserved.  

(6) 	
A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent development. If phasing is intended, a statement regarding the phasing plan must be included.  

(7) 	
A location map showing the relationship of the proposed plat to the surrounding area, including the nearest road intersection.  

(8) 
Streets, alleys, street names, right-of-way and roadway widths, together with drainage arrows. 

(9) 
Lot widths, the size of the smallest lot and the total number of lots.  

(10) 	
A grading plan illustrating contours at two-foot intervals. The grading plan is intended to ensure that stormwater runoff does not negatively impact adjacent properties. The grading plan may include yard drains, detention/retention facilities, open ditches, joint swales between lots, etc.  

(11) 
All conditions such as:  

plat. 

(12) 
Proposed and existing storm and sanitary sewers, and water mains. 

(13) 	
Typical cross section of streets to be constructed including right-of-way widths, which shall comply with requirements as established in the county road commission specifications for street construction. 

(14) 
Right-of-way easements, showing location, width and purpose. 


a.  Rivers, natural watercourses, existing county or private drains;   
b.  Railroads, powerlines and cemeteries or parks;   
c.  All other features that the location or existence of which might influence the layouts of the  

(c)  Other information required. 
(1) 	
Impact studies. The township may require that a study be prepared including, but not limited to, soil conditions, wetlands and utilities. Said studies shall be prepared by a licensed practitioner. (See division 3 of this article regarding traffic impact studies.) 

(2) 	
Preliminary engineering plans. The township engineer may require the subdivider to submit a reproducible set of preliminary engineering plans for water, sewers, sidewalks and other required public improvements. The plans shall contain enough information and detail to enable the township engineer to make a preliminary determination as to conformance of the proposed improvements to applicable township regulations and standards. 


(Code 1992, § 16-14; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994; Ord. No. 00-05, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 18-95. - Final approval of preliminary plat; processing. 
(a) 
Information required.  

(1) 	
If the township determines that it is necessary for the subdivider to extend the township water and/or sanitary sewer systems to serve the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall enter into a written agreement in compliance with the township water/wastewater ordinances and installation standards. It should be noted that the subdivider may be required to reimburse the township for its inspection and engineering expenses and other expenses as required by the water/wastewater ordinances.  

(2) 	
The subdivider shall have completed a written agreement with the township board regarding any cost splits between the subdivider and the township covering oversizing and/or deep ditching of township utilities, and any other financial participation by the township.  

(b) 
Township board action.  

(1) 	
Preliminary engineering plans for all improvements required shall be reviewed and approved by the township engineer. 

(2) 	
Within 20 days after receipt of the preliminary plat for final approval, the township board shall either approve or reject it and give its reasons therefor.  

(c) 
Conditions of approval.  

(1) 	
The township board may enter into a written agreement with the subdivider to construct, within a reasonable time, certain improvements within the area to be platted. No construction shall be undertaken in the plat area prior to the granting of all final approvals of the preliminary plat plans as provided in the Subdivision Control Act of 1967.  

(2) 	
As a condition of final approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall be required to sign a written commitment for the mandatory installation of streetlights in residential subdivisions per section 18-193(j). 

(d) 	
The subdivider shall submit proof of ownership of the land included in the final plat in the form of a title insurance policy which is currently in force. 

(e) 	
The subdivider shall submit a closure statement, prepared by a surveyor, attesting to the accuracy of the subdivision survey.  

(f) 	
All bonds, deposits, fees and other financial or legal documents required by law, this or other township ordinances, or other applicable governmental regulations shall have been submitted at or prior to filing for final plat. 

(g) 	
The township may require other information as it deems necessary to establish whether the proper parties have signed the plat.  

(h) 	
At the time of filing the final plat the proprietor shall submit certifications from the proprietor, land surveyor, county treasurer, county drain commissioner and county road commission.  


(Code 1992, § 16-15; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994; Ord. No. 00-05, 12-18-2000) 
Sec. 18-96. - Final plats. 
(a) 	
Review procedures. The following are the review procedures by appropriate authorities as to final plats: 

(1) 	
Township engineer and planning director. The township engineer and planning director shall review the final plat and make a recommendation to the township board.  


(2) Township board. 
a. 	
The township board shall make a final decision regarding the final plat within 20 days of the filing with the clerk. 

b. 	
The township board shall approve or deny the final plat.  

c. 	
If denied, the township board shall give the subdivider its reasons in writing and, if applicable, rebate the recording fee. 

d. 	
If approved, the township board shall instruct the clerk to sign the municipal certificate. The clerk shall be responsible for forwarding the approved documents to the county plat board. 


(b) 	Authority of the township. A subdivision plat shall not be received or recorded by the county register of deeds until final plat approval has been granted by the township board. No public board, agency, commission, official, or other authority shall proceed with the construction of or authorize the construction of any public improvement required by this article unless such public improvements shall comply with the requirements of this article.  
(Code 1992, §§ 16-17, 16-18; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-97. - Improvements and facilities required by the township. 
(a) 	
If the public water and sanitary sewer facilities are not completed and tested prior to the township board's approval of the final plat, a contract between the subdivider and the township board shall be provided for completion of the public water and sanitary sewer facilities.  

(b) 	
Performance of the contract shall be guaranteed by a cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit, as detailed in section 18-194.  


(Code 1992, § 16-19; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Secs. 18-98—18-124. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDIES 
Sec. 18-125. - Intent. 
The township recognizes the direct correlation between land development and traffic operations. The intent of this division is to permit accurate evaluation of expected impacts of proposed subdivisions in order to assist in decision-making. This division is further intended to help achieve the following objectives:  
(1) 
Provide a standard set of analytic tools and a format for preparing traffic impact studies.  

(2) 	
Allow the township to assess the effects that a proposed subdivision may have on the community by outlining information needed and evaluation procedures to be used.  

(3) 	
Help ensure safe and reasonable traffic-operating conditions on streets and intersections after development of the proposed subdivision.  

(4) 	
Reduce the negative traffic impacts created by individual subdivisions by helping to ensure that the transportation system can safely and efficiently accommodate the projected traffic increases. 

(5) 	
Realize a comprehensive approach to the overall impacts of the development of various subdivisions along a corridor or within part of the township rather than a piecemeal approach. 

(6) 	
Provide direction to township decision-makers, transportation agencies, and developers of the expected impacts of a subdivision. 

(7) 	
Alert the township, transportation agencies and developers of improvements or modifications needed to the roadway, access, or site design.  

(8) 
Protect the substantial public investment in the existing street system.  

(a) 	
A traffic impact study shall be required and shall be submitted by an applicant for a proposed subdivision which could generate at least 100 directional trips during the peak hour of the traffic generator, or the peak hour on the adjacent streets, or over 1,000 trips in an average day.  

(b) 	
Forecasted trip generation shall be based upon equations/rates outlined in the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineer's (ITE) trip generation manual or other authoritative studies available.  


(Code 1992, § 16-20; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-126. - Applicability. 
(Code 1992, § 16-21; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-127. - Study area determination. 
The planning director and the applicant shall meet to determine the study area boundaries. Other issues which shall be discussed include the availability of data, background rates to be used, horizon (design) year, acceptable trip generation rates and reduction factors, trip distribution, as well as the need to evaluate other issues. Generally the larger the subdivision, the larger the study area will be and the more detailed the traffic study will be. 
(Code 1992, § 16-22; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-128. - Traffic impact study contents. 
(a) 	
Description of the site and surroundings. Illustrations and a narrative shall describe the characteristics of the site and adjacent roadway system (functional classification, lanes, speed limits, etc.). This description shall include surrounding land uses, expected development in the vicinity which could influence future traffic conditions, special site features, and a description of any committed roadway improvements. 

(b) 	
Description of the subdivision. The number of lots, phasing, access points, right-of-way widths (existing and proposed), future street connections and on and off-site improvements shall be noted.  


(c)  Description of existing traffic conditions: 
(1) 	
Traffic counts. Existing conditions including existing daily and peak hour traffic volumes on adjacent streets and intersections in the vicinity which are expected to be impacted shall be noted. Traffic count data shall not be over two years old, except the planning director may permit 24-hour counts up to three years old to be increased by a factor supported by documentation that traffic has increased at a rate of no more than two percent in the past three—five years. Traffic counts shall be taken Monday through Friday on nonholiday weeks under normal driving conditions. Additional counts (i.e., on a Saturday for a proposed commercial development) may also be required in some cases. The individual preparing the impact study shall obtain the traffic counts during average or higher than average volume conditions for the area under study. 

(2) 	
Roadway characteristics shall be described and illustrated, as appropriate. Features to be addressed include lane configurations, geometrics, signal timing, traffic control devices, posted speed limits, average running speeds, gaps in the traffic flow, and any sight distance limitations. Existing levels of service shall be calculated for intersections included within the study area.  

(3) 
Existing driveways and turning movement conflicts shall be illustrated and described.  

(4) 	
Traffic accident data covering the most recent three years for intersections analyzed in the impact study may be required, particularly for sites along corridors identified as critical or congested corridors. The planning director shall be responsible for obtaining traffic accident data if it is required.  

(d) 	
Trip generation. The impact study shall include forecasted trip generation of the proposed subdivision for the a.m. and p.m. peak hours and the average daily traffic generated. The forecasts 

shall be based on the data and procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the Trip Generation Manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or other authoritative studies available. 

(e) 	
Trip distribution. The projected traffic generated shall be distributed (inbound v. outbound, left turn versus right turn) onto the existing street network to project turning movements at site access points and nearby intersections where required. Projected turning movements shall be illustrated in the report. A description of the application of standard engineering procedures for determining the distribution shall also be attached (gravity model, market studies, counts at existing driveways, etc.) For projects of regional significance, a network model projection may be required.  


(f) 	Impact analysis. 
(1) 	
For any subdivision with a completion date beyond one year at the time of the traffic study, the analysis shall also include a scenario analyzing forecasted traffic at the date of completion along the adjacent street network using a forecast based on a network model (if available), historic annual percentage increases, and/or on expected development in the area. Traffic impact assessments shall acknowledge the traffic impacts of other uses approved, but not yet constructed, which may affect traffic operations for the subject site as determined by the planning director. 

(2) 	
The impact study shall include a capacity analysis (level of service) at the proposed access points using the procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual published by the Transportation Research Board. Before and after capacity analyses shall also be performed at all street intersections where the expected traffic generated at the site will comprise at least five percent of the existing intersection capacity, and/or for roadway sections and intersections experiencing congestion or a relatively high accident rate, as determined by the applicable road agency.  

(3) 
The impact study shall include gap studies for unsignalized intersections. 

(4) 	
The township may require that the impact on the street network be evaluated for a project of regional significance if a network model is available. 

(g) 	
Access design/access management standards. The impact study shall include a map and description of the location and design of proposed access, including any sight distance limitations, dimensions from adjacent driveways and intersections within 350 feet on either side of the main roadway, other data to demonstrate that the design and number of access points proposed will provide safe and efficient traffic operation and be in accordance with the standards of this article and the standards of the applicable road agency.  


(h) Other study items: 
(1) 	
The traffic impact study shall describe the need for, or provision of, any additional right-of-way where required.  

(2) 
The study shall note changes which should be considered to the subdivision layout.  

(3) 
The study shall include a description of any nonmotorized facilities.  

(4) 
If a median crossover is desired, separate analysis shall be provided.  

(5) 	
If a traffic signal is being requested, the relationship of anticipated traffic to traffic signal warrants in the state manual of uniform traffic control devices shall be reviewed. Analysis shall also be provided on the impacts to traffic progression along the roadway through coordinated timing, etc.  

(i) 	
Mitigation/alternatives. The study shall outline mitigation measures and demonstrate any changes to the level of service achieved by these measures. Any alternatives or suggested phasing of improvements shall be described. The mitigation measures may include items such as roadway widening, need for bypass lanes or deceleration tapers/lanes, changes to signalization, use of access management techniques or a reduction in the proposed number of lots. Any mitigation 

measure shall include correspondence from the applicable road agency. The responsibility for and timing of roadway improvements shall be described. 

(j) 	
Preparer's qualifications. A required traffic impact study shall be prepared under the direction of a traffic/transportation engineer registered in the state (PE) with a history of completing impact studies and other traffic engineering analyses. The preparer's resume shall accompany the study.  


(Code 1992, § 16-23; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-129. - Submittal. 
The following procedure shall be followed in submitting a traffic impact study:  
(1) 	
The applicant shall submit the traffic impact study to the township's planning department at the time the preliminary plat for tentative approval is submitted to the clerk. 

(2) 	
The township shall distribute the traffic impact study to the appropriate road agencies. A copy shall also be submitted to the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission for projects of regional significance. 

(3) 	
The road agencies shall provide the township with comments prior to any action on the subdivision request. The township planning department shall review and comment on the traffic impact study and prepare a report for the planning commission and/or township board. 


(Code 1992, § 16-24; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-130. - Appeals. 
Appeals for a waiver (variance) from the requirement of a traffic impact study shall be made to the township board in accordance with the procedures contained in division 7 of this article, pertaining to variances. Factors which the township board shall consider when reviewing a variance request include: 
(1) 	
Are roadway improvements scheduled which are expected to mitigate any impacts associated with the proposed subdivision? 

(2) 	
Is the existing level of service along the roadway not expected to drop to level C due to the proposed subdivision? 

(3) 	
Is the existing level of service not expected to be significantly impacted by the proposed subdivision due to specific conditions at the subject location? 

(4) 	
Has a similar traffic study been previously prepared for the site and is it still considered applicable? 


(Code 1992, § 16-25; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Secs. 18-131—18-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sec. 18-161. - Streets and roads. 
(a) 	Design standards. Subdivision design standards set forth by the county road commission and the state department of transportation's uniform criteria for major streets, as from time to time amended, shall be followed in addition to the other standards specified in this article. If there is a conflict between standards, the more stringent shall apply.  
(b) General requirements. 
(1) 	
Location. Subdivision streets shall be required to conform to the recommendations of the comprehensive plan, as amended.  

(2) 	
Local or minor streets. Such streets shall be so arranged as to discourage their use by through traffic while permitting adequate access for emergency services.  

(3) 	
Street continuation and extension. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into new subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the township board and the county road commission. 

(4) 	
Stub streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract to make provision for the future projection of streets into adjacent areas.  

(5) 	
Frontage roads and service drives. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an arterial street, the township may require frontage roads and service drives to be installed or such other treatment as is deemed necessary for the adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.  

(6) 	
Reserve strips. Privately held reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited. Subdivision plats which result in the creation of small parcels of land of negligible economic or aesthetic value, in which the predominant function of such parcels is to unreasonably deny access to public roads, utilities, or services from adjacent land, shall be prohibited.  

(7) 	
Access. Safe, suitable and adequate access shall be provided to subdivisions. The following factors shall be considered when determining whether safe and adequate access exists:  

a. 	
Trip generation. Generally subdivisions generating more than 500 trips per day shall be required to provide a second access point. Trip generation estimates shall be based upon equations/rates provided in the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual.  

b. 	
Topography and natural features surrounding the subject parcel shall be considered.  

c.  	
The provision of outlots, stub streets, etc., which may facilitate future access.  

d. 	
The likelihood of adjacent properties being developed in the near future such that they could be connected to the subject parcel.  

e. 	
Proximity to emergency services. 

f. 	
The adequacy of the proposed street intersection in terms of sight distances, spacing, slope, etc.  




(c)  Specifications. 
(1) 	
Street rights-of-way and roadway widths. Street and road right-of-way and roadway widths shall conform to recommendations contained in the comprehensive plan and the rules of the county road commission and state department of transportation. 

(2) 	
Street names. Street names shall be approved by the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission. 

(3) 	
Reservation of rights-of-way. Easements or rights-of-way for planned street widenings or improvements and new streets recommended in the comprehensive plan may be required by the township board.  

(a) 	
Location. Easements shall be provided along front, side and/or rear lot lines for utilities as required by public agencies and/or public utilities. If required, the total width shall not be less than six feet along each lot, or a total of 12 feet for adjoining lots, or ten feet if off the front lot line. Requirements for the proposed layout of utilities shall be sought from the appropriate utility companies by the subdivider. 

(b) 	
Storm drains. The subdivider shall provide drainage easements as required by the county drain commissioner and township for surface and/or subsurface drainage. 


(Code 1992, §§ 16-26—16-28; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-162. - Easements. 
(Code 1992, § 16-29; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-163. - Blocks. 
(a) 	
Arrangements. A block shall generally be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots, except where lots back onto an arterial street, natural feature or subdivision boundary.  

(b) 	
Maximum length. The maximum length allowed for residential blocks shall generally be 1,320 feet long from center of street to center of street, except where the township board determines that physical conditions justify a greater distance. 


(Code 1992, § 16-30; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-164. - Lots. 
(a) 	
Conformance to zoning. The lot width, depth, and area shall not be less than the particular district requirements of the zoning ordinance, except in the case of a planned unit development or where outlots are provided for some permitted purpose.  

(b) 	
Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles to tangent street sections and radial to curved streets.  

(c) 	
Lot width to depth ratio. Narrow, deep lots shall be avoided. The depth of a lot generally shall not exceed three times the width as measured at the front building line.  

(d) 	
Corner lots. Corner lots shall be platted in conformance with at least the minimum zoning ordinance requirements. 

(e) 	
Lot frontage. All lots shall front upon a publicly dedicated street. Variances may be permitted for approved planned unit developments.  

(f) 	
Lots abutting arterial and collector streets. Residential lots abutting arterial or collector streets where frontage streets are not possible or desirable, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots, or with side lot lines parallel to the arterial/collector street.  


(Code 1992, § 16-31; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-165. - Floodplain. 
Any areas within the proposed subdivision which lie within the 100-year floodplain shall be subject to review by the state department of natural resources. Filling or altering the floodplain is subject to a review and approval by the department.  
(Code 1992, § 16-32; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) State Law reference— Building and construction in floodplain, MCL 324.3108; plat requirements for subdivision within or abutting floodplain, MCL 560.138; conditions for approval of subdivisions within floodplain, MCL 560.194. 
Sec. 18-166. - Preservation of natural features. 
The subdivider shall preserve existing natural features such as trees, watercourses, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, insofar as reasonably possible, in the design of the subdivision.  
(Code 1992, § 16-33; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-167. - Soil erosion and sedimentation controls. 
Soil erosion and sedimentation controls shall be as adopted and administered by the drain commissioner.  
(Code 1992, § 16-34; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
State Law reference— Soil erosion and sedimentation control, MCL 324.9101 et seq.; soil conservation districts law, MCL 324.9301 et seq. 
Sec. 18-168. - Planned unit developments. 
A subdivision within a planned unit development shall be platted as per the provisions of this division. (Code 1992, § 16-35; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) State Law reference— Planned unit development, MCL 125.3503. Secs. 18-169—18-189. - Reserved. DIVISION 5. - SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS Sec. 18-190. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this division to define the public improvements which will be required to be constructed by the subdivider as conditions for final plat approval and also to outline the procedures and responsibilities of the subdivider and the various public officials and agencies concerned with the administration, planning, design, construction and financing of public facilities, and to further establish procedures for assuring compliance with these requirements. 
(Code 1992, § 16-36; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-191. - Responsibility for plans. 
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to have prepared by a registered engineer, a complete set of construction plans, including profiles, cross sections, specifications and other supporting data, for the hereinafter required public streets, utilities and other facilities. Such construction plans shall be based on preliminary plans which have been approved with the preliminary plat, and shall be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. Construction plans are subject to approval by the responsible agencies. All construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the standards or specifications of the responsible agencies.  
(Code 1992, § 16-37; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-192. - Submittal of plans. 
When construction has been completed at the time of filing the final plat, one complete copy of as-built engineering plans shall be filed with the township engineer coincident with the filing of the final plat. Other requirements and procedures in the submittal of final plats shall be as provided in sections 18-96 and 18-97. 
(Code 1992, § 16-38; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-193. - Required public improvements. 
(a) 	
Lot irons and monuments. Monuments shall be set in accordance with the land division act, as amended.  

(b) 	
Streets. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications adopted by the county road commission and/or the state department of transportation, as applicable.  

(c) 	
Off-site street improvements. A subdivider may be required by the township board to install off-site road improvements such as acceleration/deceleration tapers and lanes, a center turn lane and a bypass lane. Such improvements shall be installed as per the requirements of the county subdivision regulations and/or the county engineer.  

(d) 	
Installation of public utilities. Public utilities shall be located in accordance with the rules of the county road commission and as provided herein. If necessary to protect public safety and/or welfare, the township engineer may require that the underground work be required to extend to each lot to a distance within said lot of at least ten feet from the interior edge of the road right-of-way or front yard utility easement. See section 18-162 regarding utility easement widths and locations.  

(e) 	
Driveways. All driveway openings in curbs shall be as specified by the county road commission or the state department of transportation. 


(f) 	Storm drainage. 
(1) 	
Generally. An adequate storm drainage system, including necessary storm sewers, drain inlets, manholes, culverts, bridges, detention/retention facilities and other appurtenances, shall be required in all subdivisions. The requirements for each particular subdivision shall be established by the drain commissioner.  

(2) 	
Construction standards. Construction shall follow the specifications and procedures established by the drain commissioner, in the adopted supplemental design standards and procedures for plat development, as amended. All proposed storm drainage construction plans for proposed plats shall be approved by the drain commissioner.  

(3) 	
Drainage outlets. A storm drainage outlet shall be provided by the subdivider to serve each lot zoned residential and intended to be used for single-family detached dwellings. The township drain ordinance provides specific regulations pertaining to the installation of storm drainage outlets.  


(g) Water supply system. 
(1) 
Connection requirement. Subdivisions shall be connected to a public water system. 

(2) 	
Appurtenances and state approval. Fire hydrants, valves, and other required water system appurtenances shall be provided by the subdivider. Connections and/or extensions to the 

township water supply system shall comply with the requirements of the township and the state department of public health.  

(3) 	
Extension to subdivision boundary. When a public water supply system is installed to serve a proposed subdivision, it shall be extended to the exterior boundary of said subdivision, as determined by the township engineer. 


(h) Sanitary sewer system. 
(1) 	
Connection requirement. Subdivisions shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer system. The term "available public sanitary sewer system" means a public sanitary sewer system located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts upon the property and passing not more than 500 feet at the nearest point from the boundary of the subdivision. 

(2) 	
Appurtenances and state approval. Sanitary sewers, manholes and required appurtenances thereto shall be provided by the subdivider. Sewer systems shall comply with the requirements of the township and the state department of environmental quality.  

(3) 	
Extension to subdivision boundary. When a public sanitary sewer system is installed to serve a proposed subdivision, it shall be extended to the exterior boundary of said subdivision, as determined by the township engineer. 

(i) 	
Nonmotorized transportation improvements beyond the traditional sidewalk system. Nonmotorized transportation improvements beyond the traditional sidewalk system, which provides walks in front of homes and nonresidential uses adjacent to roadways, may be required. The improvements could include trails, shared use paths, and traditional sidewalks: 

(1) 	
Many items, including but not limited to the following, shall be considered when siting nonmotorized improvements in new subdivisions:  

a. 	
The township nonmotorized transportation study, the township parks and recreation plan, the township road improvement program and the township comprehensive plan, as amended. However, nonmotorized transportation improvements may be required even if such improvements are not specifically recommended in the aforementioned documents. 

b. 	
Providing safe routes to schools, creating recreational trails, and developing connections to retail/office areas, residential neighborhoods, community buildings, recreational areas and similar land uses.  

c. 	
Proximity to natural features such as woodlots, water bodies, open space areas, etc. 

d. 	
Potential connection to other existing nonmotorized transportation facilities, including those in adjacent communities.  

e. 	
The demand created for nonmotorized transportation facilities by residents/customers of the proposed development.  

f. 
Taking advantage of existing easements and publicly owned lands. 

g. 	
By providing a sidewalk/path residents may be able to substitute a pedestrian movement for a vehicular movement. 



(2) 	
Easements and/or outlots shall be provided for nonmotorized transportation facilities as required by the township board. The township board shall determine whether the need for the nonmotorized transportation improvements is necessitated by the development itself, or if the improvements would primarily serve the public at large. The township board shall make this determination in accordance with existing law.  

(3) 	
Easements may be required in anticipation of future construction of a trail, shared use path and/or sidewalk.  


(i) 	Sidewalks and pedestrian walkways. 
(1) 	
Sidewalks shall be required as per the township sidewalk ordinance, as amended, which provides specific regulations pertaining to the installation of sidewalks. 

(2) 	
Pedestrian walkways, outside of a public road right-of-way, when required by the township board, shall have corresponding easements at least ten feet in width. The township board shall determine if an improved walking surface shall be installed within the easement.  

(j) 	
Street lighting. The subdivider shall petition the township board for the installation of streetlights in residential subdivisions as a condition of final approval of the preliminary plat. Where the average width of lots, as measured at the front property line, is over 150 feet, the township board may waive the street lighting requirement. The street lighting process shall be as follows: 

(1) 	
The clerk shall request that a street lighting plan and cost estimate be prepared for the proposed street lighting system by the applicable utility company.  

(2) 	
The township assessing department, acting on behalf of the township supervisor, shall estimate the cost per benefit (lot/unit) for the proposed streetlight system.  

(3) 
The township board shall hold a public hearing for the proposed special assessment district.  

(4) 	
Following the public hearing, the board shall finalize the boundaries of the special assessment district and confirm the special assessment roll.  

(5) 
The clerk shall notify the utility company to proceed with the installation of the streetlights.  

(k) 	
Underground utilities. Electricity, telephone and other communication systems shall be placed underground as much as reasonably possible.  


(Code 1992, § 16-39; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994; Ord. No. 00-05, 12-18-2000; Ord. No. 10­52, 7-6-2010) 
Sec. 18-194. - Guarantee of completion of township required improvements. 
(a) 	Financial guarantee arrangements. In lieu of the actual installation of required public improvements, the township board may permit the subdivider to provide a financial guarantee of performance in one or a combination of the following arrangements for those requirements which are over and beyond the requirements of the county road commission, drain commissioner or any other agency responsible for the administration, operation and maintenance of the applicable public improvement.  
(b) Sureties. 
(1) 	
A cash deposit, certified check, surety bond, an irrevocable bank letter of credit, or such surety acceptable by the township board, shall accrue to the township. These deposits shall be made with the township treasurer, or deposited with a responsible escrow agent, or trust company, subject to the approval of the township board.  

(2) 	
The dollar value of the cash deposit, certified check, surety bond, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, shall be equal to the total estimated cost of construction of the specific public improvement including contingencies, as estimated by the engineer and determined by the township board.  

(3) 	
The escrow time for the cash deposit, certified check, surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit, shall be for a period to be specified by the township board.  

(4) 	
In the case of cash deposits or certified check, an agreement between the township and the subdivider may provide for progressive payment out of the cash deposit or reduction of the certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit, to the extent of the cost of the completed portion of the public improvement, in accordance with a previously entered into 


agreement. 

(c) 	
Township approval of final plat; financial guarantees. With respect to financial guarantees, the approval of all final subdivision plats shall be conditioned on the accomplishment of one of the following: 

(1) 	
The construction of improvements required by this division shall have been completed by the subdivider and approved by the township board.  

(2) 	
Surety acceptable to the township shall have been filed in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond.  

(d) 	
Special agreements. A special agreement may be entered into between the subdivider and the township board as needed for appropriate items.  

(e) 	
Inspection of public improvements under construction. Before approving a final plat and construction plans and specifications for public improvements, an agreement between the subdivider and the township board shall be made to provide for inspecting the construction and its conformity to the submitted plans. The subdivider shall be responsible for payment of all inspection fees as established by the township board.  

(f) 	
Penalty for failure to complete a public improvement. In the event the subdivider shall fail to complete such work within such period of time as required by the conditions of the guarantee for the completion of public improvements, it shall be the responsibility of the township board to proceed to have such work completed. In order to accomplish this, the township board shall reimburse itself for the cost and expense thereof by appropriating the cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit which the subdivider may have deposited in lieu of a surety bond, or may take such steps as may be necessary to require performance by the bonding or surety company, as included in a written agreement between the township board and the subdivider.  


(Code 1992, § 16-40; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Secs. 18-195—18-211. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LOT DIVISIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) ---  
State Law reference— Further division of recorded lots, MCL 560.263.  
Sec. 18-212. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to provide standards pertaining to the division of platted lots within existing subdivisions.  
(Code 1992, § 16-41; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-213. - Division. 
(a) 	
Land may be detached from a lot or outlot and added to another lot, outlot or parcel following approval by the township board.  

(b) 	
A lot or outlot may be divided into two, three or four but not more than four separate parts following approval by the township board.  


(Code 1992, § 16-42; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-214. - Ownership. 
The applicant shall submit a signed statement that he is the owner of the subject parcel or officially acting on the owner's behalf. If there are any liens or options on the property these shall be indicated on the aforementioned statement. If the applicant is not the owner of record (or firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the land) then the name and address of the owners of record must be indicated and their signatures attached. 
(Code 1992, § 16-43; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-215. - Article compliance. 
Land to be detached or divided must meet the requirements of this article, the zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances.  
(Code 1992, § 16-44; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-216. - Procedure. 
(a) 	
Submittal. The applicant shall submit a land division application, the appropriate fee, and an illustration of the requested division to the clerk. 

(b) 	
Notification. Upon receipt of an application for a lot division, the clerk shall send one notice of the pending division by mail to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. The notice shall be given not less than five nor more than 15 days before the date the division will be considered by the township board.  

(c) 	
Preparation of report. The planning director shall prepare a report to the township board regarding the lot division request. At a minimum the report should address the following: 

(1) 	
The location of existing utility lines and easements shall be identified to ensure that they do not interfere with proposed building sites.  

(2) 	
The location of existing buildings shall be confirmed in order to confirm that said buildings do not straddle a lot line and that said buildings comply with minimum setback requirements following the proposed division. 

(3) 
Provision of public water and sanitary sewer service.  

(4) 	
Lot divisions which result in a house being constructed behind another house shall be discouraged.  

(d) 	
Apportionment of utility costs, assessments, and taxes. Where utility costs, assessments, and/or taxes have been made on a per lot basis, the planning director shall determine what additional fees may be due. Said fees must be paid before any building permits or certificates of zoning compliance are issued for the resulting lots.  

(e) 	
Recordation. Properties created via a land division shall not be added to the township assessment records until the divisions have been recorded at the county register of deeds office.  


(Code 1992, § 16-45; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Secs. 18-217—18-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 18-241. - Jurisdiction. 
Subject to the provisions of this article, the township board shall have the jurisdiction to grant or deny variances as hereafter provided:  
(1) 	
Where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit interpretation, decision, or refusal made by the planning director or any other township official or agency in enforcing the provisions of this article. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, permit, interpretation, decision or refusal as in its opinion ought to be done, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken.  

(2) 	
Where by reason of the shape, topographical condition or other extraordinary situation or condition of the land, or the use or development of property immediately adjoining the property in question, the literal enforcement of the requirements of this article would involve practical difficulties or would cause undue hardships.  


(Code 1992, § 16-46; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-242. - Procedures. 
(a) 	
The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the township board shall be necessary to revise any order, requirements, decision or interpretation of the planning director, or any other township official or agency, or to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter upon which they are required to pass, or to effect any variation of this article.  

(b) 	
Consideration of a variance request by the township board shall be conducted concurrently with the review of the subdivision plat by the township board.  


(Code 1992, § 16-47; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-243. - Application. 
(a) 	
Requests for a variance shall be made by filing an application with the planning director on a form provided for that purpose. 

(b) 	
A fee, the amount of which shall be set by the township board from time to time, shall be paid at the time the variance application is filed.  


(Code 1992, § 16-48; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-244. - Criteria. 
No variance from the provisions or requirements of this article shall be authorized by the township board unless the board finds all of the following, based upon competent material and substantial evidence on the record:  
(1) 	
That special conditions or circumstances exist affecting the subject parcel which are peculiar to the subject parcel and that the strict application of the provisions of this article would clearly be impracticable or unreasonable;  

(2) 
That the special conditions or circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant;  

(3) 	
That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which the subject parcel is located;  

(4) 	
That such variance will not violate the provisions of the land division act, being Public Act No. 591 of 1996, as amended;  

(5) 	
That such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying or be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this article and the township comprehensive plan;  

(6) 	
That such variance is the minimum variance that will permit the reasonable use of the land. To this end, the board may authorize a lesser variance than that requested by the applicant.  


(Code 1992, § 16-49; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-245. - Conditions. 
When granting a variance, the board may prescribe reasonable conditions and safeguards necessary to meet the spirit and intent of this article. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this article.  
(Code 1992, § 16-50; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-246. - Recordation of findings. 
The board shall record into the record all relevant findings, conditions, facts and other relevant factors, including the vote of each member and all of its official actions. 
(Code 1992, § 16-51; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-247. - Voiding and reapplication. 
(a) 	
A variance granted under the provisions of this article shall become null and void unless the final plat of the subject subdivision shall have been approved by the board.  

(b) 	
No application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the board shall be resubmitted within one year from the date of the board's action, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions relating to the reasons for the denial of the original variance found by the board to be valid. 


(Code 1992, § 16-52; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Secs. 18-248—18-272. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
Sec. 18-273. - Enforcement. 

The planning director shall enforce the provisions of this article.  
(Code 1992, § 16-53; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-274. - Violation procedures. 
(a) 	
When a violation of this article is found, the subdivider, property owner and/or person maintaining the violation shall be contacted by mail or in person by the planning director. The planning director shall explain the intent of this article, the nature of the violation, and the corrective action necessary to comply.  

(b) 	
When a property owner or other party who has violated this article manifests by word or action an intent not to correct the violation or to further violate this article, the planning director shall proceed with formal inspection and issue a "Notice of Violation" without delay. When a property owner or other party who has violated this article expresses an intent to correct the violation, the planning director shall allow a reasonable time period, not to exceed 30 days, for correction of the violation.  

(c) 	
At the end of the correction period, the planning director shall make a formal inspection of the property to determine if the noted violations have been corrected. A record of this inspection shall be made and shall contain the information necessary to establish the nature and extent of any remaining violation.  

(d) 	
If the corrective action has been taken by the property owner or other person responsible for the violation, the planning director shall indicate that the property is in compliance with this article by sending a letter stating this to the property owner. 

(e) 	
Passive violations. If the noted violations remain and are evident in the record of formal inspection, the planning director shall issue a "Notice of Violation." This notice shall be delivered in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested restricted to addressee, to the property owner and/or other person responsible for the violation and shall contain the date of formal inspection, the provision of this article violated, the penalties which may be imposed, and the amount of time allowed for corrective action not to exceed 15 days.  

(f) 	
At the end of this correction period, the planning director shall again make a formal inspection of the property to determine whether or not the indicated corrective actions have been taken. 

(g) 	
If the violation remains, the planning director shall present all evidence to a designated attorney for the purpose of seeking either a criminal warrant or civil action against the property owner or other person responsible for the violation.  


(Code 1992, § 16-54; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-275. - Penalties. 
Violation of any of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $100.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The landowner, subdivider, builder, or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the township board or any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this article or of the subdivision control act.  
(Code 1992, § 16-55; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Secs. 18-276—18-298. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - AMENDMENTS 
Sec. 18-299. - Initiation of amendments. 
The township board may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or repeal the provisions of this article. Amendments may be initiated by the township board, the planning commission, or by petition of one or more township residents.  
(Code 1992, § 16-56; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-300. - Application procedure. 
An amendment to this article shall be initiated by submission of an application on a form supplied by the township, including an application fee, which shall be established from time to time by resolution of the township board. Fees shall not be required for amendments initiated by the township board or planning commission. The application shall be submitted to the clerk who shall forward a copy to the planning director. 
(Code 1992, § 16-57; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-301. - Public hearing. 
(a) 	
All proposed amendments to this article shall be referred to the planning commission for public hearing and recommendation to the township board, prior to consideration thereof by the township board. 

(b) 	
Upon receipt of an amendment by the planning director, a public hearing on the proposed amendment shall be scheduled before the planning commission. Notice of the hearing shall be given by two publications in a newspaper of general circulation in the township, the first to be printed not more than 30 days nor less than 20 days before the date of the hearing, and the second not more than eight days before the date of the hearing. 

(c) 	
Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the amendment and shall report its findings and recommendations to the township board.  


(Code 1992, § 16-58; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Sec. 18-302. - Final action by township board. 
Following receipt of the findings and recommendation of the planning commission, the township board shall consider the proposed amendment. The township board may modify the proposed amendment as recommended by the planning commission, prior to enactment.  
(Code 1992, § 16-59; Ord. No. 94-3, § 1, 4-4-1994) 
Chapter 20 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
State Law reference— Commission on law enforcement standards act, MCL 28.601 et seq.; uniform crime reports, MCL 28.251 et seq.; mutual assistance agreements, MCL 123.811 et seq.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) ---  
State Law reference— Municipal civil infractions, MCL 600.8701 et seq.  
Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Act means Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.), as amended.  
Authorized township official means the township building official, the fire chief, a designee of either official, officers and law enforcement personnel of the county sheriff's office/department, the code enforcement officer, the zoning administrator and deputy zoning administrator(s), or other personnel of the township authorized by this Code of Ordinances to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
Bureau means the township municipal ordinance violations bureau as established by this article.  
Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.  
Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized township official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited.  
Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized township official, directing a person to appear at the township municipal ordinance violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the township, as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act (MCL 600.8396, 600.8707(6)).  
(Code 1992, § 2-176; Ord. No. 97-4(A), § 1, 12-1-1997; Ord. No. 99-4, § 1, 7-6-1999; Ord. No. 10-51, § 1(2-176), 5-17-2010; Ord. No. 19-106 , § 1, 5-6-2019) 
Sec. 20-20. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized township official of a municipal civil infraction:  
(1) 
Citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or  

(2) 	
Violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the township municipal ordinance violations bureau.  


(Code 1992, § 2-177; Ord. No. 97-4(A), § 1, 12-1-1997) 
Sec. 20-21. - Municipal civil infraction citations. 
(a) 	
Issuance and service. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized township officials as follows:  

(1) 	
The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued.  

(2) 
The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court.  

(3) 	
Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the township and issued to the alleged violator as provided by section 8705 of the Act (MCL 600.8705).  

(4) 	
A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized township official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief."  

(5) 	
An authorized township official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 

(6) 
An authorized township official may issue a citation to a person if:  

a. 	
Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or  

b. 	
Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the township attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 



(7) 
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized township official as follows:  

a. 	
Except as provided by subsection (7)b of this section, an authorized township official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator.  

b. 	
If the municipal civil infraction involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the last known owner of record of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 




(b) Contents. 
(1) 	
A municipal ordinance citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following: 

a. 	
Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance.  

b. 	
Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction with explanation within the time specified for appearance by mail or in person, or by representation. 

c. 	
Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following:  

1. 	
Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the township. 

2. 	
Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 

3. 	
The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 

(i) 	
That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in 

person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance.  

(ii) 	
That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.  






(iii) 	That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the township.  
(iv) 	
That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 

(v) 	
That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 



(2) 	
The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction.  


(Code 1992, §§ 2-178, 2-179; Ord. No. 97-4(A), § 1, 12-1-1997; Ord. No. 10-51, § 2(2-179), 5­17-2010) 
Sec. 20-22. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a) 	
Bureau established. The township hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau (bureau) as authorized under the Act to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized township officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance.  

(b) 	
Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at township/offices, and shall be under the supervision and control of the finance director. The finance director, subject to the approval of the township board, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified township employees to administer the bureau.  

(c) 	
Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this article shall prevent or restrict the township from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law.  

(d) 	
Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 

(e) 	
Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized township officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in section 20-21. In addition to any other information required by this Code of Ordinances, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 

(f) 	
Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation.  

(g) 	
Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized township official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice, and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by section 20-21, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 


(Code 1992, § 2-180; Ord. No. 97-4(A), § 1, 12-1-1997) 
Sec. 20-23. - Records and accounting. 
The designated township official/employee shall retain a copy of all municipal ordinance violation notices. The civil fines/costs collected shall be delivered to the treasurer at such intervals as the treasurer shall require, and shall be deposited in the general fund of the township.  
(Code 1992, § 2-181; Ord. No. 97-4(A), § 1, 12-1-1997) 
Sec. 20-24. - Availability of other enforcement options. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to require the township to initiate its municipal civil infraction ordinance enforcement activity through the issuance of an ordinance violation notice. As to each ordinance violation designated as a municipal civil infraction the township may, at its sole discretion, proceed directly with the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation or take such other enforcement action as is authorized by law.  
(Code 1992, § 2-182; Ord. No. 97-4(A), § 1, 12-1-1997) 
Sec. 20-25. - Nonpayment and lien. 
(a) 	
Pursuant to the Act, if a defendant in a municipal civil infraction action brought for a violation involving the use or occupation of land or a building or other structure does not pay a civil fine, costs, civil sanctions, damages, expenses and/or an installment within 30 days after the date on which payment is due, the township may obtain a lien against the land, building, or structure involved in the violation by recording a copy of the court order or judgment requiring payment of the fine and costs with the county register of deeds. A legal description of the property must be incorporated in or attached to the court order or judgment for recording. The lien is effective immediately upon recording of the court order or judgment with the county register of deeds.  

(b) 	
The court order or judgment recorded with the county register of deeds shall constitute notice of the pendency of the lien. In addition, a written notice of the lien shall be sent by a township official by first class mail to the owner of record of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address.  

(c) 	
The lien for the civil fine, costs, civil sanctions, damages, expenses and/or an installment shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the General Property Tax Act, Public Act No. 206 of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq.), as amended.  

(d) 	
The township may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the civil fine, costs, civil sanctions, damages, expenses and/or an installment imposed by a court order or judgment for a municipal civil infraction. However, an attempt by the township to collect the civil fine, costs, civil sanctions, damages, expenses and/or an installment by any process does not invalidate or waive the lien upon the land, building, or structure.  


(Code 1992, § 2-183; Ord. No. 03-13, 11-17-2003) 
Chapter 22 - LICENSES 
Sec. 22-1. - Violations; violation report. 
(a) 	
Alleged violations of a township licensing ordinance shall be stated on a violation report form and shall be submitted to the township clerk. 

(b) 	
The township clerk shall submit the violation report form to the township board within three working days. 

(c) 	
After a review of the alleged violations, the township board may issue a complaint specifying the particular ordinance allegedly violated by the licensee and a short and plain statement of the alleged violations. 

(d) 	
The complaint shall be served on the licensee in person or by mail to the license address, return receipt requested, not less than 14 days before the scheduled hearing. A license address shall be the address of the licensed establishment unless the licensee has submitted, in writing, to the township clerk a different address for the receipt of mail. 

(e) 	
A notice of hearing shall be served along with the complaint and such notice shall advise the licensee of the licensee's following rights:  

(1) 
The right to be present and submit evidence.  

(2) 
The right to be represented by an attorney.  

(3) 
The right to call witnesses.  

(4) 
The right to cross examine witnesses presented by the township. 

(f) 	
The notice of hearing shall state the date, hour and place of the hearing. 

(g) 	
The notice of hearing shall also state the name of the hearings officer who will preside at the hearing.  


(Code 1992, § 8-36; Ord. No. 292, § I, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-2. - Hearing officer; qualifications. 
(a) 
A hearing officer shall be appointed by the township board to preside over the hearing. 

(b) 
The hearing officer shall have the following minimum qualifications: 

(1) 
Be impartial (see section 22-12); and 

(2) 
An attorney licensed by the state and currently in good standing with the state bar association.  


(Code 1992, § 8-37; Ord. No. 292, § II, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-3. -Waiver of hearing; acknowledgment of violation. 
(a) 	
A licensee who is cited in a complaint for an alleged violation of a township licensing ordinance may waive the right to hearing on the complaint and acknowledge the violation specified in the complaint.  

(b) 	
The waiver and acknowledgment constitute an authorization to the township board to enter, without a hearing, an order which imposes any of the penalty or forfeiture provisions as provided in that particular ordinance.  

(c) 	
The waiver of the right to hearing and acknowledgment of a violation shall be on the reverse side of the complaint form. The waiver and acknowledgment form shall provide that the licensee may explain, on a separate sheet of paper, if necessary, any mitigating circumstances which a licensee believes should be considered in disposing of the violation.  


(Code 1992, § 8-38; Ord. No. 292, § III, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-4. - Hearing procedure. 
(a) 
A hearing officer shall conduct the violation hearing on the complaint.  

(b) 	
A party who has been served with a notice of hearing may file a written answer with the township clerk not less than three days before the date scheduled for the hearing. 

(c) 	
The licensee shall be given an opportunity to present oral and written arguments on issues of law and policy and an opportunity to present evidence and argument on issues of fact.  

(d) 	
Both the township and the licensee may cross examine a witness, including the author of a document prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of the licensee or township and offered in evidence. Both the township and the licensee may submit rebuttal evidence.  

(e) 	
Findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be mailed, registered delivery, return receipt requested, and delivery restricted to the addressee, to the licensee and the licensee's attorney within 20 days after the completion of the hearing, except upon written order of the township extending the time period.  

(f) 	
In violation hearings where the licensee is not represented by an attorney at law, the hearings officer shall open the hearing by advising the licensee of the following rights:  

(1) 
Right to present evidence.  

(2) 
Right to cross examine township witnesses. 


(Code 1992, § 8-39; Ord. No. 292, § IV, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-5. - Decision; exceptions to findings of fact and law. 
(a) 	
The decision of the hearing officer shall be acted upon by the township board within 30 days after the time for submitting exceptions to the findings of fact and conclusions of law has expired (see subsection (b) of this section). 

(b) 	
The licensee or the licensee's attorney may, within ten days of receipt of the findings of fact and conclusions of law, submit exceptions to the findings of fact and conclusions of law. Such exceptions shall be filed with the township clerk for review by the township board. 

(c) 	
If the licensee or the licensee's attorney submits exceptions to the findings of fact and conclusions of law as provided in subsection (b) of this section, then the township board shall review the record of the hearing prior to entering a decision.  

(d) 	
The township board's decision shall be mailed to the licensee and the licensee's attorney, registered delivery, return receipt requested, and delivery restricted to the addressee, within seven days after the board meeting at which the decision was rendered by the board. 


(Code 1992, § 8-40; Ord. No. 292, § V, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-6. - Failure to appear. 
If a licensee fails to appear at a hearing after proper service of notice, the presiding hearing officer may: 
(1) 
Grant an adjournment without testimony being taken;  

(2) 
Order testimony taken and then adjourn proceedings until rescheduled; 

(3) 	
Order that the license not be suspended, not be renewed, or that the license be revoked until proper appearance is made at a rescheduled hearing; or  

(4) 
Proceed with the hearing and render a decision.  


(Code 1992, § 8-41; Ord. No. 292, § VI, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-7. - Violation rehearing. 
(a) 	
After a violation hearing, a licensee who alleges new evidence may request a new hearing before the hearing officer who issued the original order. The request for a rehearing shall be submitted, in writing, to the township clerk within 20 days after the date of the mailing of the original order. The request for a new hearing shall summarize the alleged new evidence.  

(b) 	
If a request for a rehearing in a violation matter is granted by the hearing officer, the licensee or the licensee's attorney shall be notified of the hearing not less than ten days prior to the date of the rehearing.  


(Code 1992, § 8-42; Ord. No. 292, § VII, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-8. - Rules of evidence. 
In a hearing, the rules of evidence as applied in a nonjury civil case in circuit court shall be followed as far as practicable, but the hearing officer may admit and give probative effect to evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent men in the conduct of their affairs. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. Affect shall be given to the rules of privilege recognized by law. Objections of offers of evidence may be made and shall be noted on the record. Subject to these requirements, the hearing officer, for the purpose of expediting hearings and when the interest of the parties will not be substantially prejudiced thereby, may provide for submission of all or part of the evidence in written form.  
(Code 1992, § 8-43; Ord. No. 292, § VIII, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-9. - Transcripts. 
(a) 
A record of the hearing shall be made by a certified court reporter. 

(b) 	
Documentary evidence may be received in the form of a copy or excerpt, if the original is not readily available, or may be incorporated by reference, if the materials so incorporated are available for examination by the parties.  

(c) 	
Upon timely request, both parties shall be given an opportunity to compare the copy with the original when available. 


(Code 1992, § 8-44; Ord. No. 292, § IX, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-10. - Official notice of facts; evaluation of evidence. 
(a) 	
The hearing officer may take official notice of judicially cognizable facts, and may take notice of general, technical or scientific facts within the hearing officer's specialized knowledge.  

(b) 	
A hearing officer may use his experience, technical competence, and specialized knowledge in the evaluation of evidence presented to him.  


(Code 1992, § 8-45; Ord. No. 292, § XI, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-11. -Stipulation as to facts; disposition by stipulation. 
(a) 	
The parties by a stipulation in writing filed with the hearing officer may agree upon any fact involved in a controversy, which stipulation shall be used as evidence at the hearing and be binding on the parties hereto. 

(b) 	
Except as otherwise provided by these rules, disposition may be made of a contested case by stipulation, settlement, consent order, waiver, default or other method agreed upon by the parties.  


(Code 1992, § 8-46; Ord. No. 292, § XII, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-12. - Impartiality of hearings. 
(a) 
Hearings shall be conducted in an impartial manner. 

(b) 	
On the filing in good faith by a licensee of a timely and sufficient affidavit of personal bias or disqualification of the presiding hearing officer, the township board shall determine the matter as a part of the record of the hearing, and its determination shall be subject to judicial review at the conclusion of the proceedings.  

(c) 	
When a presiding hearing officer is disqualified or it is impracticable for him to continue the hearing, another presiding officer may be assigned to continue with the hearing unless it is shown that substantial prejudice to the party will result therefrom. 


(Code 1992, § 8-47; Ord. No. 292, § XIII, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-13. - Costs. 
Where the hearing officer renders a decision that a violation occurred, the hearing officer may assess actual costs, including the township's reasonable attorneys' fees, of the proceeding against a licensee. 
(Code 1992, § 8-48; Ord. No. 292, § XIV, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-14. - Personal appearance of licensee. 
(a) 	
At a hearing, depending on to whom the license is, or is proposed to be, issued, there shall personally appear one of the following:  

(1) 
The individual licensee.  

(2) 
At least one co-licensee.  

(3) 
At least one partner of a partnership license. 

(4) 
At least one officer of a corporate license. 

(b) 	
Subsection (a)(1) of this section may be waived by the hearing officer where a formal appearance has been filed by an attorney at law in good standing with the state. 


(Code 1992, § 8-49; Ord. No. 292, § XV, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-15. - Postponements; continuances. 
(a) 	
Request for a postponement shall be made in writing not less than ten days before the scheduled hearing date unless waived by the township. The written request may be granted by the township clerk after a consultation with other board members. 

(b) 
Request for continuance for cause may be granted by the presiding hearing officer at the hearing.  


(Code 1992, § 8-50; Ord. No. 292, § XVI, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-16. - Legal representation. 
(a) 	
In addition to the appearance required by section 22-14, a licensee or an aggrieved license applicant may be represented at a hearing by a licensed attorney at law in good standing in the state. 

(b) 	
The attorney shall file a written appearance with the township clerk before or at the time of the hearing.  


(Code 1992, § 8-51; Ord. No. 292, § XVII, 1-30-1986) 
Sec. 22-17. - Appeals. 
A party aggrieved by any finding or decision of the hearing officer shall have the right of direct appeal to the county circuit court. 
(Code 1992, § 8-52; Ord. No. 292, § XVIII, 1-30-1986) 
Chapter 24 - MASSAGE PARLORS AND SCHOOLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  

State Law reference— Massage therapy, MCL 333.17951 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Apprentice or student means any person who, under the guidance of an instructor in a massage school or in a massage parlor, is being trained or instructed in the theory, method or practice of massage therapy. 
Employee means any individual who is paid by the operator or customer for performing any service for the operator or customer at the licensed location.  
Instructor means any person who gives lessons or teaches the theory, method or practice of massage therapy.  
Massage parlor means any place or establishment where a massage is offered or performed, whether as the primary or secondary purpose of a business.  
Massage school means any of the following accredited or licensed institutions of higher education that meet the minimum standards and curriculum, in compliance with section 16148 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.16148): 
(1) 
A public or private community college, college, or university.  

(2) 
A public or private trade, vocational, or occupational school.  


Massage therapist means an individual engaged in the practice of massage therapy.  
Operator means any person who owns, manages, supervises or is in any way in charge of the operation of a massage parlor or massage school. 
Practice of massage therapy. 
(1) 	
The term "practice of massage therapy" means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the human body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore the health and well-being of the client. The term "practice of massage therapy" includes complementary methods, including the external application of water, heat, cold, lubrication, salt scrubs, body wraps, or other topical preparations; and electromechanical devices that mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands. 

(2) 	
The term "practice of massage therapy" does not include medical diagnosis; practice of physical therapy; high-velocity, low-amplitude thrust to a joint; electrical stimulation; application of ultrasound; or prescription of medicines.  


(Code 1992, § 9-2; Ord. No. 301, § 2.0, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 301.1, § 1, 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 95­5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-2. - Violations, penalties and forfeiture of license. 
(a) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow the use of any place, business, establishment, or premises owned, operated, leased or managed by him to be used in violation of any provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the township or any state law.  

(b) 	
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or to aid, assist or abet another to violate such provision, rules or regulations.  

(c) 	
In addition to any other penalty provided under this section, any licensee hereunder who shall be convicted a second time of a violation of any of the provisions in this chapter shall upon such second conviction forfeit any and all rights or privileges granted or conferred by any license issued by virtue of this chapter.  


(Code 1992, § 9-14; Ord. No. 301, § 11.0, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-3. - Enforcement provisions. 
(a) 	
The township clerk shall have the authority to request the assistance of any department listed in section 24-49 in order to enforce these rules and regulations. 

(b) 	
Every establishment ostensibly being operated as a massage parlor or massage school shall be open for inspection by duly authorized representatives of any township department concerned with the licensing and supervising of such establishment during operating hours for the purpose of enforcing any of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinance or regulation of the township relating to the public health, safety and welfare.  

(c) 	
The hours of operation shall be set by the township board and shall be listed on the license granted to any applicant. The hours of operation may be modified by the board on its own motion, or subject to the board's discretion in response to a request by the applicant or licensee. 

(d) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entry to premises in which a massage parlor or massage school is ostensibly being operated, by duly authorized township, county and state representatives for the purpose of making lawful inspections.  


(Code 1992, § 9-3; Ord. No. 301, §§ 10.1, 10.4, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-4. - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to licensed individuals engaged in the personal performance of the duties of their respective professions, including physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, physical therapists, registered nurses, athletic trainers of any organized athletic team or an individual operating under the direct personal supervision of such licensed person, or a massage therapist, who meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1) 
Proof of graduation from a school of massage licensed by the state.  

(2) 	
Official certified transcripts verifying completion of at least 300 hours of massage training from an American college or university, plus three references from massage therapists who are professional members of a recognized massage association.  

(3) 	
Certificate of professional membership in the American Massage Therapy Association, International Myomassethics Federation or any other recognized massage therapy association with equivalent professional membership standards.  


(Code 1992, § 9-1; Ord. No. 301, § 1.0, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-5. - Maintenance of premises. 
(a) 	
Every establishment shall be kept clean and in a sanitary condition at all times. All tables and surfaces on which the practice of massage therapy is performed shall be covered by a permanent, washable material. 

(b) 	
The premises used for a massage parlor shall be well-lighted and ventilated. They shall be kept clean, and the furniture and equipment shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. There shall be an adequate supply of running hot and cold water during business hours. Bathing devices shall be thoroughly cleaned before the use of each patron. 


(Code 1992, § 9-4; Ord. No. 301, §§ 10.2.3, 10.8.6, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-6. - Advertising restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise the offering of the practice of massage therapy unless the advertised establishment is duly licensed.  
(Code 1992, § 9-5; Ord. No. 301, § 10.3, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-7. - Scope of service. 
(a) 	
No apprentice or student shall perform the practice of massage therapy unless in the presence and under the supervision of an instructor. 

(b) 	
Service in massage parlors licensed under this chapter shall be limited to exercise, baths and the practice of massage therapy. Medical treatment of any kind shall not be given to any patron without a prescription from a licensed physician. The use of any mechanical or electrical devices other than heat lamps and sunray lamps is prohibited.  

(c) 	
The private parts of patrons must be covered when in the presence of an employee, massage therapist. Any contact with a patron's genital area is prohibited.  


(Code 1992, § 9-6; Ord. No. 301, §§ 10.7, 10.8, 10.8.11, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-8. - Disease control. 
(a) 	
No person who has any visible symptoms of a communicable disease, such as a rash, discharge, or fever may be attended by any licensee under this chapter or any person engaged in the practice of massage therapy.  

(b) 	
Each applicant for an apprentice's or student's certificate of registration, employee or applicant for an instructor's or operator's license under this chapter or a renewal thereof, shall present to the township clerk a certificate from a registered physician, certifying that he is free from communicable disease. A current certificate shall also be provided prior to the renewal of any license. If the township board receives information that any individual defined in section 24-1 may no longer be free of a communicable disease then the board may in its discretion direct that such individual terminate his presence at the licensed establishment until a new or updated certificate is provided. Failure to provide a new or updated certificate when requested shall be a basis for the immediate suspension of the license and closure of the business until compliance is obtained.  

(c) 	
The skin of the hands of those attending patrons shall be clean and in healthful condition, and the nails shall be kept short. The hands shall be washed thoroughly before providing the patron any service. A minimum of one separate wash basin shall be provided in each massage parlor for the use of employees of any such establishment. There shall be provided, at each wash basin, sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers.  


(Code 1992, § 9-7; Ord. No. 301, §§ 10.8.1, 10.8.3, 10.8.9, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18­1995) 
Sec. 24-9. - Minors. 
(a) 	
The practice of massage therapy shall not be performed on any individual under the age of 18 years, and it shall be the obligation of the operator and its employees to ascertain the age of any individual requesting massage therapy, and if such individual is unable to provide proof of age of 18 or older, it shall be a violation of this chapter to provide the practice of massage therapy for or on behalf of this individual. 

(b) 	
No person operating a massage school or massage parlor, nor any instructor, shall permit training of an apprentice or student who has not attained the age of 18 years.  

(c) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsify his age in order to obtain training as an apprentice or student in a massage school or massage parlor. 


(Code 1992, § 9-8; Ord. No. 301, §§ 10.2.4, 10.5, 10.6, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-10. -Linens, wearing apparel, etc. 
(a) 	
All robes, towels, blankets and linens furnished for the use of one patron shall be thoroughly laundered before being offered to another.  

(b) 	
Nontransparent uniforms or garments covering the torso shall be worn by instructor, operator, massage therapist, employee, or apprentice while attending patrons, which shall be of washable material, and shall be kept in clean condition. The sleeves shall not reach below the elbow.  


(Code 1992, § 9-9; Ord. No. 301, §§ 10.8.7, 10.8.8, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-11. -Areas for the practice of massage therapy restricted. 
(a) 	
The practice of massage therapy shall not be performed in a massage parlor or massage therapy school in a private room which is closed to other persons by means of a door containing any latch or locking device. However, reasonable measures may be used to offer privacy to patrons such as partitions, stalls, curtains and the like. 

(b) 
No massage parlor shall be conducted in direct connection with living quarters. 


(Code 1992, § 9-11; Ord. No. 301, §§ 10.8.5, 10.8.10, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-12. - Students prohibited from the practice of massage therapy upon each other. 
Students at a massage school shall be prohibited from performing the practice of massage therapy on each other. 
(Code 1992, § 9-12; Ord. No. 301, § 10.8.12, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 301.1, § 2, 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-13. - Protection of patron. 
Any person providing any service to a patron shall exercise every precaution for the safety of such patron. They shall watch for early signs of fatigue or weakness and immediately discontinue whatever form of service is being given upon the appearance of such signs.  
(Code 1992, § 9-13; Ord. No. 301, § 10.8.4, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Secs. 24-14—24-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 
Sec. 24-45. - Required. 

Any person who is an operator of a massage parlor or massage school shall be required to obtain a license from the township clerk pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any operator to engage in the business of a massage parlor or massage school, without first obtaining a license as herein provided, or for any person to provide or perform any service customarily associated with a massage parlor or massage school in any unlicensed facility.  
(Code 1992, § 9-36; Ord. No. 301, § 4.0, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-46. - Required. 
No person either individually or with others shall own, establish or maintain a massage parlor or massage school unless the massage parlor or massage school is duly licensed except as provided in section 24-4.  
(Code 1992, § 9-37; Ord. No. 301, § 10.2, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-47. - Application. 
(a) 	
The application for a license required by this article shall be made, in duplicate, on forms provided by the township clerk which shall contain the following information:  

(1) 	
Name and address of the applicant and the name and address of the owner of the massage parlor or massage school. If a partnership, the name and address of each partner thereof. If a corporation, the name and address of each officer, director, and any shareholder owning more than ten percent of the common stock of the corporation, and the name and address of the resident agent of such corporation. 

(2) 	
A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of this chapter, or any similar ordinance, or has been convicted of any felony or any offense dealing with sexual misconduct or violation of any narcotic drug statute.  

(3) 
Location and address where the massage parlor or massage school is to be established.  

(4) 	
A statement as to whether the applicant has been known by another name, and if so, what name. 

(b) 	
Upon any change in the information furnished in subsection (a) of the section, it shall be the duty of the licensee to inform the township clerk, township fire chief, township building official, township zoning administrator and the county sheriff's department of such change. 

(c) 
A separate application shall be made for each location of a massage parlor or massage school. 


(Code 1992, § 9-38; Ord. No. 301, § 5, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-48. - Age restriction. 
No license shall be issued under this article to any applicant unless the applicant is 18 years of age or older. 
(Code 1992, § 9-39; Ord. No. 301, § 5.2, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-49. - Investigation; referral to board. 
(a) 	
Both copies of the application for a license under this article shall be filed with the township clerk who shall investigate same and cause:  

(1) 
The county sheriff to ascertain if there are any outstanding warrants against the applicant;  

(2) 	
The township building official to ascertain from an investigation of the location where it is proposed to operate such massage parlor or massage school whether such operation would violate any building ordinances;  

(3) 	
The township fire chief to determine from an investigation of the location where it is proposed to operate such massage parlor or massage school whether such operation would violate any fire safety ordinance or statute; and  

(4) 	
The township zoning administrator to ensure compliance with all zoning ordinances and regulations.  

(b) 	
Upon the township clerk's determination that all investigations and inspections referenced herein have been conducted, and approvals received by such officials, the township clerk shall prepare and file with the township board a statement establishing that the clerk has received a completed application, the required filing fee, the physician's certificate, the copies of investigations and the approvals by all of the officials listed herein. The township board shall then consider the application at the next regularly scheduled township meeting.  


(Code 1992, § 9-40; Ord. No. 301, § 6.0, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-50. - Granted upon approval. 
When an application and the proposed location have been reviewed by the township clerk, the county sheriff's department, the township building official, the township zoning administrator and the township fire chief, and when the township board has approved the application, a license shall be granted.  
(Code 1992, § 9-41; Ord. No. 301, § 4.0, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-51. - Fees; prorations; expiration date. 
Every operator under this article shall pay an annual administration fee as set by resolution of the township board, which is nonrefundable and which fee is limited to one location. The amount of this fee may be amended by township resolution. The fee will be for a 12-month period with the license expiring on December 31 of each year. For the first year the applicant will only be required to pay a pro rata amount of the fee based upon the date of issuance of the license to December 31 of that year. 
(Code 1992, § 9-42; Ord. No. 301, § 7.0, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-52. - Transfer of location or to new owner. 
(a) 	
Prior to the operator moving the location of the operation of the licensed business within the township, the new location shall be first inspected and approved by the county sheriff, the township building official, the township fire chief and the township zoning administrator. After such approvals are obtained, the clerk of the township shall so notify the township board, and if there have been no violations of this chapter at the original licensed location, the township board shall approve the transfer.  

(b) 	
If upon the sale of such business, whether in whole or in part, the new operator or part-operator, prior to commencement of business, shall first obtain approval of the township board as required by this article for an original application of a license. 


(Code 1992, § 9-43; Ord. No. 301, §§ 8.1, 8.2, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-53. - Display. 
The license granted under this article shall be displayed in plain view of all patrons of the licensed premises, together with the text of sections 24-3 through 24-13.  
(Code 1992, § 9-44; Ord. No. 301, § 8.3, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-54. - Revocation. 
(a) 	
Each license issued under this article is subject to revocation by the township board. Revocation may result in the township board's sole discretion for any violation of this chapter or any conviction of any state's criminal statutes.  

(b) 	
Prior to revoking a license, the township board shall first provide the operator with written notice of a hearing to be held by the township board on whether the license is to be revoked, which notice of hearing shall list those reasons to be considered by the township board for the revocation of such license. The operator shall be given two weeks' notice of this hearing and the operator and/or operator's attorney may appear at the hearing for the purpose of contesting any or all of the reasons that the township board is to consider for the revocation of such license.  


(Code 1992, § 9-45; Ord. No. 301, § 9.0, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Secs. 24-55—24-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION 
Sec. 24-82. - Required. 
No person shall act as an operator or massage therapist without first complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter and obtaining a certificate of registration under this article.  
(Code 1992, § 9-66; Ord. No. 301.1, § 2(10.2.1A), 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-83. - Application. 
Any apprentice, student, massage therapist or employee prior to performing or assisting in performing the practice of massage therapy shall first register with the township clerk by submittal of an application for a certificate of registration. Such application shall include the following information:  
(1) 	
The individual applicant's name, address, height, weight, sex, color of eyes, hair color, date of birth, location of birth, social security number and any name used by such individual in the five years preceding this application.  

(2) 	
A statement as to whether the apprentice, student or employee has been known by another name, and if so, what name.  

(3) 
Written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavit) that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.  

(4) 
One photograph of at least two inches by two inches.  

(5) 	
Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application, including the name and address of the employers.  

(6) 	
A list of all felony or misdemeanor convictions, other than traffic violations, including guilty pleas, pleas of nolo contendere, the date of the conviction or plea, the court where the conviction or plea occurred, and the docket number of the case. 

(7) 	
A certificate from a medical or osteopathic doctor stating that the applicant has, within 30 days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease.  

(8) 	
Such other identification and information including any necessary releases or authorizations necessary to confirm the information set forth in the application.  


(Code 1992, § 9-67; Ord. No. 301, § 10.2.2, 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 301.1, § 2(10.2.1A), 4-2­1990; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-84. - Filing fee. 
Each application filed under this article shall be accompanied by a filing fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board, no part of which is refundable.  
(Code 1992, § 9-68; Ord. No. 301.1, § 2(10.2.1B), 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-85. - Action on application. 
Following receipt of the application under this article the clerk shall determine whether the apprentice, student massage therapist or employee complies with the terms of this chapter and, if so, approve the application and issue the certificate of registration.  
(Code 1992, § 9-69; Ord. No. 301.1, § 2(10.2.1C), 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Sec. 24-86. - Display. 
Each certificate of registration issued under this article shall be displayed in plain view of the public at the massage parlor or massage school.  
(Code 1992, § 9-70; Ord. No. 301.1, § 2(10.2.1D), 10-16-1989; Ord. No. 95-5, 9-18-1995) 
Chapter 26 - MEDICAL MARIHUANA[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  

State Law reference— Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Act means initiated law of 2008, MCL 333.26421 et seq., and Michigan Administrative Rules, R333.101 et seq. 
Chief law enforcement official means the lieutenant of the township substation of the county sheriff's department. 
Department means the state department of community health.  
Distribution means the physical transfer of any amount of marihuana in any form by one person to any other person, whether or not any consideration is paid or received.  
Marihuana means the substance or material defined in section 7106 of the public health code, 1976 PA 368, MCL 333.7106.  
Primary caregiver or caregiver means a person as defined under MCL 333.26423(g) of the Act.  
Principal residence means the place where a person resides for more than half of the calendar year. 
Qualifying patient or patient means a person as defined under MCL 333.26423(h) of the Act.  
Registry identification card means the document defined under MCL 333.26423(i) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-202, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-2. - Penalty for violation, municipal civil infraction. 
(a) 	
A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a license is responsible for a municipal civil infraction in accordance with article II of chapter 20. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the township in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a license. 

(b) 	
If any fines or costs associated with this article are not paid, the civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court in accordance with section 20-25.  


(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-213, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-3. - Intent. 
(a) 	
It is the intent of this chapter to give effect to the intent of the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act as approved by the electors, and not to determine and establish an altered policy with regard to marihuana. The act authorizes a narrow exception to the general rule and state policy that the cultivation, distribution, and use of marihuana amount to criminal acts. It is the further intent of this chapter to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of persons and property, and to license certain locations as specified section 26-31. This chapter is intended to comply with the Act while concurrently attempting to protect the health, safety, and welfare of law enforcement officers and other persons in the community, and also to address and minimize reasonably anticipated secondary effects upon children, other members of the public, and upon significant areas of the community, that would be reasonably expected to occur in the absence of the provisions of this chapter. This chapter is designed to recognize the fundamental intent of the Act to allow for a private and confidential patient-caregiver relationship to facilitate the statutory authorization for the limited cultivation, distribution, and medical use of marihuana; and to regulate around this fundamental intent in a manner that does not conflict with the Act so as to address issues that would otherwise expose the community and its residents to significant adverse conditions. 

(b) 	
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as allowing persons to engage in conduct that endangers others or causes a public nuisance, or to allow cultivation, distribution or use of marihuana contrary to the express authorizations of the Act and this chapter; and, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to undermine or provide immunity from federal law as it may be enforced by the federal or state government relative to the cultivation, distribution or use of marihuana. Thus, the authorization of activity, and the approval of a license under this chapter shall not have the effect of superseding or nullifying federal law applicable to the cultivation, distribution and use of marihuana.  

(a) 	
Under the Act law enforcement officers are prevented from securing the information necessary to determine whether or not the cultivation, distribution and use of marihuana are being conducted by persons authorized under the Act. Accordingly, the licensure of a particular location as the site of cultivation and distribution, which need not undermine the privacy and confidentiality of the parent-caregiver relationship, could be critical to law enforcement in order to identify and distinguish sites of lawful activity from sites of unlawful activity. 

(b) 	
The experience in the State of California, a state that approved the medical use of marihuana in 1996, is that concentrations of marihuana distribution activity lead to serious secondary effects including: 

(1) 	
Resale of products just obtained inside, since marihuana dispensaries regularly attract marihuana growers, drug users and drug traffickers sharing just purchased marihuana outside dispensaries; 

(2) 	
Street dealers lurking about dispensaries to offer a lower price for marihuana to arriving patrons; 

(3) 
Marihuana smoking in public and in front of children in the vicinity of dispensaries;  

(4) 	
Acquiring marihuana and/or money by means of robbery of patrons going to or leaving dispensaries; 

(5) 
Loitering;  

(6) 
An increase in burglaries at or near dispensaries; and 

(7) 
A loss of trade for other commercial businesses located near dispensaries.  

(c) 	
Children are not capable of making distinctions between the lawful and unlawful use and possession of marihuana by individuals based upon the intricacies of the Act. Therefore, there is a need to insulate children from the narrowly permitted use and possession of marihuana permitted under the Act.  

(d) 	
Unauthorized installations of plumbing and electrical equipment relating to the cultivation of marihuana plants may create mold conditions and/or a fire risk. 


(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-201, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-4. - Findings of fact warranting a license requirement. 
(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-203, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-5. - Findings of fact warranting restrictions on distribution. 
(a) 	
The Act reflects the intent to a private and confidential patient-caregiver relationship to facilitate the lawful cultivation, distribution, and use of marihuana strictly for medical purposes, that is, an authorization for confidential and private use of marihuana by patients, and for confidential and private assistance in such use by caregivers to individual patients. It is reasonable to expect and require that all undertakings of caregivers and other persons in assisting a patient are intended to occur on a confidential and private one-to-one basis. 

(b) 	
The confidentiality provisions of the Act reflect the intent for all caregivers and patients to remain anonymous in terms of their names and addresses, thus further reflecting the private and confidential nature of the activities contemplated between a caregiver and the patient he is assisting. 

(c) 	
It is deemed necessary to maintain, by licensure, an environment promoting the protection, efficiency and effectiveness of law enforcement officers and their work performed in connection with the cultivation, distribution or use of marihuana.  

(d) 	
All of the findings stated in section 26-4, in support of the requirement for licensure are incorporated by reference in this section. 


(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-210, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-6. - Restrictions on the distribution of medical marihuana. 
A caregiver, and any other person authorized under the Act to assist patients, if any, shall distribute medical marihuana only on a confidential one-to-one basis.  
(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-211, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-7. - No vested rights. 
A property owner shall not have vested rights or nonconforming use rights that would serve as a basis for failing to comply with this chapter or any amendment thereto.  
(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-212, 2-7-2011) 
Secs. 26-8—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
Sec. 26-31. - Required. 
No cultivation, distribution or other assistance to patients by a caregiver or other person permitted under the Act shall be lawful at a location until such location has been licensed under this article. By way of exception, it is not the intent of this article to require a license for the principal residence of a patient where marihuana is cultivated or used exclusively for such patient's personal consumption; however, a location other than a patient's principal residence where a patient cultivates or uses marihuana shall be subject to the licensure requirements of this article.  
(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-204, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-32. - Application. 
Since this article licenses locations and not persons, the application will not require the name, home address or date of birth of a patient or caregiver. The information acquired shall be deemed per se confidential, and not subject to public disclosure. An application for a license shall be submitted to the chief law enforcement official and provide the following:  
(1) 	
The address and legal description of the precise premises, other than a patient's principal residence, at which there shall be cultivation, distribution or other assistance in the use of marihuana. The fact that a caregiver or other person providing assistance to patients also has an ID card as a patient shall not relieve the obligation to provide this information. 

(2) 
Payment of an applicable fee established by resolution of the township board.  

(3) 	
Provide a floor plan, with dimensions, illustrating the enclosed and locked location in the building where marihuana is cultivated and stored. 

(4) 	
Specify the number of patients to be assisted, including the number of patients for whom marihuana is proposed to be cultivated, and the number of patients to be otherwise assisted on the premises. 

(5) 	
For safety and other code inspection purposes, provide a description detailing the electrical and plumbing improvements and all other means proposed to facilitate the cultivation of marihuana plants.  


(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-205, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-33. - Requirements for approval. 

(a) 	
Locations used for the cultivation and distribution of marihuana or other assistance by caregivers or other persons permitted under the Act, to engage in the medical use of marihuana, not including a patient's principal residence which is used to cultivate marihuana or assist in the patient's medical use of marihuana, shall be prohibited:  

(1) 	
Within 1,000 feet of a building housing a school, including any facility with after school programs, or child care centers as defined and licensed by Act 116 of 1973 as amended, to ensure compliance with federal "Drug-Free School Zones." 

(2) 	
Within 500 feet of a building at which any other caregiver or any other person permitted under the Act to cultivate marihuana, not including a patient's principal residence which is used by the patient to cultivate marihuana or assist in the medical use of marihuana. 

(b) 	
The location at which a caregiver or any other person permitted under the Act cultivates marihuana, or assists a patient in the medical use of marihuana shall not be the same location at which any other caregiver or person cultivates marihuana, or assists a patient in the medical use of marihuana. The maximum number of marihuana plants cultivated at a patient or caregiver location shall be as stipulated by the Act.  

(c) 	
The cultivation of marihuana and assistance of a patient in the use of marihuana by a caregiver shall occur within the confines of a building and such activities shall occur only in locations not visible to the public, provided, this subsection shall not prohibit a caregiver from assisting a patient at the patient's principal residence.  

(d) 	
The necessary electrical, plumbing and other permits shall be granted for all improvements used to facilitate the cultivation of marihuana plants if the applicable requirements are met.  

(e) 	
Since the location and identity of a caregiver is known to patients, signage identifying a caregiver's location is prohibited. 

(f) 	
Prior to license approval, the chief law enforcement official or his designee shall inspect the facility at which a caregiver or any other person permitted under the Act cultivates, distributes or assists a patient in the medical use of marihuana. The inspection shall include, at a minimum, review of the proposed cultivation and storage areas and security measures. 

(g) 	
If approved, all use of property shall be in accordance with an approved application, including all information submitted by the applicant in reliance on which the application shall be deemed to have been approved.  

(h) 	
A caregiver location that exists on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived must file an application for a license within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in order to continue to legally operate. 


(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-206, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-34. - Renewal. 
Prior to the expiration of the original one-year license, a license renewal application, and applicable fee, shall be filed with the chief law enforcement official. Any changes to the information provided on the original application shall be indicated on the license renewal application. If it is determined that the caregiver location is in compliance with the applicable requirements, a one-year license renewal shall be issued. A license renewal application shall be submitted requesting renewal for every year thereafter.  
(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-207, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-35. - Revocation. 
(a) 	
The chief law enforcement official may revoke any license issued under the provisions of this article upon any of the following findings:  

(1) 
A violation of any state or local regulations or provisions of this chapter. 

(2) 	
Operation of a location at which a caregiver or any other person permitted under the Act cultivates, distributes or assists a patient in the medical use of marihuana in an unlawful manner or in a manner contrary to the public health, safety and welfare.  

(3) 
Any attempt to transfer the license to another location or to use the same improperly.  

(4) 	
The information provided with the license application was falsified, incomplete, and/or inaccurate.  

(5) 	
Abandonment of the location upon which the caregiver or any other person permitted under the Act cultivates marihuana or assists a patient in the medical use of marihuana. For the purpose of this section, the cessation of use of the property by the caregiver or other person for six months or more shall constitute abandonment.  

(b) 	
Upon serving notice of a license revocation by the chief law enforcement official, the caregiver or any other person permitted under the Act to cultivate marihuana or assist a patient in the medical use of marihuana shall cease such activities immediately.  

(c) 	
No property at which a license has been revoked for the cultivation of marihuana or assistance to a patient in the medical use of marihuana by a caregiver or any other person permitted under the Act to conduct such activities shall be eligible to receive another license at any location within the township for three years from the date of license revocation. 


(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-208, 2-7-2011) 
Sec. 26-36. - Appeal. 
An application for an original or renewal license which has been denied, or an existing license which has been revoked, by the chief law enforcement official may be appealed to county circuit court.  
(Ord. No. 10-56, § 8-209, 2-7-2011) 
Chapter 27 - NON-DISCRIMINATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 27-1. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the township that no person be denied equal protection of the laws; nor shall any person be denied the enjoyment of his or her civil or political rights or be discriminated against because of actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income, familial status, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. It is also the intent of the township to preserve the rights of religious organizations granted to religious organizations by state and federal law. This chapter shall govern discriminatory conduct and shall not infringe upon free speech rights granted by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any affirmative action policies passed by any level of government. 
(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Age means chronological age.  
Complaint review committee means five citizens of the township responsible for reviewing complaints which shall, to the extent possible, collectively be representative of the population of the township. One of the five individuals shall be a licensed state attorney. The complaint review committee shall remain an impartial decision-maker. Members shall adhere to the township ethics policy and abstain from participation if they have a conflict of interest.  
Conciliation agreement means an agreement entered into between the complaint review committee, the person alleged to have been discriminated against and the person alleged to have engaged in a prohibited practice under this chapter, whereby the persons agree to methods of resolving a compliant, terminating discrimination or reversing the effects of past discrimination.  
Contractor means a person who by contract furnishes services, materials or supplies. "Contractor" does not include persons who are merely creditors or debtors of the township, such as those holding the township's notes or bonds or persons whose notes, bonds or stock is held by the township. 
Discriminate means to make a decision, offer to make a decision or refrain from making a decision based in whole or in part on the actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income, familial status, sexual orientation or gender identity/expression. 
Discrimination based on actual or perceived physical or mental limitation includes discrimination because of the use by an individual of adaptive devices or aids.  
Employer means a person employing one or more persons.  
Employment agency means a person regularly undertaking, with or without compensation, to procure, refer, recruit, or place an employee for an employer, or to procure, refer, recruit, or place for an employer or person the opportunity to work for an employer and includes any agent of that person.  
Familial status means ones or more individuals under the age of 18 residing with a parent or other person having custody or in the process of securing legal custody of the individual or individuals or residing with the designee of the parent or other person having or securing custody, with the written permission of the parent or other person. For purposes of this definition, "parent" includes a person who is pregnant. 
Gender identity/expression means a person's actual or perceived gender, including a person's gender identity, self-image, appearance, expression, or behavior, whether or not that gender identity, self-image, expression, or behavior is different from that traditionally associated with the person's sex at birth as being either female or male.  
Housing facility means any dwelling unit or facility used for a person to regularly sleep and keep personal belongings including, but not limited to, a house, apartment, rooming house, housing cooperative, hotel, motel, tourist home, retirement home or nursing home.  
Labor organization means includes an organization of any kind, an agency or employee representation committee, group, association, or plan in which employees participate and which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employees concerning grievances, labor disputes, wages, rate of pay, hours, or other terms or conditions of employment. 
Marital status means the state of being married, unmarried, divorced or widowed.  
Mental limitation means a limitation of mental capabilities unrelated to one's ability to safely perform the work involved in jobs or positions available to such person for hire or promotion; a limitation of mental capabilities unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent and maintain property; or a limitation of mental capabilities unrelated to one's ability to utilize and benefit from the goods, services, activities, privileges and accommodations of a place of public accommodation. "Mental limitation" includes, but is not limited to, developmental disabilities, psychological, etc. "Mental limitation" does not include any condition caused by the current illegal use of alcohol, prescription drugs or a controlled substance. 
Minority means a person who is Black or African American, Native American, or Alaskan native, Hispanic or Latino, Asian, Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander.  
Perceived means to regard or attain awareness or understanding of something through one's perception or senses. As used in this chapter, the word refers to the perception of the person who acts, and not to the perception of the person for or against whom the action is taken. For example, a perceived mental limitation is one where the person who takes action perceives the person against whom such action is taken as having a mental limitation, regardless of whether the person against whom such action is taken has a mental limitation or regards himself or herself as having a mental limitation.  
Person means shall mean an individual, organization, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or other unincorporated or incorporated public or private entity of any kind.  
Physical limitation means a limitation of physical capabilities unrelated to one's ability to safely perform the work involved in jobs or positions available to such person for hire or promotion; a limitation of physical capabilities unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent and maintain property; or a limitation of mental capabilities unrelated to one's ability to utilize and benefit from the goods, services, activities, privileges and accommodations of a place of public accommodation. "Physical limitation" includes, but is not limited to, blindness or partial sightedness, deafness or hearing impairment, muteness, partial or total absence of physical member, speech impairment and motor impairment. "Physical limitation" does not include any condition caused by the current illegal use of alcohol, prescription drugs or a controlled substance. 
Place of public accommodation means an educational, governmental, health, entertainment, recreational, refreshment, transportation, financial institution, accommodation, business or other facility of any kind, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold or otherwise made available to the general public, or which receives financial support through the solicitation of the general public or through governmental subsidy of any kind, but shall not mean any facility not open or accessible to the general public. By way of example, day care operations being conducted in a private home shall not be considered a place of public accommodation. Place of public accommodation does not include a facility operated by a religious organization or institution regardless of whether it is open or accessible to the public. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to limit any rights under the state or United States constitutions. 
Religious organization or institution means a religious association, educational institution or society, which is, in whole or substantial part, owned, supported, controlled or managed by a particular religion whose purpose or character is directed toward the propagation of that particular religion and that has the inculcation of religious values as its purpose; primarily employs persons who share its religious tenets; and primarily serves persons who share its religious tenets or, on a charitable basis, the broader community. "Religious organization or institution" includes, but is not limited to, the following: churches, mosques, synagogues and other houses of worship; any subsidiary organizations; or educational institutions affiliated with, controlled, or managed by those houses of worship or with articles of incorporation, bylaws and other documents stating an intention to inculcate its religious tenets in students.  
Sexual orientation means male or female homosexuality, heterosexuality or bisexuality, by orientation or practice, whether past or present.  
Source of income means any legal source from which a person obtains money.  
(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-3. - Discriminatory housing practices. 
(a) 	
No person shall discriminate in referring, leasing, selling, renting, showing, advertising, pricing, offering, inspecting, listing, or otherwise making available any real property, including discrimination in providing information and receiving or communicating a bona fide offer on any real property.  

(b) 
No person shall discriminate in:  

(1) 
The application, conditions, or granting of mortgages or other financing; or  

(2) 	
The contracting of construction, rehabilitation, maintenance, repair, or other improvement of any housing facility.  

(c) 	
No person shall refuse to lend money for the purchase or repair of any real property because of the location in the township of such real property, except for legitimate non-discriminatory reasons related to actual risks associated with the property itself, such as being within a floodplain.  

(d) 	
No person shall promote any sale, rental, lease, sublease, exchange, transfer, or assignment of real property by representing that demographic changes are occurring or will occur in an area with respect to any illegitimate or discriminatory characteristics. 

(e) 	
No person shall indicate, communicate, or otherwise represent to another person that any real property or interest therein is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease knowing in fact it is available, including failing to make a person aware of a real property listing, refusing to permit inspection of real property, and representing that a property has been sold when in fact it has not.  


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-4. - Discriminatory public accommodation practices. 
(a) 	
No person shall discriminate in making available full and equal access to all goods, services, activities, privileges and accommodations of any place of public accommodation. 

(b) 	
No person shall prohibit a breastfeeding mother from, or segregate a breastfeeding mother within, any public accommodation where she and the child would otherwise be authorized to be.  

(c) 	
This article shall not apply to a private club or other establishment not in fact open to the public, except to the extent that the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of the private club or establishment are made available to the customers or patrons of another establishment that is a place of public accommodation, or if it is licensed, chartered, or certified by the state or any of its political subdivisions.  


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-5. - Discriminatory employment practices. 
(a) 
It is unlawful for an employer to:  

(1) 	
Limit, segregate, classify, fail or refuse to hire, to recruit, to discharge, or otherwise discriminate against an individual with respect to employment, compensation, or a term, condition, or privilege of employment provided under state law, including a benefit plan or system because of actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income, familial status, sexual orientation or gender identity/expression, or because of the use by an individual of adaptive devices or aids.  

(2) 	
Fail or refuse to hire, recruit, or promote an individual on the basis of any physical or mental limitations that are not directly related to the requirements of the specific job. 

(3) 	
Discharge or take other discriminatory action against an individual on the basis of any physical or mental limitations that are not directly related to the requirements of the specific job.  

(4) 	
Fail or refuse to hire, recruit, or promote an individual when adaptive devices or aids may be utilized thereby enabling that individual to perform the specific requirements of the job.  

(5) 	
Discharge or take other discriminatory action against an individual when adaptive devices or aids may be utilized thereby enabling that individual to perform the specific requirements of the job. 

(6) 	
Discriminate against a person with respect to hire, tenure, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of a misdemeanor arrest, detention, or disposition where a conviction did not result. This section does not apply to felonies or information relative to a felony charge before conviction or dismissal.  

(7) 	
Make, keep or use an oral inquiry, form of application, or record that elicits or attempts to elicit information concerning the religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, height, weight, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity/expression, or because of the use by an individual of adaptive devices or aids except where applicable under federal and state law, or local ordinance.  

(b) 	
An employer, labor organization, or employment agency shall not print, circulate, post, mail, or otherwise cause to be published a statement, advertisement, notice, or sign relating to employment by the employer, or relating to membership in or a classification or referral for employment by the labor organization, or relating to a classification or referral for employment by the employment agency, which indicates a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination, based on actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income, familial status, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, or the need for any reasonable accommodations, including but not limited to the use by an individual of adaptive devices or aids.  

(c) 	
A person subject to this section may apply to the committee for an exemption on the basis that actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income, familial status, sexual orientation or gender identity/expression, is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the business or enterprise. Upon sufficient showing, the committee may grant an exemption to this section. An employer who does not obtain an exemption for such bona fide occupational qualification shall have the burden of establishing that the qualification is reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the business. 

(d) 
This section shall not apply to the employment of an individual by his/her parent, spouse, or child. 

(e) 
Nothing in this section shall operate to violate article I, section 25 of the state constitution.  


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-6. - Other prohibited practices. 
(a) 	
No person shall adopt, enforce or employ any policy or requirement, publish, post or broadcast any advertisement, sign or notice which discriminates or indicates discrimination in providing housing, employment or public accommodations.  

(b) 	
No person shall discriminate in the publication or distribution of advertising material, information or solicitation regarding housing, employment or public accommodations. 

(c) 	
No agent, broker, labor union, employment agency or any other intermediary shall discriminate in making referrals, listings or providing information with regard to housing, employment or public accommodations. A report of the conviction of any such person for a violation of this chapter shall be made to the applicable licensing or regulatory agency for such person or business.  

(d) 	
No person shall coerce, threaten or retaliate against a person for making a complaint or assisting in the investigation regarding a violation or alleged violation of this chapter, nor require, request, conspire with, assist or coerce another person to retaliate against a person for making a complaint or assisting in an investigation.  

(e) 	
No person shall knowingly conspire with, assist, coerce or request another person to discriminate in any manner prohibited by this chapter.  

(f) 	
No person shall provide false or misleading information to any authorized person investigating a complaint regarding a violation or alleged violation of this chapter, or sign a complaint for a violation of this chapter based upon false or substantially misleading information.  


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-7. - Information and investigation. 
(a) 	
No person shall provide false information to any authorized employee investigating a complaint regarding a violation of this chapter.  

(b) 	
For an investigation, the complaint review committee may request a person to produce books, papers, records or other documents which may be relevant to a violation or alleged violation of this chapter. If said person does not comply with such request, the township attorney may apply to the county circuit court for an order requiring production of said materials.  


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-8. - Conciliation agreements. 
In cases involving alleged violations of this chapter, the complaint review committee may enter into agreements whereby persons agree to methods of terminating discrimination or to reverse the effects of past discrimination. Violations of such agreements shall be violations of this chapter.  
(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-9. - Injunctions. 
The township attorney may commence a civil action to obtain injunctive relief to prevent discrimination prohibited by this chapter, to reverse the effects of such discrimination or to enforce a conciliation agreement. 
(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-10. - Discriminatory effects. 
No person shall adopt, enforce or employ any policy or requirement which has the effect of creating unequal opportunities according to actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, source of income, familial status, sexual orientation, marital status, physical or mental limitation, or gender identity expression for a person to obtain housing, employment or public accommodation, except for a bona fide business necessity. Such a necessity does not arise due to a mere inconvenience or because of suspected or actual objection to such a person by neighbors, customers, or other persons.  
(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-11. - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, the following practices shall not be violations of this chapter: 
(1) 
For a religious organization or institution to: 

a. 	
Restrict access or use of any of its facilities it operates;  

b. 	
To restrict employment opportunities for officers, religious instructors, staff and clergy; or  

c. 	
Restrict membership or benefits of membership.  



(2) 	
For the owner of an owner-occupied single-family or two-family dwelling, or a housing facility or public accommodation facility, respectively, devoted entirely to the housing and accommodation of individuals of one sex, to restrict occupancy and use on the basis of sex.  

(3) 	
To limit occupancy in a housing project or to provide public accommodations or employment privileges or assistance to persons of low income, over 55 years of age or who are handicapped. 

(4) 	
To engage in a bona fide effort to establish an affirmative action program to improve opportunities in employment for minorities and women.  

(5) 	
To discriminate based on actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income, familial status, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression when such discrimination is permitted or required by state, federal, or local law under principles of preemption.  

(6) 
To refuse to enter a contract with an un-emancipated minor.  

(7) 	
To refuse to admit to a place of public accommodation serving alcoholic beverages a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages.  

(8) 	
To refuse to admit to a place persons under 18 years of age to a business providing entertainment or selling literature which the operator of said business deems unsuitable for minors. 

(9) 	
For an educational institution to limit the use of its facilities to those affiliated with such institution. 

(10) 	
To provide discounts on products or service to students, minors and senior citizens, or members of an organization.  

(11) 
To discriminate in any arrangement for the sharing of a dwelling unit.  

(12) 
To restrict use of lavatories and locker room facilities on the basis of sex.  

(13) 	
For a governmental institution to restrict any of its facilities or to restrict employment opportunities based on duly adopted institutional policies that conform to federal and state laws and regulations.  

(14) 	
To restrict participation in an instructional program, athletic event or on an athletic team on the basis of age or sex. 

(15) 
Placing reasonable restrictions on breast feeding in an area open to the general public. 


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-12. - Nondiscrimination by township contractors. 
(a) 	
A written contract to which the township, a political subdivision, or an agency thereof, is a party shall contain a covenant by the contractor and his/her subcontractors not to discriminate against an employee or applicant for employment with respect to hire, tenure, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, including a benefit plan or system or a matter directly or indirectly related to employment, because of actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income, familial status, sexual 

orientation, gender identity or expression, or use by an individual of adaptive devices or aids. Breach of this covenant may be regarded as a material breach of the contract. 

(b) 	
This section is also applicable to labor organizations, employment agencies, apprenticeships, and job training programs. In addition, a labor organization shall not discriminate in its membership practices nor fail to fairly represent its membership in a grievance process because of actual or perceived religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, height, weight, marital status, physical or mental limitation, source of income, familial status, sexual orientation, gender identity/expression, or use by an individual of adaptive devices or aids.  


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-13. - Complaints. 
(a) 	
Any person claiming to be discriminated against in violation of this article may file with the complaint review committee a complaint, in writing, setting forth with reasonable specificity the person or persons alleged to have violated this chapter, the specific nature of the violation and the date(s) of the alleged violation. A person filing a complaint must do so within 180 days of the incident forming the basis of the complaint. 

(b) 	
To the extent permitted by law, all written complaints of discrimination in employment, public accommodation, public services, and housing received by the complaint review committee shall be kept confidential. 

(c) 
The complaint review committee shall: 

(1) 	
Be responsible for receipt, recordation, investigation, mediation, conciliation, recommendation, and/or forwarded to the township manager for referral to the township attorney;  

(2) 	
Ensure there are no undue burdens placed on a claimant, which might discourage filing of a discrimination complaint.  

(3) 	
Commence and complete the complaint investigation, mediation/conciliation, and recommendation process in a timely manner; 

(4) 	
Hold any complaint investigation, mediation/conciliation and recommendation in abeyance pending the outcome of any state or federal investigation being conducted or private cause of action arising out of the same operative facts relating to the matter or incident forming the basis of the complaint; and  

(5) 	
Refer a complaint it deems valid and sufficiently egregious to the township manager for referral to the township attorney for review and additional action.  


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-14. - Investigation and hearing. 
(a) 	
During an investigation, the complaint review committee may request the appearance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, records or other documents that may be relevant to a violation or alleged violation of this chapter. 

(b) 	
If the complaint review committee determines that the complaint and preliminary evidence gathered indicates a prima facie violation of any provision in this chapter, the complaint review committee shall conduct a hearing within 90 days after completion of its preliminary investigation. The person alleged to have committed a violation (the "respondent") and the claimant shall be sent by regular mail at least 14 days advance, notice of the scheduled date and time of the hearing and a request for each to appear. At the hearing, testimony will be taken. All testimony shall be on the record, under oath and either recorded or transcribed. Both claimant and respondent shall be allowed to testify, present 

evidence, bring witnesses to testify, and to cross-examine all witnesses at the hearing. Technical rules of evidence shall not apply.  

(c) 	
A failure of either the claimant or the respondent to cooperate with the complaint review committee may result in an adverse determination for that person at the hearing.  


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-15. - Findings and recommendations. 
The complaint review committee shall make findings of fact based on the testimony and evidence introduced at the hearing and shall order such relief as the complaint review committee deems appropriate. The findings and recommendations shall be served by regular mail on the claimant and respondent. The claimant and respondent shall have 30 days from the date the findings and recommendations are mailed to either: 
(1) 	
Comply with the findings and recommendations, unless a different time frame is provided by the complaint review committee for compliance, or 

(2) 
Object to the recommendation to the township board. 


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-16. - Available recommendations. 
Complaint review committee recommendations include:  
(1) 	
Ceasing the illegal conduct cited in the complaint and taking steps to alleviate the effect of such illegal conduct;  

(2) 
Providing that the respondent apologize to the claimant;  

(3) 	
Closing the matter based upon a mediation/conciliation agreement of the claimant and respondent; 

(4) 	
Admitting the claimant to a place of public accommodation or extending full and equal use and enjoyment of said place of public accommodation; 

(5) 
Paying some or all of the claimant's costs, incurred at any stage of review; 

(6) 
Dismissing the complaint;  

(7) 
Imposing costs against a claimant for a frivolously filed claim; and 

(8) 
Imposing penalties pursuant to section 27-17. 


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Sec. 27-17. - Penalties. 
(a) 	
A violation of a prohibited act in this chapter is designated a municipal civil infraction, is not a crime and shall not be punishable by imprisonment.  

(b) 	
Schedule of civil fines. The violation shall be according to the schedule as adopted by resolution of the township board. Such resolution shall be on file in the office of the township clerk. 

(c) 
Continuing violation.  

(1) 	
For an offense that is a single and discrete occurrence, a single violation shall accrue. Subsequent single and discrete occurrences shall result in additional violations according to the above schedule.  

(2) 	
For offenses that are continuing in nature, rather than single and discrete, the first violation shall accrue with the first day of the occurrence, and subsequent violations shall accrue for each additional day of that occurrence (for example, an impermissible hiring practice that continues each day on an ongoing basis). 

(3) 	
For continuing violations under subsection (c)(2), the day of the first occurrence shall be measured from the day of service of the township attorney's complaint.  


(Ord. No. 13-78, § 1, 10-21-2013) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  

State Law reference— Michigan Penal Code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 28-1. - Accessorial liability. 

Every person concerned in the commission of an offense, whether such person directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted, indicted and tried and, on conviction, shall be punished as if such person had directly committed the offense. (Code 1992, § 12-2) State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 767.39. 
Sec. 28-2. - Cruelty to animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally beat, kick, injure, torture or cruelly strike any animal or assist another in so doing.  (Code 1992, § 12-3; Ord. No. 108, § 1(3), 8-21-1972; Ord. No. 03-11, 10-6-2003)  State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.50 et seq. 
Sec. 28-3. - Window peeping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to look into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the township in such a manner that would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent.  
(Code 1992, § 12-4; Ord. No. 108, § 1(5), 8-21-1972)  State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Sec. 28-4. - Accosting, panhandling, selling, soliciting. 
(a) 	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his/her person, or upon property in his/her immediate possession.  
Ask, panhandle or solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining money, food or items of value. 
Public place means governmental owned property, to which the public has access, including but not limited to: any alley, public restroom/toilet facility, sidewalk, street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, or playground. 
Roadway means that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.  
Sell means the transfer of goods, property or title for a price.  
(b) 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 

(1) 	
Trespass, panhandle or solicit money, food or other things of value in or on private property without first obtaining the permission from the owner or person in lawful control or possession of such property or on property that has posted a sign clearly indicating no trespassing and that solicitations are not permitted on the property;  

(2) 	
Sell to or solicit from an occupant or from any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, roadway or highway if such activity blocks, impedes, or otherwise interferes with the normal flow of traffic; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of a disabled vehicle;  

(3) 
In an aggressive manner: 

a. 	
Accost, approach or speak to a person, or follow a person before, during or after soliciting in a manner that is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, or damage to or loss of property or otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value;  

b. 	
Continue to accost, or solicit from a person after the person has refused such advance or provided a negative response to such conduct;  

c. 	
Intentionally touch or cause physical contact with another person without that person's consent;  

d. 	
Intentionally block or interfere with the safe or free passage of a person or vehicle by any means; and 

e. 	
Use violent, profane, or threatening gestures or language toward a person solicited, before, during, or after the act of solicitation. 



(c) 
Exceptions. Persons duly authorized or licensed pursuant to township ordinance.  


(Ord. No. 17-95 , § I, 1-3-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-95 , § I, adopted Jan. 3, 2017, repealed the former § 28-4 and enacted a new § 28-4 as set out herein. The former § 28-4 pertained to begging, panhandling, soliciting and derived from the Code of 1992, § 12-5; Ord. No. 183, § 1(11), 8-21-1972; and Ord. No. 10-67, § 1(12-5), 4-16-2012. 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(h). 
Secs. 28-5—28-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-95 , § II, adopted Jan. 3, 2017, repealed § 28-5, which pertained to spitting and derived from the Code of 1992, § 12-6 and Ord. No. 183, § 1(18), 8-21-1972. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS Sec. 28-29. - False alarms generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise without any good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise, the police or the fire department or any public or private ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not needed.  (Code 1992, § 12-36; Ord. No. 183, § 1(32), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— False fire alarms, MCL 750.240. 
Sec. 28-30. - False fire alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly and willfully commit any one or more of the following actions:  
(1) 
Raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place.  

(2) 	
Ring any bell or operate any mechanical apparatus, electrical apparatus or combination thereof for the purpose of creating a false alarm of fire. 


(3) Raise a false alarm of fire orally by telephone or in person. (Code 1992, § 12-37; Ord. No. 183, § 1(32), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.240. Sec. 28-31. -Resisting, obstructing or interfering with a law enforcement officer or other duly authorized person. 
It shall be unlawful to:  
(1) 	
Knowingly or willfully resist, obstruct, interfere with and/or oppose, by physical or nonphysical means, any law enforcement officer, or other duly authorized person while said officer or person was engaged in lawful acts, attempts and conduct in the enforcement or execution of any law, ordinance, order, or resolution made, issued, or passed by lawful authority.  

(2) 	
Knowingly or willfully resist, obstruct, interfere with, and/or oppose, by physical or nonphysical means, any law enforcement officer, or other duly authorized person, in serving or attempting to serve or execute any civil or criminal process, or order made, issued, or passed by lawful authority. 

(3) 	
Knowingly or willfully failing to adhere, obey and/or follow the lawful order or directive of a law enforcement officer, when such person knows or should know said officer to be a member of the Eaton County Sheriff's Office or any other law enforcement agency having jurisdiction or authority to enforce any law, ordinance, order, or resolution made, issued, or passed by lawful authority. 

(4) 	
Knowingly or willfully interfere with, and/or oppose, by physical or nonphysical means, any officer, firefighter, government medical technician, or other duly authorized person while in the performance of his or her lawful duties or while attempting to provide aid to an injured or ill person, reduce a hazardous condition, or respond to an emergency or critical incident.  

(5) 	
Flee or run from, evade or attempt to flee or run from, or evade a law enforcement officer when said officer is lawfully enforcing or attempting to enforce any civil or criminal law, ordinance, or resolution. 

(6) 	
Knowingly provide false or misleading information or data to a law enforcement officer while said officer is in the performance of his lawful duties.  

(7) 	
Knowingly or willfully enter an area or remain in an area where access has been restricted or closed by a law enforcement officer or other duly authorized person, or whenever a person has been informed by an officer or other duly authorized person that the area is closed or restricted, or when an area has been cordoned off with ropes, tape, barriers or any other line or boundary designed to restrict access to the area.  

(8) 	
Knowingly or willfully hinder, harass, injure, annoy or interfere with a dog or other animal being used for law enforcement purposes 


(Ord. No. 10-64, § 1(12-45), 4-16-2012) 
Secs. 28-32—28-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
Sec. 28-49. - Littering. 
(a) 	
It shall be unlawful for a person knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property, to dump, deposit, place, throw or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on public or private property or water other than property designated and set aside for such purposes. The term "public or private property or water" includes, but is not limited to, the right-of-way of a road or highway, a body of water or watercourse, or the shore or beach thereof, including the ice above the water; a park, playground, building, refuse or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties or timberlands.  

(b) 	
It shall be unlawful for a person who removes a vehicle wrecked or damaged in an accident on a highway, road or street to fail to remove all glass and other injurious substances dropped on a highway, road or street as a result of the accident; and to knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of public property or the owner of private property, to dump, deposit, place, throw or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of any vehicle wrecked or damaged in an accident, on any highway, road or street, on public or private property other than property designed and set aside for such purposes. 


(Code 1992, § 12-61; Ord. No. 108, § 1(1), 8-21-1972; Ord. No. 183, § 1(7), 8-21-1972; Ord. No. 03-11, 10-6-2003) 
State Law reference— Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 28-50. -Tampering with, damaging property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1) 	
Willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his own or any public school building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, streetlight or street sign;  

(2) 	
Mark or post handbills on, or in any manner mar the walls of, any public building, tree or pole within the township;  

(3) 	
Destroy, take or meddle with any property belonging to the township or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed or stored, without proper authority; or  


(4) Disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage any township water meter without proper authority.  (Code 1992, § 12-63; Ord. No. 108, § 1(2), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, MCL 750.377a et seq. Sec. 28-51. - Malicious destruction of real or personal property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure the real or personal property of another by any means not particularly mentioned or described in this article if the resulting damages shall be under $200.00, or to make or post handbills on, or in any manner mar the walls of any public building or any fence, tree or pole within the township or take or meddle with any property belonging to the township, or remove the same from the street, alley, building or place where it may be kept, placed, standing or stored, without authority from the superintendent, fire chief or other official custodian of such property.  (Code 1992, § 12-64; Ord. No. 183, § 1(16), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.377a. 
Sec. 28-52. - Malicious destruction of buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure any house, barn or other building of another, or the appurtenances thereof if the resulting damages shall be under $200.00.  (Code 1992, § 12-65; Ord. No. 183, § 1(16), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.380. 
Sec. 28-53. - Disturbance of assemblies. 
No person shall disturb any service of worship or any other assembly gathered for a lawful purpose.  
(Code 1992, § 12-67; Ord. No. 183, § 1, 8-21-1972) 
State Law reference— Disturbance of religious worship, MCL 750.169, 752.525; disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 28-54. - Damage to gardens, orchards. 
No person shall enter any garden or orchard, located within the township without the consent of the owner or tenant, or his agent, and there cut down, damage, destroy, eat or carry away any portion of such garden or orchard, including any growing thing, crop, tree, timber, grass, seed, soil, fertilizer, water supply, tool, implement, fence or any other protective device, or any other thing used for the development, cultivation, maintenance and use of the aforesaid gardens or orchards. (Code 1992, § 12-68; Ord. No. 183, § 1(30), 8-21-1972; Ord. No. 03-11, 10-6-2003)  State Law reference— Trespass, MCL 750.546. 
Sec. 28-55. - Retail fraud. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to do any of the following:  
(1) 	
While a store is open to the public, alter, transfer, replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale. 

(2) 
While a store is open to the public, steal property of the store that is offered for sale. 

(3) 	
With the intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store.  


(Ord. No. 10-62, § 1(12-69), 4-16-2012) 
Secs. 28-56—28-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
Sec. 28-82. - Disturbing the peace. 

It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the public peace and quiet by shouting, whistling, loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct, the playing of musical instruments, phonographs, radios, televisions, tape players or any other means of sound amplification at any time or place so as to unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort and repose of persons in the vicinity. 
(Code 1992, § 12-91; Ord. No. 183, § 1(6), 8-21-1972) 
Sec. 28-83. -Disturbance in public place. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or excite any disturbance or contention in any public place which shall cause or aid or abet the institution or maintenance of a riot, or to do an act or engage in conduct that urges others to commit unlawful acts or acts of unlawful force or violence, or to do an act or engage in conduct which shall cause or has the purpose to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance.  (Code 1992, § 12-92; Ord. No. 183, § 1(6), 8-21-1972; Ord. No. 03-11, 10-6-2003)  State Law reference— Inciting to riot, MCL 752.542. 
Sec. 28-84. - Disorderly persons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by such person to be a resort of noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons. 
(Code 1992, § 12-94; Ord. No. 183, § 1(27), 8-21-1972) 
Sec. 28-85. - Disorderly intoxication. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated in a public place that is either endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or is acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance. (Code 1992, § 12-95; Ord. No. 183, § 1(8), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— Disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 28-86. - Jostling, crowding. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place.  (Code 1992, § 12-96; Ord. No. 183, § 1(21), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— Disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Sec. 28-87. - Fighting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in a public place.  
(Code 1992, § 12-97; Ord. No. 183, § 1(9), 8-21-1972) 
Sec. 28-88. -Obstructing public passage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public, or in such a way as to prevent other members of the public from going on or making use of the premises after having been requested to leave by a duly authorized police officer. 
(Code 1992, § 12-98; Ord. No. 183, § 1(22), 8-21-1972) 
Sec. 28-89. - Loitering. 
(a) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found standing or idling in or about any store, shop or business or commercial establishment and/or its premises, if such standing and/or idling in or about the locations described in this subsection causes interference or disorder of the normal course of business of the store, shop, business or commercial establishment or in any way tends to hinder or impede the passage of pedestrians or vehicles en route to or from the establishment or premises. No person shall be issued a citation under this section unless the person fails to leave any of the locations described in this subsection after having been requested to leave by the lawful owner or occupant or by a representative of the owner or occupant or a duly authorized police officer.  

(b) 	
Any person who violates this section shall be liable for a municipal civil infraction and to pay a civil fine of not more than $500.00.  

(c) 	
Following the issuance of a civil fine citation under subsection (b) of this section, a person failing to leave the premises within a reasonable time after the request of a police officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  


(Code 1992, § 12-99; Ord. No. 183, § 1(20), 8-21-1972) 
State Law reference— Certain loiterers defined as disorderly persons, MCL 750.167. 
Sec. 28-90. - Being under influence of controlled substance or unlawful drug in public. 
(a) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of any controlled substance or unlawful drug in any public place. For the purposes of this section a "controlled substance" is deemed to be any narcotic, opiate, barbiturate, amphetamine, methamphetamine, hallucinogen, D-Lysergic acid, mescaline, marijuana (Cannabis sativa), cocaine, or any derivative of the above indicated substances, whether synthetic or not, or any other controlled substance which is defined as such by the Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq.). 

(b) 	
Except as otherwise permitted by law, no person shall intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any substance releasing vapors for the purpose of causing euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dull senses. No person shall possess, buy or use any such substance for the purpose of violating or aiding or abetting another to violate this section.  


(Ord. No. 10-66, § 1(12-100), 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 28-91. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a) 	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Controlled substance means all substances as defined under the Public Health Code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.). 
Drug paraphernalia or such devices means items primarily designed or adapted for use with a controlled substance; all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(b) 	
It shall be a civil infraction to use, or possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia or such devices fashioned to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law.  

(c) 	
It shall be civil infraction to deliver, sell, process with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia or such devices knowing that it will used to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state law.  

(d) 	
Civil forfeiture. Any drug paraphernalia or devices used, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent to sell, in violation of this section, shall be seized and forfeited and may be destroyed after 60 days.  

(a) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place where liquor or alcohol is sold illegally. 

(b) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, congregate or be found in any room or place where liquor or alcohol is sold illegally.  


(Ord. No. 10-68, § 1(12-101), 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 28-92. - Keeping or frequenting a place used for illegal sale of liquor or alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 10-69, § 1(12-102), 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 28-93. - Restrictions on sale, consumption, or possession of alcoholic beverages in public places. 
(a) 	
It shall be unlawful for a person to sell or consume alcoholic beverages or possess any uncapped, open container of any alcoholic liquor, as that term is defined in the Michigan liquor control code of 1998, Public Act No. 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.), in the public streets, public places, parks, alleys, sidewalks, township-owned parking facilities or in any other place open to the general public, including any store or establishment doing business with the public not licensed to serve alcoholic beverages or parking lots thereof.  

(b) 
Exceptions. 

(1) 	
Alcoholic liquor may be sold, possessed and/or consumed during the period of a special license with the specific approval and in conformance with the conditions of such approval and the condition of a special license granted by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.  

(2) 	
This section does not prohibit a person less than 21 years of age from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed pursuant to state law by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, or by an agent of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption.  

(3) 	
The consumption by a person who is less than 21 years of age of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this section. 

(4) 	
This section does not apply to a person who is less than 21 years of age who participates in either or both of the following:  

a. 	
An undercover operation in which the person who is less than 21 years of age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior written approval of the Eaton County Sheriff's Office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.  

b. 	
An undercover operation in which the person who is less than 21 years of age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, or the Eaton County Sheriff's Office as part of an enforcement action. The state police, the commission, or the Eaton County Sheriff's Office shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a person who is less than 21 of age for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of an initial violation of this section. 



(c) 
Penalty. 

(1) 
A person who is less than 21 years of age convicted of violating this section:  

a. 	
Shall be fined not more than $100.00 for a first violation, not more than $200.00 for a second violation, and not more than $300.00 for a third violation;  

b. 	
May be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of the public health code, Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.6107), and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his own expense; and 

c. 	
Shall be subject to license sanctions as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.319).  



(2) 	
Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section, violation of this section is a misdemeanor subject to imprisonment and fine as established in section 1-7(b).  


(Ord. No. 10-63, § 1(12-103), 4-16-2012) 
Sec. 28-94. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-95 , § III, adopted Jan. 3, 2017, repealed § 28-94, which pertained to accosting and derived from Ord. No. 12-71, § 1, 1-7-2013. 
Sec. 28-95. - Curfew for minors. 
(a) 	
No minor under the age of 12 years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child.  

(b) 	
A minor under the age of 16 years shall not loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 12 midnight and 6 a.m., subject to the exceptions set forth in subsection (c) hereof.  

(c) 
Exceptions. The following shall constitute valid exceptions to subsection (b) above: 

(1) 	
Where the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian or some adult over 21 years of age delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor child for a designated period of time and for a specific purpose within a specified area.  

(2) 	
Where the minor is on the sidewalk of his or her residence, or on the sidewalk of either next door neighbor; however, neighbor complaints or objections may invalidate this portion of this exception if the minor is on the neighbor's sidewalk.  

(3) 	
Where the minor is returning home by a direct route from and within 30 minutes of the termination of a school activity or an activity of a religious organization or other volunteer association. 

(4) 	
Where the minor is a resident of another jurisdiction or a resident of the township and is in a motor vehicle with parental consent and is traveling through the township.  

(5) 
Operating a motor vehicle within the scope of his or her license.  

(6) 	
Where the minor is engaged in the course of lawful employment or for a period of 30 minutes before or after work, while traveling a direct route between such place of employment and his or her residence.  

(c) 	
Aiding and abetting. Any person of the age of 16 years or over assisting, aiding, abetting, allowing, permitting or encouraging any minor under the age of 16 years to violate the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine as set by township resolution. 

(d) 
Minor arrest; notice to parent/guardian and court; subsequent offense.  

(1) 	
Law enforcement officers are vested with authority to arrest, without warrant, any minor within his or her presence violating any provision of this section. If such arrest is the minor's first offense, the officer shall transport the minor to his or her residence and place the minor in the charge of the minor's parent or legal guardian. If the minor's parent or legal guardian is not on the premises, the minor may be left in the care and charge of a family member over the age of 18 years. If no such parent, legal guardian, or person having custody of such minor or member 

of the family over 18 years of age is present when the minor is returned, the officer shall make disposition as directed by a judge or agent of the county juvenile court.  

(2) 	
Whenever any minor is arrested under this section, written notice shall be given to the parent, legal guardian or other person having legal care or custody of such minor. Notice will be served by personal service, or by leaving a copy thereof at his or her place of residence and informing any person upon the premises of suitable age and understanding of the contents thereof. Such notice shall be in writing. 

(3) 	
When any minor is arrested for violating this section, the arresting officer shall report, in writing, to the prosecutor and judge of the probate/juvenile court of the county. Said report will include the name of such minor, the dates of the offense and arrest and the name of the person upon whom the notice provided for in this section was served. A copy of the report will be on file at the sheriff's office.  

(4) 	
Whenever a minor is arrested a second time or for a subsequent violation of this section, the arresting officer shall seek a petition against such minor in the probate/juvenile court. In addition; the arresting officer may seek a warrant for any parent, legal guardian or other person having legal custody of such minor who permitted, aided or abetted the minor to violate this section. 

(5) 	
No parent or legal guardian of any minor shall fail to exercise reasonable control over such minor, which failure results in the minor committing any violation of this section, criminal act, or allow or encourage any minor to commit any criminal act. Upon second or subsequent violation of this section, proof that a minor was upon or in any public street, highway, alley, park, vacant lot or other unsupervised public place in violation of this section shall be prima-facie evidence.  


(Ord. No. 13-72, § 1, 2-18-2013) 
Sec. 28-96. -Prowling; present on property of another in the nighttime without permission; window peeping; trespass. 
Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor subject to imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by a fine of not more $250.00, or both.  
It shall be unlawful for a person to do any of the following:  
(1) 	
Prowl about the premises of another, in the nighttime, without authority or permission of the owner of such premises or without authority or permission of the lawful occupants of the premises or an agent of the lawful occupants.  

(2) 	
While standing, kneeling or prowling, or unauthorized entry upon the property of another, day or nighttime, without authority or permission of the owner of such premises or without authority or permission of the lawful occupants, looks into or peeps in the windows or doors of any inhabited building, house, dwelling or structure located thereon.  

(3) 	
Willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the owner, occupant or agent of either, or any person being upon the lands or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner, occupant or agent of either, who, without lawful authority, neglects or refuses to depart therefrom.  


(Ord. No. 13-73, § 1, 2-18-2013) 
Sec. 28-97. - Unlawful expectoration, urination and defecation. 
Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor subject to imprisonment and a fine as established in section 1-6.1(b). 
Except where restroom facilities are used for such purposes, it shall be unlawful for a person to expectorate, urinate or defecate: 
(1) 	
While present upon, or in any: public property, street, sidewalk, parking lot/structure, alley, park, public transportation, or any other place open to the public. 

(2) 
While present upon, or in any private property while such act is open to the public view. 

(3) 	
While present upon, or in any private property of another without authority or permission of the owner of such premises or without authority or permission of the lawful occupants.  


(Ord. No. 13-74, § 1, 2-18-2013) 
Secs. 28-98—28-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
Sec. 28-107. - Indecent or obscene conduct. 

It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place.  
(Code 1992, § 12-121; Ord. No. 183, § 1(9), 8-21-1972) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(f). 

Sec. 28-108. - Indecent exposure. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any open or indecent exposure of his person or of the person of another. 
(Code 1992, § 12-122; Ord. No. 183, § 1(12), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a. 
Sec. 28-109. - Prostitution and solicitation. 
(a) 
It shall be unlawful to:  

(1) 	
Engage, offer to engage or solicit the services of a person for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or immoral conduct, by the payment in money or other forms of consideration; 

(2) 	
Offer to engage in, engage in, accost, solicit or invite another person by words, gestures or any other means, to commit any act of prostitution or engage in any other lewd or immoral conduct, by the payment in money or other forms of consideration;  

(3) 	
Transport any person to any place, structure, house, building, parking lot or different location, for the purpose of enabling the person transported to engage in an act of prostitution or in any other lewd or immoral conduct;  

(4) 	
Walk, stroll or loiter about for prostitution, lewd or immoral purposes or for the purposes of enticing others to commit prostitution, lewd or immoral conduct;  

(5) 	
Knowingly attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant of any place where prostitution or other lewd or immoral conduct is permitted or conducted;  

(6) 	
Knowingly receive or admit or offer to receive or admit any person into any place, structure, house, building or vehicle for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or immoral conduct, or who shall knowingly permit any person to remain in any such place for any such purpose;  

(7) 	
Knowingly let or lease any place, structure, house, building or vehicle for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or immoral conduct, or knowingly permit said lessee to use the same for such purpose, or knowingly receive any rent or other consideration for any place, structure, house, building or vehicle for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or immoral conduct; and 

(8) 	
Knowingly aid, assist or abet another to commit, or offer to commit, any act prohibited in this section. 

(b) 
This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer while in the performance of his duties.  

(c) 	
Law enforcement officers are authorized to seize any vehicle or other personal property used for the purposes of soliciting or committing any acts prohibited by this section pursuant to the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.3801 et seq.). The township is authorized at its discretion to release any vehicle which has been seized to the owner upon payment of a sum to be determined by the township board. Further, the township attorney is authorized to maintain an action to abate a nuisance and to have the vehicle or property forfeited under the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.3801 et seq.), and to name the township official as the plaintiff pursuant to MCL 600.3805.  


(Code 1992, § 12-123; Ord. No. 183, § 1(23), (25), 8-21-1972; Ord. No. 10-65, § 1(12-123), 4­16-2012) 
State Law reference— Common prostitute deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(b); prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq. 
Sec. 28-110. - Gambling prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to deal in, play or engage in gambling such as faro, roulette, dice, cards or other device or game of chance, hazard or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player or otherwise for the purpose of gambling for money or other valuable thing or to attend or be found frequenting any place where gambling is permitted or allowed or is taking place.  
(Code 1992, § 12-124; Ord. No. 183, § 1(23), 8-21-1972; Ord. No. 17-101 , § I, 12-4-2017) 
State Law reference— Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Sec. 28-111. - Keeping, occupying building for gambling; using gambling apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township or his agent or employee to directly or indirectly keep or occupy or assist in keeping or occupying any common gambling house or any building or place where gaming is permitted or suffered; to suffer or permit on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him any apparatus used for gaming or gambling or to use such apparatus for gaming or gambling in any place within the township.  
(Code 1992, § 12-125; Ord. No. 183, § 1(26), 8-21-1972) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.302. 
Sec. 28-112. - Keeping, maintaining gaming room, table for hire. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township for hire, gain or reward to keep or maintain a gaming room, a gaming table or any game of skill or chance or partly of skill and partly of chance for gaming or to knowingly suffer a gaming room, gaming table or any such game to be kept, maintained or played on any premises occupied or controlled by him.  (Code 1992, § 12-126; Ord. No. 183, § 1(26), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.303. 
Sec. 28-113. - Keeping, maintaining building, room for registering bets, selling pools. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township or his agent or employee to directly or indirectly keep, maintain, operate or occupy any building or room or any part thereof or any place with apparatus, books or any device for registering bets or buying or selling pools upon the result of a game, competition, political competition, appointment, election or any purported event of like character. It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to register bets, buy or sell pools, to be concerned in buying or selling pools or to knowingly permit any grounds or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him to be used for any of such purposes.  (Code 1992, § 12-127; Ord. No. 183, § 1(26), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.304. 
Sec. 28-114. - Frequenting or attending gaming places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the township to knowingly attend or frequent any place where gaming or gambling is suffered or permitted or any place operated or occupied as a common gaming or gambling house or room.  (Code 1992, § 12-128; Ord. No. 183, § 1(25), 8-21-1972) State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.309. 
Sec. 28-115. - Charitable gaming exception. 
Charitable gaming events conducted by organizations and suppliers qualified and licensed to do so in accordance with state law are permitted to operate within the township. Copies of the applicable current state issued licenses authorizing the organization and supplier to conduct charitable gaming events shall be filed with the township zoning administrator prior to the date of event.  
(Ord. No. 17-101 , § I, 12-4-2017) 
Secs. 28-116—28-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
Sec. 28-142. - Definitions. 

All words and phrases used in this article shall be construed and have the same meaning as those words and phrases defined in part 419 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.41901 et seq.). 
(Code 1992, § 12-151; Ord. No. 250, § I, 9-11-1975; Ord. No. 03-11, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 28-143. - Authority. 
This article is enacted under the authority of part 419 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.41901 et seq.), and pursuant to the recommendations of the special committee established in accordance with such statute following a public hearing.  
(Code 1992, § 12-152; Ord. No. 250, § III, 9-11-1975; Ord. No. 03-11, 10-6-2003) 
Sec. 28-144. - Areas closed to hunting. 
(a) 	
Hunting with, or the discharge of, a firearm other than a shotgun loaded with shot not larger than No. 2, is unlawful in the following areas in the township:  

(1) 	
That portion of the township located east of Interstate Highway 96 (I-96), except Section 11, T4N, R3W, which is bounded on the north by Willow Highway, on the south by Saginaw Highway, on the east by Elmwood Road, and on the west by Creyts Road;  

(2) 	
Those areas of Sections 21, 22, 27 and 28 bounded on the north by St. Joseph Highway, on the south by Millett Highway, on the east by Creyts Road, and on the west by I-96; 


except at target ranges recognized and approved by the township board.  
(b) 	
Hunting with, or the discharge of, any firearm is unlawful within 150 yards of properties belonging to and under the control of the Waverly school district in the township, described as the administration building site located in the SW¼ of Section 25, T4N, R3W; the Campus and Colt sites located in Sections 13 and 14, T4N, R3W; the Elmwood site located in Section 11, T4N, R3W; and the Bretton Woods site located in Section 12, T4N, R3W.  

(c) 	
Hunting with, or the discharge of, a firearm is unlawful in all of Section 11, T4N, R3W, bounded on the north by Willow Highway, on the south by Saginaw Highway, on the east by Elmwood Road, and on the west by Creyts Road in the township. 

(d) 	
Hunting with, or the discharge of, a rifle is unlawful in that portion of the township, described as follows: beginning at a point where St. Joseph Highway intersects with I-96; thence east on St. Joseph Highway to Creyts Road; thence south on Creyts Road to Millett Highway; thence west on Millett Highway to I-96, thence north on I-96 to point of beginning.  


(Code 1992, § 12-153; Ord. No. 250, §§ I, III, IV, 9-11-1975) 
Sec. 28-145. - Leashed animals on public property. 
(a) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person while on public property, including public streets, public sidewalks, public trails, and public park property, within the township to bring, drive, lead or carry any dog or small animal or pet which is unleashed, or which is on a leash longer than six feet or capable of extending longer than six feet onto any public property in the township, unless a specific area is designated for unleashed dogs, small animals or pets. 

(b) 	
Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction and subject to fines as determined by resolution of the township board.  


(Ord. No. 10-60, § 1, 1-3-2012) 
Secs. 28-146—28-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES ON SCHOOL PROPERTY 
Sec. 28-174. - Damaging, destroying school property. 

No person shall damage, deface or destroy, or aid in the damage, destruction or defacement of any public, private or parochial school building, grounds, trees, shrubs, plants, fences, buses, equipment, appurtenances or fixtures of the school property.  (Code 1992, § 12-176; Ord. No. 154, § 1, 11-15-1971) State Law reference— Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 28-175. - Creating a disturbance. 
No person shall willfully or maliciously make or assist in making any noise, disturbances or improper diversions by which the peace, quietude or good order of any public, private or parochial school is disturbed. (Code 1992, § 12-177; Ord. No. 154, § 2, 11-15-1971) State Law reference— Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 28-176. - Indecent conduct. 
No person shall indulge in any indecent or obscene conduct in any building or on any grounds of a public, private or parochial school.  (Code 1992, § 12-178; Ord. No. 154, § 3, 11-15-1971; Ord. No. 03-11, 10-6-2003)  State Law reference— Disorderly persons, MCL 750.167. 
Sec. 28-177. - Unauthorized persons in school building. 
No person who is not a regularly enrolled student, teacher, parent or other employee, school supply salesman or any person engaged in legitimate school business or pursuits, shall enter and remain in any school building, whether public, private or parochial, in the township for any reason whatever, unless such person has received permission from the school principal or the principal's duly authorized representative to be in any such public, private or parochial school building. (Code 1992, § 12-179; Ord. No. 154, § 4, 11-15-1971; Ord. No. 03-11, 10-6-2003)  State Law reference— Trespass, MCL 750.552. 
Sec. 28-178. - Unauthorized entrance. 
(a) 	
No person shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of any public, private or parochial school, in the township without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the principal, or his designated agent. No person being upon such lands or premises may refuse or neglect to depart therefrom upon being requested to do so by the principal or his designated agent. Where signs at each school building entrance direct persons to any office or any place to obtain permission to enter 

and remain in such building, entry into the building by any person without complying with such directions shall be deemed prima facie violation of this section; provided, however that this requirement shall not apply in the case of students who are regularly enrolled and attending at such school, parents or guardians of such students, teachers or other employees.  

(b) 	
For the purpose of this section, the term "students who are regularly enrolled and attending" does not include students who are expelled or suspended from the public, private or parochial school.  


(Code 1992, § 12-181; Ord. No. 154, § 5, 11-15-1971) 
State Law reference— Trespass, MCL 750.552. 
Sec. 28-179. - Borrowing from students. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow or attempt to borrow any money or thing of value from any student in any public, private or parochial school or on any public, private or parochial school property in the township or during any time when any such student is going to or returning from any regularly scheduled session of any such school without first obtaining the written approval of the principal of such school or other person designated by the principal to issue such written approval.  
(Code 1992, § 12-182; Ord. No. 154, § 6, 11-15-1971) 
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
State Law reference— Authority to operate recreation areas and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq.; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq.  
Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Appropriate governmental entity means that agency of the state or that state municipal corporation administering or having jurisdiction over public park property. 
Authorized agent means that person who may be designated by the commission to act in its behalf; such person shall be vested with such authority as granted by the commission. 
Camping means the overnight lodging or sleeping of a person on the ground or in any other manner, or in any sleeping bag, tent, trailer-tent, trailer coach, vehicle camper, motor vehicle, boat or in any other conveyance erected, parked or placed on the premises or waters within any public park property.  
Commission means the parks, recreation and cemeteries commission of the township, which shall act in behalf and at the direction of the township board.  
Director means the township parks, recreation and cemeteries director, an agent of the township board. 
Public park property means all park lands, waters and property administered by or under the jurisdiction of the township board or located within the township and administered by or under the jurisdiction of an agency of the state or a state municipal corporation.  
Rules means the rules adopted by the commission applicable to all property administered by or under the jurisdiction of the township board and all amendments thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 13-1; Ord. No. 234.2, § 2, 2-15-1982) 
Sec. 30-2. - Public use. 
Any group or gathering of 25 or more persons may use certain areas within the public parks in the township to the exclusion of others by making application and being granted a permit by the township parks, recreation and cemeteries director or the authorized agent of the commission or, in the case of public parks not owned by the township, by the designated representative of the governmental entity owning such public park.  
(Code 1992, § 13-2; Ord. No. 234.2, § 3.1, 2-15-1982) 
Sec. 30-3. - Permits. 
(a) 	
Applications for permits for reserved park space shall be made upon forms to be furnished by the township parks, recreation and cemeteries department as approved by the commission.  

(b) 	
The commission or its authorized agent may, upon written application, grant specific use permits for special uses when in the opinion of the commission or its authorized agent special consideration is warranted. 

(c) 	
Application shall be made in advance of the time of the reservation request sufficient to allow at least 12 hours' posted notice of reservation of space, if such notice is deemed necessary by the commission or its authorized agent.  

(d) 	
If more applications for reserved space are received than spaces available, such applications shall be considered in chronological order received. 

(e) 	
Nothing contained in this section shall operate to exempt the users of reserved space from full compliance with this chapter and all rules of the commission relating to use of and conduct on township park property. 


(Code 1992, § 13-3; Ord. No. 234.2, § 3.2, 2-15-1982) 
Sec. 30-4. - Fees and charges. 
(a) 	
Fees and charges may be assessed by the commission for the use of any facility, land, area or program on township park property.  

(b) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any facility, land or area for which a fee or charge has been established by the commission or an agency of a governmental entity owning park land within the township without payment of such fee or charge.  

(c) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person using a public park or any portion thereof to charge a fee, accept a donation, or charge admission in connection with the use of such public park, or conduct any raffle (including any raffle authorized by proper state authorities) without written authorization from the commission or its authorized agent.  



(Code 1992, § 13-4; Ord. No. 234.2, § 3.3, 2-15-1982) 
Sec. 30-5. - Hours. 
No person or vehicle shall remain upon public park property between posted closing times and sunrise excepting at designated fishing sites, camp areas and other special use areas; provided, however, that such hours may be extended by permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of park lands or waters which have been designated as closed to public use or entry. 
(Code 1992, § 13-5; Ord. No. 234.2, § 3.4, 2-15-1982) 
State Law reference— Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 30-6. - Protection of property. 
Destruction of buildings, markers, monuments and other properties shall be prohibited, and no person shall, on property within a public park in the township: 
(1) 	
Willfully destroy, deface, alter, change or remove any monument, stone marker, benchmark, stake, post or blaze marking or designating any boundary line, survey line or reference point.  

(2) 	
Cut, break, mark upon or otherwise injure any building, equipment, bridge, drain, wall, fountain, lamppost, fence, gate, hedge or other structure. 

(3) 	
Deface, destroy, or remove any placard, notice or sign, whether permanent or temporary, posted or exhibited within or upon park property by the commission or its authorized agent.  

(4) 	
Appropriate, excavate, injure or destroy any historical or prehistorical ruin or any object of antiquity, without permission of the commission or its authorized agent or an agent of the governmental entity owning the public park. 


(Code 1992, § 13-6; Ord. No. 234.2, § 4.1, 2-15-1982) 
State Law reference— Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 30-7. - Protection of environment. 
Destruction of plant life and natural surroundings shall be prohibited, and no person within a public park in the township shall: 
(1) 	
Cut, remove or destroy any tree, sapling, seedling, bush or shrub, whether alive or dead, or chip, blaze, box, girdle, trim or otherwise deface or injure any tree or shrub or break or remove any branch, foliage, flower or any tree or shrub, or pick, gather, uproot, remove or destroy any flower, plant or grass, without written permission of the commission or its authorized agent or an agent of the governmental entity owning the public park.  

(2) 	
Remove or cause to be removed any sod, earth, humus, peat, boulders, gravel or sand, without written permission of the commission or its authorized agent or an agent of the governmental entity owning the public park. 


(Code 1992, § 13-7; Ord. No. 234.2, § 4.2, 2-15-1982) 
State Law reference— Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 30-8. - Fire control. 
The following rules shall apply to fires on property within a public park in the township:  
(1) 	
No person shall willfully set or cause to be set on fire any tree, woodland, brushland, grassland or meadow within or upon the park property.  

(2) 	
No person shall build any fire except within the fireplaces, receptacles or open spaces approved and designated by the commission or appropriate governmental entity for such purpose.  

(3) 	
No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigars, cigarettes, tobacco paper or other inflammable materials within or upon any park property.  

(4) 	
Fires shall not be left unattended. All fires shall be extinguished upon leaving the immediate vicinity. 


(Code 1992, § 13-8; Ord. No. 234.2, § 4.3, 2-15-1982) 
State Law reference— Open burning of leaves and grass clippings, MCL 324.11522; prevention and suppression of forest fires, MCL 324.51501 et seq.; arson and burning, MCL 
750.71 et seq. 
Sec. 30-9. - Protection of wildlife. 
(a) 
It shall be unlawful for any person while within a public park located within the township to: 

(1) 
Cause any animal or fowl to run at large.  

(2) 	
Bring, drive or lead any animal onto public park property; excepting that horses and other beasts of burden and draft animals may be ridden by persons in charge thereof or driven before a vehicle attached thereto, on such portions of park property as may be designated for riding or driving by the commission or appropriate governmental entity.  

(3) 	
Bring, drive, lead or carry any dog or other small animal or pet which is unleashed, or upon a leash more than six feet in length, upon public park property, except for animals used in designated waterfowl hunting, dog shows or field trial areas. All animals, large or small, must be under the immediate control of a competent person at all times. 

(4) 	
Suffer a dog or pet to enter any public building or to be upon any designated beach, except a trained and working leader or hearing dog.  

(5) 
Torture, ill-treat or neglect any animal or fowl. 

(6) 	
No person shall hunt, trap, catch, wound, kill, treat cruelly, attempt to trap, catch, wound or kill any bird or animal; molest or rob any nest of any bird or any lair, den or burrow of any animal in or upon any public park, land or waters; provided, however, the commission or appropriate governmental entity may from time to time designate limited areas in which hunting will be allowed. 

a. 	
All hunting blinds of any sort or construction shall have attached thereto the name and address of the owner or person responsible therefor, in letters not less than two inches in height. All such blinds shall be removed by the owner or person responsible therefor within five days after the close of the hunting season; provided further, however, fishing will be permitted within or upon public park property in accordance with the laws of the state and the rules of the state department of natural resources in such areas designated for such purposes. 

b. 	
The commission or its authorized representative shall have the right and power, upon the posting of notice, to:  

1. 
Close to all fishing any pond located upon public park property for any length of time;  


2. 	
Limit the number of fish which may be taken from ponds located upon the public park property;  

3. 	
Limit the hours during any day during which fishing will be permitted at any pond located upon public park property;  

4. 	
Set an appropriate age limit for persons who may fish at any pond located upon public park property.  



c. 	
The commission or its authorized representative may grant special fishing permits to any person upon application therefor.  

d. 	
All ice shanties, houses, structures and shelters placed or used on ice must be identified on all sides with the owner's name and address in waterproof letters not less than two inches high and must be removed before ice becomes unsafe and, in any event, shall be removed from public park property, water, ice or land, no later than March 7 of each year. It shall be unlawful to violate any of the laws of the state relating to hunting and/or fishing while on public park property.  



(b) 	
All game, animals, fowl, birds, fish and other aquatic life hunted, killed, taken or destroyed, bought, sold, bartered or had in possession, contrary to any of the provisions hereof, shall be and the same are declared to be contraband and the same shall be turned over to the state department of natural resources for disposal; provided further, that any weapon or object carried or used by any person in violation of these rules shall be subject to seizure by the commission or its agents and disposed of according to law.  


(Code 1992, § 13-9; Ord. No. 234.2, § 5, 2-15-1982) 
State Law reference— Wildlife, MCL 324.40101 et seq.; cruelty to animals, MCL 750.49 et seq. 
Sec. 30-10. - Swimming, bathing and wading. 
No person within a public park in the township shall:  
(1) 	
Swim, bathe or wade between sunset and sunrise, in any of the watercourses, lakes, ponds, or sloughs located within or upon the properties administered by or under the jurisdiction of the township board.  

(2) 	
Swim, bathe, or wade except at such times and places as may be provided or designated for such purpose. 


(Code 1992, § 13-10; Ord. No. 234.2, § 6.1, 2-15-1982) 
Sec. 30-11. - Boating. 
No person shall bring into, use or navigate any boat, yacht, canoe, raft or other watercraft upon any watercourse, lagoon, lake, pond or slough located within or upon the public park properties except at such time or places as may be provided or designated for such purpose. All watercraft shall comply with and be used in compliance with subchapter 5 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.80101 et seq.) and such regulations as may be adopted under the authority of the Act. 
(Code 1992, § 13-11; Ord. No. 234.2, § 7.1, 2-15-1982) 
Sec. 30-12. - Camping. 
It shall be unlawful to camp except in such areas as may be provided and designated for such purposes. No person shall camp without written permit issued by the commission or its authorized agent, or by the appropriate governmental entity.  
(Code 1992, § 13-12; Ord. No. 234.2, § 8.3, 2-15-1982) 
Sec. 30-13. - Operation of motor vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful within a public park in the township for any person to:  
(1) 	
Operate a motor-driven vehicle of any kind or nature except on roads or designated parking areas.  

(2) 	
Operate any motor-driven sled, toboggan or snowmobile on any public park property except where permitted by posted notice. 

(3) 	
Drive any vehicle upon public park property while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic, drug, barbital or any derivative of barbital.  

(4) 	
Drive any vehicle upon public park property while his ability to do so has been impaired by the use of intoxicating liquor or by the use of drugs or narcotics. 

(5) 	
Operate any motor vehicle upon public park property while his license to so operate has been suspended or revoked by the state.  

(6) 	
Operate any vehicle upon public park property contrary to posted traffic signs, symbols, rules or regulations or marked roadways.  

(7) 	
Operate any motor vehicle in any manner upon public park property which results in excessive noise or disturbs the peace, quiet or tranquility of the area. 

(8) 	
Leave, or cause to be left, any vehicle upon public park property between the posted park closing time and 9:00 a.m. excepting at designated fishing sites, camp areas and other special use areas.  

(9) 	
Continuously cruise in any motor-driven vehicle in, through and around campgrounds or through or on any park property with the intent of attracting or distracting persons or visitors.  


(Code 1992, § 13-13; Ord. No. 234.2, § 9.4, 2-15-1982) 
State Law reference— Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq. 
Sec. 30-14. - Stopping, standing, parking vehicles. 
(a) 	
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any parking area in such manner as to form an obstruction to traffic thereon. 

(b) 
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any area which is not designated as a parking area. 

(c) 	
It shall be unlawful to drive or park any motor vehicle in or upon public park property which is used for recreational purposes, unless otherwise allowed by these rules.  


(Code 1992, § 13-14; Ord. No. 234.2, § 9.1, 2-15-1982) 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, MCL 257.672 et seq. 
Sec. 30-15. - Use of parking lots. 
(a) 	
Designated parking areas shall be used only for the purpose of parking, driving to and from parking spaces and loading or unloading vehicles. Where lines have been placed designating individual parking spaces, each vehicle must be parked within an individual space and it shall be unlawful for any vehicle to intrude into two or more designated parking spaces. It shall be unlawful for any person to be part of a gathering or congregation of persons not for the purposes listed in this subsection which takes place on or within 20 feet of any designated parking area or travelled roadway or which obstructs or impedes the flow of vehicles or the line of sight of persons driving vehicles lawfully on designated parking areas or travelled roadways.  

(b) 	
The commission or its authorized representative may use designated parking areas for purposes other than those prescribed in the section 30-14 and may authorize any person to use designated parking areas for purposes other than those prescribed in section 30-14. 


(Code 1992, § 13-15; Ord. No. 234.2, § 9.2, 2-15-1982) 
State Law reference— Stopping, standing and parking, MCL 257.672 et seq. 
Sec. 30-16. - Operation of bicycles. 
(a) 	
Bicycles shall be operated as closely to the right-hand curb or right-hand side of the path, trail or roadway as conditions will permit and not more than two bicycles shall be operated abreast.  

(b) 	
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle, upon any path, trail, or roadway, to carry any person upon the handlebar or frame of any bicycle, or for any person to so ride upon such bicycle.  

(c) 	
Bicycles may be operated upon such paths, trails, or roadways as may be posted allowing such use; provided however, no such use shall be allowed between sunset and sunrise.  


(Code 1992, § 13-16; Ord. No. 234.2, § 9.5, 2-15-1982) 
State Law reference— Operation of bicycles, MCL 257.656 et seq. 
Sec. 30-17. - Horses. 
(a) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead or cause or suffer a horse to be upon any public park property except on specifically designated and posted areas or bridle paths or by permit on field trial areas.  

(b) 	
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse in a careless, negligent or reckless manner so as to create a nuisance or to endanger the life, property or person of the rider or others on any public park lands.  

(c) 	
The driver of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any person riding a horse on marked bridle paths where such bridle paths cross streets or roadways.  


(Code 1992, § 13-17; Ord. No. 234.2, § 9.3, 2-15-1982) 
Sec. 30-18. - Peddling and soliciting in township parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute handbills or other advertising material or to post unauthorized signs on any lands, water, structures, or property in a public park or to use such lands, water, structures, or property unless first authorized in writing by the commission or its authorized agent or the representative of the appropriate government entity.  
(Code 1992, § 13-19; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-19. - Unlawful obstruction. 
No private person shall by force, threats, intimidations, unlawful fencing, enclosing, or by any other means, prevent or obstruct any person from entering, leaving, or making full use of any public park property.  
(Code 1992, § 13-20; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-20. - Hindering or impersonating employees. 
(a) 	
No person shall interfere with, hinder, or fail to obey any lawful command of a park ranger, employee, or agent of the township who are performing their official duties.  

(b) 
No person shall impersonate any member of the park ranger force for any reason whatsoever.  


(Code 1992, § 13-21; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-21. - Alcoholic liquors and drugs. 
No person shall have in their possession any alcoholic liquors while in or upon public park property except by written permit. No person shall sell, use, or have in their possession any drug, narcotic or controlled substance for which the sale, use or possession of, is prohibited by state law.  
(Code 1992, § 13-22; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-22. -Skating and coasting. 
(a) 	
No person shall skate, sled, walk, or go upon any ice or snowshoe or ski except at such times and upon such places as may be designated or maintained thereof.  

(b) 	
No person shall within or upon public park property coast with handsleds, bobs, carts or other vehicles on wheels, or runners, except at such times and upon such places as may be designated or maintained therefor. 


(Code 1992, § 13-23; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-23. - Balloons, airplanes and parachutes. 
No person shall make any ascent in any balloon or airplane or any descent in or from any balloon or airplane or parachute on any public park lands or waters without first having written permission from the commission or its authorized agent or an appropriate government entity. 
(Code 1992, § 13-24; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 5-17-1993) 
Sec. 30-24. - Public exhibition. 
No person shall exhibit any machine, show, or animal or indulge in any acrobatic exhibitions in or upon any public park property. Nor shall any person carry on any performance or do anything whatsoever which shall cause persons to congregate so as to interfere with the proper use of such property by the general public or to obstruct the passage of vehicles or persons without first having obtained written permission from the commission, its authorized agent, or an appropriate governmental entity.  
(Code 1992, § 13-25; Ord. No. 93-4, § 1, 5-17-1993) 
Chapter 32 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
Editor's note— Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) , repealed ch. 32, arts. I—IV, §§ 32-1—32-4, 32-23—32-27, 32­58—32-67, 32-93—32-109, 32-134—32-142, in its entirety; and enacted a new ch. 32 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 32 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1992, §§ 15-4, 15­11—15-15, 15-21—15-38, 15-41—15-50, 15-61—15-69; Ord. No. 03-15, adopted March 1, 2004; Ord. No. 05-22, § 1, adopted October 17, 2005; Ord. No. 05-24, adopted December 5, 2005; Ord. No. 06-26, adopted April 3, 2006 and Ord. No. 06-32, § 1, adopted October 2, 2006. 
State Law reference— Highway advertising act, MCL 252.301 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 32-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Charter Township of Delta Sign Ordinance."  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-2. - Purpose. 
This article is intended to apply reasonable regulations concerning the use of signs and outdoor advertising structures, in order to achieve the following objectives:  
(1) 	
Prevent excessive visual clutter and degradation of the visual environment in the township, which is likely to occur in the absence of reasonable regulations regarding the use of signs.  

(2) 	
Provide adequate opportunity for various types of land uses to identify their location, the nature of the use and manage the use of signs as a means of communication to the general public. 

(3) 	
To ensure that the size, design, type and placement of signs does not conflict with safe and efficient movement of vehicular traffic in the township. 

(4) 	
To ensure that signs and sign structures are designed, constructed, installed, operated, and maintained so as not to constitute a safety hazard.  

(5) 	
To protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the township and its residents.  

(6) 	
To provide opportunities for the public to express freedom of speech while not regulating the message displayed on the sign.  

(7) 
To encourage signs that will facilitate economic development in the community. 

(8) 
To enhance the protection of property values. 


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-3. - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Act No. 359 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1947 (MCL 42.1 et seq.), as amended. 
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-4. - Substitution. 
Any sign that can be displayed under the provisions of this chapter may contain a non-commercial message.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-5. - Validity and severability. 
(a) 	
Validity. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this chapter to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in said ruling.  

(b) 	
Severability. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular parcel, sign or sign structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, sign or sign structure not specifically included in said ruling. 


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-6. - Conflict with other laws. 
Where any condition imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the use of any parcel, sign, or sign structure is either more restrictive or less restrictive than any comparable condition imposed by any other provision of this chapter or by the provision of any ordinance adopted under any other law, the provision which is more restrictive or which imposes a higher standard or requirement shall govern.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-7. - Effective date. 
The ordinance, from which this chapter is derived, shall become effective seven days from the date of final publication. 
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-8. - Repeal of prior ordinance. 
The Delta Charter Township Sign Ordinance, effective February 21, 2000, and all amendments thereto, and any prior sign ordinance of the township are hereby repealed effective coincident with the effective date of the ordinance, from which this chapter is derived. The repeal of said ordinance shall not have the effect of releasing or relinquishing any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under said ordinance, or any part thereof, and such ordinance shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture or liability. 
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
Sec. 32-9. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Abandoned sign means a sign that no longer correctly advertises or directs a person to a bona fide business, person, goods, product, activity or service because of abandonment of use and vacation of property for a period of 12 months or longer. 
Administrator means an individual or individuals appointed by the township manager charged with administering and enforcing this article.  
Air dancer sign means an inflatable sign intended to draw attention by movement of air through the inflated core, also known as a sock sign (Figure 1).  

Figure 1 Air Dancer Sign 
Awning/canopy sign means a sign that is part of or located on a canopy or awning that is attached to and projects from a building wall.  
Banners means:  
(1) 	
The term "banner" means a sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind (Figure 2).  

(2) 	
The term "banner" does not include national flags, flags of political subdivisions, symbolic flags of any institution or feather signs.  



Figure 2 Banner Sign 
Bench sign means a sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed anywhere outside a building.  
Billboard sign means a freestanding sign elevated by a single pole or pylons which generally advertises an establishment, service, merchandise, use, entertainment, activity, product or message which is not conducted, sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished upon the parcel or lot on which the sign is located, and additionally shall include those signs as regulated by the state pursuant to Public Act No. 2 of 2014, as amended.  
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns, walls, or any other supports, which is used for the purpose of housing, sheltering, storing, or enclosing persons, animals, or personal property, or carrying on business activities. This definition includes mobile homes, tents, sheds, garages, greenhouses, and other accessory structures.  
Business center/strip commercial means a single building containing two or more business establishments. Lodging uses with on-premises restaurants shall be included within this definition.  
Business complex means a land parcel containing two or more buildings, each containing one or more individual business establishments. 
Business establishment means a business operating independently of any other business on the same parcel or in the same building, separated from other businesses by walls, and with one or more doors that provide exclusive ingress and egress to that business.  
Commemorative sign means a sign, tablet or plaque commemorating or memorializing a person, event, structure or site.  
Commercial means a land use or activity involving the sale of goods and services for financial gain.  
Construction sign means a temporary sign related to a current construction activity on an active job site.  
Corner locations means those properties with frontage on two or more public streets.  
Directional sign, on-premises, means a sign whose primary purpose is to direct the movement or parking of vehicles within the premises. Examples of signs which are included in this definition include directional signs at driveway entries from the public road, signs directing the movement of traffic within a parking area or driveway, signs identifying barrier-free parking spaces, signs identifying rear access doors in a multi-business establishment, signs prohibiting parking in loading areas or signs identifying loading dock names or numbers at a product distribution facility. A sign intended to convey instructions and enhance traffic safety. Examples of instructional signs include designs with directories, signs providing directions and signs identifying on-site facilities. An instructional sign may include the name of the business and logo.  
Display area means the entire area within a circle, triangle or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits or writing, lighting, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed (Figure 3). Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign; except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than three feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. 
(1) 	
Exception 1. The display area of signs painted directly on building wall surfaces shall be that area within the circle, triangle or parallelogram enclosing the extreme limits of writing, letters or numbers.  

(2) 	
Exception 2. The area of an awning/canopy sign shall be measured as provided in the main body of this definition, and the sign shall be treated as if it were a wall sign attached to the same wall to which the awning or canopy is attached, for purposes of determining maximum allowed sign area. 



Figure 3 Display Area and Sign Height 
Electronic changeable message sign means a sign whose informational content can be changed or altered by means of electronically controlled electronic impulses.  
Embedded electronic message device means an accessory that is made part of a sign, sign face, or sign structure with a total area that is less than that of the sign face to which it is attached, and displays only static numbers, such as time, temperature, gas price information. Embedded electronic message device does not include electronic changeable message sign.  
Encroaching sign means a sign that projects beyond the private property line into and over public right-of-way or a sign that projects beyond a required setback line. 
Expressway business means a motel, hotel, service station or restaurant that lies 2,000 feet or less from an expressway on-ramp or off-ramp.  
Feather sign means a freestanding sign typically constructed of a shaft, driven in the ground or standing with supports, with an attached pennant that is vertically elongated and attached to the shaft (Figure 4). Also known as a feather flag. 

Figure 4 Feather Sign 
Fence sign means any type of permanent or temporary sign affixed to a fence or freestanding wall.  
Flag, business, means a flag displaying the name, insignia, emblem or logo of a profit-making entity. The term "business flag" does not include feather signs.  
Flag, public, means a flag displaying the name, insignia, emblem, or logo of any nation, state, municipality, educational institution, civic/religious/fraternal organization or branch of the U.S. military.  
Freestanding sign means a sign structurally separated from a building, supported by one or more posts or braces or attached directly to the ground or a standard, including but not limited to pole signs, ground signs, monument signs or post-mounted hanging signs. 
Footcandle means a measure of illumination on a surface that is one foot from a uniform source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot.  
Frontage means the side of the property facing a thoroughfare.  
Grade, average, means the arithmetic average of the lowest and highest grade elevations in an area within five feet of the sign structure.  
Grade, finished, means the lowest point of elevation between the sign structure and a line five feet of the structure.  
Grade, natural, means the elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before man-made alterations.  
Ground sign means a freestanding sign that is supported by one or more short uprights, a standard, or upon the ground (Figure 5).  

Figure 5 Ground Sign 
Height of sign means the maximum vertical distance from the uppermost extremity of a sign or sign support to the average grade at the base of the sign (Figure 3). 
Home occupation sign means any sign used for the purpose of advertising services in conjunction with a lawful home occupation.  
Human directional sign means a person advertising a business or service by holding or wearing a sign or dressed in a costume.  
Identification sign means a sign that provides identifying information, with or without the street address. 
Industrial park means a grouping of several industrial businesses on contiguous parcels, accessed by the same public or private street and sharing a common location identity.  
Inflatable sign means a tethered sign consisting of an envelope inflated with pressurized or heated air, or a lighter-than-air gas, and displayed for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention.  
Institutional sign means a sign established by a social, educational, religious, quasi-public or non­profit organization.  
Logo means an emblem, letter, character, trademark or symbol used to represent any firm, organization, entity or product.  
Marquee sign means a sign placed on a marquee over an entrance to a theater, museum, art gallery, hotel, motel, convention center or hall, exhibition hall or other similar use, that includes changeable copy that relates to the principal use on the premises and does not project horizontally beyond the marquee (Figure 6).  

Figure 6 Marquee Sign 
Menu board means a sign board on which a menu of food or services are posted or advertised for drive-in or drive-through businesses.  
Mural mean a painting or other work of art executed directly on a wall. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.  
Obsolete sign means a sign that no longer correctly advertises or directs a person to a bona fide business, person, goods, product, activity or service.  
Off-premises sign means a sign that advertises a business, product, service, event, person or subject that is not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which said sign is located.  
On-premises product display means an area on a property created to aesthetically display a manufacturer's product for advertisement or similar purpose.  
On-premises sign means a sign that advertises a business, product, service, event, person or subject which is located on the same premises as the business, product, service, event, person or subject being advertised. 
Pole sign means a sign having a sign face that is elevated above the ground by one or more uprights, pylons or poles (Figure 7).  

Figure 7 Pole Sign 
Political sign means a sign supporting or opposing a candidate, proposition or other measure at an election or a sign exhibiting free expression or an ideological opinion.  
Portable sign means a sign intended to be easily moved which is not attached to a building, structure, or the ground. Portable signs shall include, but are not limited to, trailer mounted signs, A-frame signs, sandwich board signs, etc. not including signs on a motor vehicle (Figure 8).  

Figure 8 Portable Signs  
Projecting sign means a sign attached to and projecting perpendicularly from a building wall, excluding awning/canopy signs, as defined herein. One face only shall be used for computation of the display area of a projecting sign (Figure 9).  

Figure 9 Projecting Sign 
Real estate sign means a sign announcing or advertising the availability of an improved or unimproved lot, parcel or building, or portion thereof, for sale, lease or rent.  
Roof sign means a sign that is erected, constructed and maintained upon or above the roof of a building, or parapet wall and that is wholly or partially supported by such building.  
Sandwich board sign means a temporary sign structure placed on the ground that consists of two back-to-back sign faces that are hinged together at the top and separated at the base a sufficient distance to solidly support the structure in an upright position (Figure 10).  

Searchlight means a powerful outdoor electric light with a concentrated beam that can be turned in the required direction.  
Semi-nudity means a state of dress in which opaque clothing fails to cover the genitals, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, vulva, or nipple and areola of the female breast.  
Setback, required, means the minimum required horizontal separation distance between a public or private road right-of-way or property line, to any part of a sign, including any aboveground portions of a sign that project beyond the point of attachment of the sign to the ground (Figures 11—12). 


Signs means and includes every individual announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface or space when erected or maintained out of doors in view of the general public for identification, advertisement or promotion of the interests of any person. This definition shall include billboard signs and signs painted directly on walls of structures. 
Specified anatomical area means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.  
Specified sexual activity means the fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast.  
Standard means the base of a ground or monument sign (Figure 5).  
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground.  
Supports and uprights mean those members constructed of wood or metal posts or pylons, masonry, concrete or other similar materials necessary for the structural support of a pole sign. 
Temporary sign means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time (Figure 13). 

Figure 13 Temporary Sign  
Unified business development means a commercial development planned as a coordinated project in accordance with an approved signage plan.  
Uppermost building line means the uppermost horizontal line of a building formed by a roof, wall or parapet wall. 
Wall sign means a sign that is attached directly to a wall, mansard roof, roof overhang, parapet wall, or above a marquee of a building with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall or to the surface on which it is mounted, not projecting more than 12 inches from the wall, and which does not have any part of such sign or sign supports extending above the uppermost building line not including chimneys, flagpoles, electrical or mechanical equipment, TV antennas or any other similar equipment or extensions. This definition shall include writing, letters or numbers placed or painted directly on a building wall surface. 
Window sign means a sign attached to the inside or outside surface of a window on a building wall or door, or placed within six inches of the inside face of a window and intended to be viewed from outside the building. 
Wayfaring sign means a sign for a publicly or privately owned activity or attraction that is nationally or regionally known, that is of outstanding interest to the traveling public, and that is one of the following:  
(1) 
A natural phenomenon,  

(2) 
A scenic attraction,  

(3) 
A historic, educational, cultural, scientific, or religious site,  

(4) 
An outdoor recreational area.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
ARTICLE III. -ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sec. 32-10. - Administrator. 
This chapter shall be administered by an individual or individuals appointed by the township manager, or designee, who shall have the authority to issue sign permits and enforce this chapter. This individual will be referred to as the administrator in this chapter.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-11. - Sign permits. 
(a) 	
Sign permit required. No person shall erect, replace, apply, structurally alter or add to any sign without first obtaining a permit, unless exempt by this chapter. 

(b) 	
Application procedure. Application for a permit to erect, replace, apply, structurally alter or add to a sign shall be made to the administrator, by submission of the required forms, fees, exhibits and information by the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located, or by his agent or lessee. The application shall contain the following information:  

(1) 
The property owner's name, address and signature. 

(2) 
The applicant's name, address and signature. 

(3) 	
The address and permanent parcel number of the property on which the sign is or will be located.  

(4) 	
The identification of the type of sign (ground, pole, temporary, wall) and method of illumination (internal, external, ECM).  

(5) 
The name of business or name of premises to which the sign belongs or relates. 

(6) 
Plans drawn to an accurate, common scale, depicting the following: 

a. 	
The dimensions, display area and a scaled drawing of the proposed sign, in accordance with section 32-25(c). 

b. 	
For ground signs and pole signs, a site plan drawn to scale, accurately identifying the location of the proposed sign and setbacks from the nearest public or private road right-of­way and property line. If there are proposed grade changes, such as adding a berm, this shall be noted on the site plan.  

c. 	
For ground signs and pole signs, the height of the sign. 

d. 	
For wall signs, the height and width of the building wall or tenant-controlled portion of building wall to which the sign will be attached.  

e. 	
For ECM signs, the interval of the message changes and display area. 

f. 	
The luminance of externally illuminated signs at the sign face and the source of illumination for internally illuminated signs, measured in foot candles.  



(c) 	
Scope. Sign permits issued on the basis of plans and other information submitted as part of the permit application authorize only the design and construction set forth and described in the permit application, and no other design or construction. 

(d) 	
Conformity with plans required. The administrator shall not approve plans or issue sign permits for any sign that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 

(e) 	
Records maintained. The administrator shall maintain a record of all sign permits issued, and such record shall be open for public inspection.  

(f) 	
Permit fees. An application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by payment of a fee, in an amount established by resolution of the township board.  


(g) Permit not required for sign maintenance and change of message. 
(1) 	
Maintenance. Painting, repainting, cleaning, maintenance, repair and change of sign message or graphics shall not be considered erection or alteration of a sign that requires issuance of a sign permit, provided that no structural alterations or additions to the display area are made. Further, signs refaced with a covering, including, but not limited to, banners and/or coverings made of fabric or other material, shall be considered temporary and permitted for a duration of only 60 days, after which the covering shall be replaced with a permanent sign face. 

(2) 	
Re-lettering and rewording changeable copy. The changing of advertising copy or message, either electronically or manually, on an approved sign, such as a theater marquee, institutional bulletin board and similar approved signs which are specifically designed for use of changeable copy. 


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-12. - Violations and penalties. 
(a) 	
Compliance. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction as prescribed in section 1-7.  

(b) 	
Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the administrator, who is hereby designated as the authorized township official to issue municipal civil infraction citations, directing alleged violators to appear in court, or issue municipal civil infraction violation notices, directing alleged violators to appear at the township municipal violations bureau as provided by this Code.  

(a) 
Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to permit the continuance of legal nonconforming signs until they are removed or destroyed and to encourage overall compliance with this chapter. 

(b) 	
Legal nonconforming signs. Existing signs that were lawfully established in conformance with all applicable regulations in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be permitted to remain, although such sign may not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 

(c) 	
Illegal nonconforming signs. Signs installed without a sign permit shall be considered an illegal nonconforming sign and shall be either removed or made to conform to this chapter and a permit obtained. Nothing in this code shall be construed to give a nonconforming status to any sign erected without a sign permit.  

(d) 	
Change and compliance. Nonconforming signs shall not be structurally changed, altered or enlarged unless such change, alteration or enlargement diminishes the nonconformity or complies with the requirements of this Code.  

(e) 	
Normal maintenance. Legal nonconforming signs may be painted, cleaned, maintained, repaired and messages, graphics and face changes may be permitted if compliant with this code. 

(f) 	
Relocation. Nonconforming signs shall not be moved completely or in part to another location unless the sign at the new location conforms to this chapter. 

(g) 	
Rebuilding after damage. Any nonconforming sign, sign structure, frame or standard destroyed by any means shall not be restored or rebuilt if the damage exceeds 50 percent of present day replacement value considering a sign of equal and similar size, materials, construction and quality. The sign owner shall provide two estimates acceptable to the administrator for an official determination concerning restoration and repair eligibility.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-13. - Nonconforming signs. 
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-14. - Inspections, removal, maintenance and safety. 
(a) 	Inspection. Signs for which a permit is required may be inspected periodically by the administrator for compliance with this chapter and other township codes.  
(b) Removal of signs. 
(1) 	The administrator may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter. The costs incurred for sign removal shall be assessed to the owner on the property tax roll. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the Township in connection with the sign's removal.  
a. 	
The owner of a permanent sign for which a permit has been granted but does not conform to this chapter shall be given 30 days written notice to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance. If not removed by the owner or brought into compliance, the sign shall be removed by the township. Permanent signs not redeemed within 30 days of their removal may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the township. 

b. 	
The owner of permanent signs which are erected without a permit shall be given 14 days written notice to remove the signs or bring them into compliance. If not removed by the owner or brought into compliance, the sign shall be removed and impounded by the administrator or his/her designee. Permanent signs impounded by the township may be disposed of if not claimed and removed from the place of impoundment within 14 calendar days of the impoundment. 

c. 	
The administrator may remove an unpermitted temporary or portable sign immediately and without notice. Any sign removed by the administrator and/or designee, pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be held by the township for redemption by the owner. To redeem, the owner shall pay all costs incurred by the township for removal. Temporary 


signs not redeemed within 14 days of their removal may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the township.  
d. 	
The administrator may remove a permitted but nonconforming temporary or portable sign immediately and without notice. Any sign removed by the administrator and/or designee, pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be held by the township for redemption by the owner. To redeem, the owner shall pay all costs incurred by the township for removal. Temporary signs not redeemed within 14 days of their removal may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the township. 

e. 	
Any signs located within the road right-of-way may be removed by the administrator without warning. 


(2) 	
Signs that are no longer functional or are in disrepair for more than 60 days shall be removed, at the expense of the property owner, within 30 days following notice of non-compliance. The property owner shall be notified by U.S. mail. If the sign is not removed within 30 days, the administrator shall cause the sign to be removed and assess the cost of removal against the property.  

(3) 	
Upon demolition of buildings on commercial and office zoned properties, all non-conforming pole signs associated with the property and structure shall be removed. The sign removal shall include all sign display areas and the sign uprights, pylons or poles. Non-conforming pole signs associated with structures demolished prior to the effective date of the ordinance, from which this chapter is derived, shall be removed within 12 months of the effective date of the ordinance, from which this chapter is derived. 

(4) 	
Pole signs associated with commercial and office structures and sites that have been completely abandoned for more than 12 months shall be removed. Failure to remove a pole sign within 12 months of abandoning a property shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Pole signs determined by the administrator to be abandoned on the effective date of the ordinance, from which this chapter is derived, shall be removed within 12 months. The sign removal shall include all sign display areas and the sign uprights, pylons or poles.  

(c) 	
Obsolete signs. Obsolete signs are those on vacant, unoccupied premises or discontinued use. These signs shall be subject to the following: 

(1) 	
Full removal. The owner of a vacant or unoccupied property shall remove all graphics, text copy or other business or premises identification from the subject sign.  

(2) 	
Panel removal. In the event the sign is an internally illuminated sign or any sign with removable graphic display panels, the panels containing the sign graphic or message shall be removed and replaced by a blank and opaque panel containing no graphic or message.  

(3) 	
Violation after notice. Failure to remove the sign message from a vacant or unoccupied property within 45 days of official notice shall constitute a violation of this chapter.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-15. - Discontinued or new zoning districts. 
If any zoning district is discontinued in the zoning ordinance or if a new zoning district is created after the enactment of this chapter, signs in the affected areas shall be reviewed against the sign standards for the most restrictive residential or commercial zoning district, as applicable, until the sign code is amended.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGN BOARD OF APPEALS Sec. 32-16. - Established. 
A township sign board of appeals is hereby established.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-17. - Membership. 
(a) 	
Membership. The township sign board of appeals shall consist of seven members: a member of the township planning commission appointed by the planning commission, a member of the township board appointed by the township board, with terms of service concurrent with service on the planning commission and on the township board, and five additional members appointed by the township board from among electors residing within the township.  

(b) 
Term limits. Terms not exceeding three years. 

(c) 	
Alternates. The township board may appoint not more than two alternate members for the same term as regular members to the sign board of appeals. An alternate member may serve as a regular member of the sign board of appeals in the absence of a regular member if the regular member is absent from or will be unable to attend two or more consecutive meetings of the sign board of appeals or is absent from or will be unable to attend meetings for a period of more than 30 consecutive days. An alternate member may also be called upon to serve as a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision is made. The alternate member has the same voting rights as a regular member of the sign board of appeals. The alternate member shall serve at the call of the chairperson of the sign board of appeals. 


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-18. - Authority. 
(a) 	
Administrative appeals. Any person allegedly aggrieved by a decision of the administrator relative to the placement, area, height and construction of a sign may appeal such decision to the sign board of appeals. 

(b) 	
Variances. The sign board of appeals shall have the authority to grant variances from the provisions of this chapter whenever the strict application of requirements may pose demonstrable hardship or practical difficulty with regard to placement, area, height and construction of a sign. An appeal for variance from such requirements shall be filed with the administrator on a form provided for such purpose.  


(c)  Limitations of power. 
(1) 	
The sign board of appeals shall not take any action that results, in effect, in a legislative change to the terms of this chapter. 

(2) 	
The sign board of appeals shall not have the authority to add to the types of signs permitted on any premises.  

(a) 	
Form and fee. Any person filing an appeal with the township sign board of appeals shall fill out the necessary appeal form provided by the administrator and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution of the township board.  

(b) 	
Agenda. The administrator shall place an appeal request on a regular meeting agenda of the sign board of appeals within 45 days of filing.  

(c) 	
Public notice. The administrator shall give due notice of all hearings to all owners of record of real property within 300 feet of the premises in question; such notice shall be delivered by first class mail addressed to the respective owners at the address given in the last assessment roll.  

(d) 	
Representation. All persons appealing shall be required to appear in person or to be represented by a duly authorized agent to speak on behalf of their request and furnish supporting information and evidence as applicable. 

(e) 	
Decision. Within 90 days of filing, the sign board of appeals shall render a final decision in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 

(f) 	
Effective date. Decisions of the sign board of appeals shall become effective following the chairperson's certification of the board's decision. 

(g) 	
Stays. The filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the administrator certifies to the sign board of appeals, after the appeal has been filed with him/her, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, an emergency exists, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, except by restraining order or by circuit court, following a timely notice to the administrator.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-19. - General procedures. 
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-20. - Administrative appeal. 
(a) 	
Appeals. The sign board of appeals shall have the authority to render a decision pertaining to applications for administrative appeals and interpretations filed as hereinafter provided:  

(1) 	
Where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, interpretation, decision or refusal made by the administrator or any other township official, body, or agency in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 

(2) 	
The sign board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, permit, interpretation, decision or refusal as in its opinion ought to be done, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken.  

(b) 	
Interpretations. The administrator shall have the authority to request interpretations of the provisions of this chapter from the sign board of appeals.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-21. - Variances. 
(a) 	
Criteria for Variances. A variance shall not be granted unless the sign board of appeals determines that each of the following criteria and/or standards have been affirmatively satisfied:  

(1) 	
Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships that will exist if the variance is not granted. The appellant must demonstrate that the alleged practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or both, are exceptional and peculiar to the appellant's situation and result from conditions that do not generally exist throughout the township. 

(2) 	
The fact that other larger signs constructed under prior sign ordinances exist in the area shall not be sufficient reason to declare practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship.  

(3) 
The sign board of appeals shall not grant a variance if it is determined that the practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship is self-created.  

(4) 	
The terms "practical difficulties" and "unnecessary hardships" shall relate to the use of a particular parcel of land. Practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship shall not be deemed solely economic, as in relating to the cost of the sign, the size of the sign, or to the fact that the sign has already been constructed. The fact that the sign is only available in a standardized size and/or material (example: franchised business signs) shall not constitute a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship.  

(5) 	
The practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship that is alleged to result from a failure to grant the variance, must include substantially more than mere inconvenience or the mere inability to attain a higher financial return. 

(6) 	
It must be demonstrated by the appellant that granting the variance will result in substantial justice being done, while consideration is given to the impacts on the public health, safety and welfare. 

(7) 
The granting of the variance shall not impose a negative impact on the rights of others.  

(b) 	
Conditions. In granting any variance, the sign board of appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions which meet the purpose of this chapter and are related to, and insure compliance with, the standards herein.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-22. - Action. 
(a) 	
Concurrent vote. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the sign board of appeals appointed and serving shall be necessary to:  

(1) 	
Revise any order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination of the administrator or any other township official or agency; or 

(2) 	
Decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which they are required to pass or to affect any variance of this chapter.  


(b) Findings of fact. 
(1) 	
Appeal. The sign board of appeals shall prepare an official record for all appeals and shall base its decision on this record.  

(2) 	
Variance. The official record for each variance must record a finding of fact for each criteria and/or standard in section 32-21(a).  

(c) 	
Official Record. The sign board of appeals shall prepare an official record for each appeal and shall base its decision on this record. The official record shall include:  

(1) 	
The relevant administrative records and administrative orders issued herein relating to the appeal.  

(2) 
The appeal form. 

(3) 	
The requisite written findings of fact, the conditions attached, the decisions and orders by the sign board of appeals in disposing of the appeal, signed by the chairman of the board. 


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-23. - Review by circuit court. 
Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the board of appeals may obtain a review thereof both on the facts and the law, in county circuit court.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
ARTICLE V. - SIGN REGULATIONS 
Sec. 32-24. - Generally. 
The regulations in this article shall govern the type, use, size, height and number of signs permitted on any parcel of land in the township, based on the zoning district designation of the subject property, as shown on the official zoning map of the township, as amended, adopted as part of the township zoning ordinance, as amended.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-25. - General requirements. 
(a) Permitted signs. No sign may be erected unless it is expressly authorized by this chapter.  
(b) Clear vision area. 
(1) 	No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a way as to obstruct vision between a height of three and ten feet within the triangular area formed by the intersection of the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting two points which are located on those intersecting right-of-way lines 30 feet from the point of the intersection of the right of way lines (Figure 14). 

Figure 14 Street Intersection Clear Vision Area  
(2) 	
No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a way as to obstruct vision between a height of three and ten feet within the triangular area formed by the intersection of a street right-of-way line and a paved/unpaved driveway and a line connecting two points which are located on the right-of-way line and the paved/unpaved driveway 20 feet from the point of intersection of the right-of-way line and paved/unpaved driveway (Figure 15). 

(3) 	
The three foot height limit shall be measured from the lowest elevation of the segment of the intersecting road and driveway's centerlines that lies between the point of the intersection of the centerlines and the extension of the line drawn through the points 20 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way line and driveway.  

(c) 	
Sign measurement. No sign shall exceed the maximum sign area allowed for the district in which it is located. The sign area is to be expressed in square feet, computed to the nearest tenth of a square foot, and shall be calculated as follows:  

(1) 	
Area. The area of a sign shall be measured as the area within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any straight line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, logo or any other figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding only the structure necessary to support the sign (Figure 16).  




Figure 16 Sign Area Measurement  
(2) 	
Double-faced sign. The area of a ground or projecting sign that has two or more faces shall be measured by including the area of all sign faces, except if two faces are placed back-to-back and are no more than two feet apart at any point, the area of one face shall be counted toward the maximum size requirement. If the two back-to-back faces are of unequal size, the larger of the two sign faces shall be counted as the one face.  

(3) 	
Wall sign. For a sign consisting of individual letters and/or a logo affixed directly onto a building, the area of the sign shall be computed by measuring the area of the envelope required to enclose the lettering and logo.  

(4) 	
Business centers/strip commercial. For buildings with multiple tenants, the sign area for wall, projecting, canopy or awning signs shall be determined by taking that portion of the front wall of the building applicable to each tenant and computing the sign requirements for that portion of the total wall (Figure 17). 



Figure 17 Wall Sign Measurement  
(d) 	
Design. Properties that contain multiple freestanding signs shall incorporate a common design theme among sign structures to maintain a unified character. Freestanding sign structures shall have similar construction, color, design and quality.  

(e) 	
Embedded electronic message devices. These devices are permitted on all types of signs including pole signs. Fuel price signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area. The embedded electronic message area shall not be counted in determining compliance with the maximum permitted sign display area. 


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-26. - Exemptions. 
Signs. The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements, provided, all other applicable requirements of this chapter are met:  
(1) 	
Barber poles provided that bottoms of barber poles shall be attached to the building wall and must be at least eight feet from the ground or sidewalk, but the top must be lower than the height of the building. Barber poles must not extend more than 12 inches from the exterior face of the wall to which it is attached.  

(2) 	
Incidental sign, no greater than two square feet in area, such as a prohibition on hunting or trespassing.  

(3) 	
Construction sign not exceeding 32 square feet shall be permitted. The sign shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any right-of-way line. The sign may be erected when a building permit is issued for construction and shall be removed within 30 days following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building or project to which the sign relates. Construction signs must abide by section 32-28. 

(4) 
Public art or murals not containing any words, logos, products or service representations.  

(5) 	
Interior signs located completely within an enclosed building and not visible from outside the building or which are primarily directed at persons within the premises upon which the sign is located.  

(6) 	
Historical markers, including plaques or signs describing a property's designation as a historical site or structure, not exceeding 20 square feet in area; provided, an officially designated state or federal historical marker shall not be subject to a size limitation.  

(7) 	
Integral signs, such as names of building, date of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure.  

(8) 	
Window signs, provided that the maximum size of any window sign shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of the window on which it is displayed. Painted messages, text, graphics, posters, balloons, paper advertisements and similar items affixed to the window shall constitute a window sign. 

(9) 	
Any identification, address, or for sale sign affixed to a wall, mailbox, post, lamppost or pillar, and that is no larger than two square feet in display surface. Address signs provided that numeral height no greater than six inches for residences and 18 inches for businesses and other nonresidential uses. Anything larger will count toward the total permitted display area.  

(10) 	
Traffic control or other municipal signs such as, but not limited to, directional signs placed in rights-of-way, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, danger, accessible parking, fire lane and other temporary emergency signs that conform to the requirements of the manual of uniform traffic control devices.  

(11) 
Public flags.  

(12) 	
Business flags, but shall be limited to the display of no more than two flags on the premises. Business flags do not include feather signs.  

(13) 	
On-premises parking lot and internal driveway directional signs, subject to the following limitations: 

a. 	
Maximum size shall be four square feet, except for Industrial-zoned properties where the maximum can be 12 square feet.  

b. 	
On-premises directional signs shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from the public right­of-way. Directional signs under four square feet require a one foot setback from any property line. Directional signs four square feet or over require a 15 foot setback from any property line.  

c. 	
Multiple on-premises directional signs shall be mounted on the same structure, unless the need to do otherwise can be demonstrated by the applicant to create a hardship that is nonfinancial in nature, in order to limit the detriment to environmental aesthetics and sight obstruction.  



(14) 
Political signs, subject to the following limitations: 

a. 	
Political signs shall be removed within 14 calendar days after the election to which they pertain and shall not exceed a height of eight feet. Free expression or ideological opinion signs not related to an election shall not be subject to any time limit but shall be subject to the size limitations for political signs.  

b. 	
For properties located in the RA, RB and RC zoning districts, the maximum size of any individual sign shall be 12 square feet. The aggregate size of all political signs displayed on the premises shall be 32 square feet.  

c. 	
For all zoning districts, other than the RA, RB and RC zoning districts, the maximum size of any individual sign shall be 32 square feet. The aggregate size of all political signs displayed on the premises shall not exceed 64 square feet.  



(15) 	
Signs maintained by the United States of America, the state, any agencies or political subdivisions thereof and educational institutions.  

(16) 
Signage affixed to fuel pumps, vending machines, ice dispensers, etc.  

(17) 
Menu boards for drive-in/drive-through businesses.  

(18) 	
Cart corrals with a maximum height of ten feet above grade and 12 square feet in display area. 

(19) 	
Scoreboard and athletic field sponsorship signs facing playing fields not primarily visible from the public right-of-way.  


(20)  Holiday decorations.   
(21)  Human directional signs.   
(22)  Signs approved by MDOT, including wayfinding signs.   
(23)  Any signs required by local, state or federal law.   

( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-27. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited in the township: 
(1) 	
Signs which are placed within or encroach into a public right-of-way, including signs placed on utility poles, utility cabinets, traffic control signs, structures or devices unless permitted by the agency having jurisdiction over the road and outside of clear vision triangles.  

(2) 
Roof signs. 

(3) 	
Any sign which, by reason of its size, location, coloring or manner of illumination constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety, by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing or detracting from the visibility of any traffic control device on public streets and roads.  

(4) 
Sign displays that interfere with, mislead or confuse drivers.  

(5) 	
Signs and sign structures that are structurally unsafe, constitute a hazard to safety and health, that are not kept in good repair or have bare bulbs exposed.  

(6) 	
Any sign that obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way.  

(7) 	
Any sign displaying images of nudity, semi-nudity, specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity, or using obscene material or words. The administrator shall also consider the following criteria when providing a determination:  

a. 	
An average person, applying contemporary community standards, must find that the material, as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, is offensive or profane; 

b. 	
The material must depict or describe, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by applicable law; and  

c. 	
The material, taken as a whole, must lack serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 



(8) 	
Display or parking of a motor vehicle or trailer upon a lot or premises in a location visible from a public right-of-way, for the primary purpose of displaying a sign attached to, painted on or placed on the vehicle or trailer, with the exception of vehicles used regularly in the course of conducting the principal use located on the premises (Figure 18). 

(9) 	
Use of pennants, string lights, ribbons, or other such features which are hung or strung across any property, and which are not an integral, physical part of a building or other permanent structure on the property.  

(10) 
Inflatable signs. 

(11) 	
Signs having any visible portion either in motion or having the appearance of being in motion, whether on a continuous basis or at intervals, and regardless of whether the motion or appearance of motion is caused by natural or artificial sources, with the exception of electronic changeable message signs.  



(12)  Off-premises signs, except for billboard signs as permitted in the industrial (I) district.   
(13)  Billboard signs used for on-premises advertising.   
(14)  Bench signs.   
(15)  Home occupation signs.  
(16)  Signs are not permitted on that portion of any parcel that is less than 25 feet in width or depth.  
(17)  Any sign that is not expressly permitted.   
(18)  Feather signs, wind sock signs and air dancers.   
(19)  Searchlights.  
(20)  Digital displays on pole signs or elevated pole signs that do not abut the sign face.  
(21)  Empty sign frames and structures.   

( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 32-28. -Residential (NR, AG1, AG2, RA, RB, RC, and RM) districts. 
In the NR, AG1, AG2, RA, RB, RC, and RM districts, the requirements in the following schedule A shall govern sign use, area, type, height and numbers, in addition to requirements elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, adopted Mar. 19, 2018, amended § 32-28 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 32-28 pertained to residential (NR, A-1, A-2, RA, RB, RC, RD, and RE) districts and derived from Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) . 
Sec. 32-29. -Signs permitted in the office (O) district. 
In the O district, the requirements in the following schedule B shall govern sign use, area, type, height and numbers, in addition to requirements elsewhere in this chapter. 
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-30. - Signs permitted in the commercial (C) district. 
In the C district, the requirements in the following schedule C shall govern sign use, area, type, height and numbers, in addition to requirements elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, adopted Mar. 19, 2018, amended § 32-30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 32-30 pertained to signs permitted in local service commercial (B-1) and community commercial (B-2) districts and derived from Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) . 
Sec. 32-31. - Signs permitted in the industrial (I) zoning district. 
In the I district, the requirements in the following schedule D shall govern sign use, area, type, height and numbers, in addition to requirements elsewhere in this chapter. 
SCHEDULE A — Section 32-28 Signs Permitted in Residential (NR, AG1, AG2, RA, RB, RC, and RM) Districts  
Use  Sign Type  Maximum # of signs  Maximum Display Area  Location  Maximum Height  Electronic  Standards  Other  
Residential Gateway  Ground or wall/fence entrance sign  Ground: 2 signs per entrance wall/fence entrance sign: 2  20 sq. ft. per sign, with maximum of 2 display faces per sign.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  8 ft.  * ECM signs Not allowed for residential gateways.  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade. • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • Where two signs per street entrance are  

used, signs  
shall be of  
identical size,  
design and  

 
 
 
 
 materials.  
Wall sign,  Not  
canopy,  allowed  
projecting,  for  
marquee  residential  

 or awning  gateways.  
 
 
 
 
 
Institutional use (including,  Ground sign  1 on each side of each street entrance.  40 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  Ground: 8 ft.  * ECM signs allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordance with section 32­39.  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade. • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41.  
but not limited to places of worship and schools)  Wall sign, canopy, projecting, marquee or awning  No maximum.  Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 10 percent of wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary  On wall.  Below uppermost building line, not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  * No ECM signs shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  • Wall signs: 12 in. maximum projection. • Projecting signs may extend a max. of 5 ft. from the wall of a building, but are limited to an 8 ft. height clearance. • New  
facades.  awning signs  

 
 
 Signs on  
 
 
 require a  


 
 
 secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of the wall area to which it is attached.  
 
 
 building permit.  

SCHEDULE B — Section 32-29 Signs Permitted in Office (O) District  
Use  Sign Type  Maximum # of signs  Maximum Display Area  Location  Maximum Height  Electronic  Standards  Other  
Individual building containing 1 business  Ground  1  40 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  8 ft., including a 2 ft. minimum sign standard.  * ECM signs allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordance with section 32­39. * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 feet from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade. • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting or Awning  No maximum   Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 15  On wall.  Below uppermost building line, not on sloped wall and not above peak or  • Wall signs: 12 in. maximum projection. • Projecting signs may extend a max. of 5 ft. from  


 
 
 percent of wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary facades. Signs on secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of the wall area to which it is attached.  
 parapet.  permitted.  the wall of a building, but are limited to an 8 ft. height clearance. • New awning signs require a building permit.  
Marquee   1  6 sq. ft.  Underside of building overhang or eave  Not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  
Business center/Strip commercial (1 multi-tenant building on  Pole or ground sign  1 per street frontage  60 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear  Pole sign: 20 ft. Ground sign: 8 ft.  * ECM displays not permitted on pole signs. Allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping  
1 parcel)  
 
 
 vision triangle.  
 and in accordance with section 32­39.  requirements per section 32-41. • New pole signs see  


 
 
 
 
 
 * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  section 32-34 for wind load requirements. • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting, marquee or awning  No maximum   Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 15 percent of leased wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary facades. Signs on secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of the wall area to which it is attached.  On wall.  Below uppermost building line, not on sloped wall and not above peak or parapet.  • Wall signs: 12 in. maximum projection. • Projecting signs may extend a max. of 5 ft. from the wall of a building, but are limited to an 8 ft. height clearance. • New awning signs require a building permit.  
Marquee   1  24 sq. ft.  Underside of building overhang  Not above peak or parapet and not on sloped  


 
 
 
 or eave.  roof.  
 
 
Business complex (multiple buildings on one parcel)  Pole or ground sign  1 per driveway access  60 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  Pole sign: 20 ft. Ground sign: 8 ft.  * ECM displays not permitted on pole signs. Allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordance with section 32­39 * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41 • New pole signs see section 32-34 for wind load requirements. • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting, marquee or awning  No maximum per tenant  Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 15 percent of leased wall area to  Below uppermost building line, not on sloped wall and not above peak or  • Wall signs: 12 in. maximum projection. • Projecting signs may extend a max. of 5 ft. from the wall of a building, but are limited to  

 
 
 which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary  
 parapet.  
 an 8 ft. height clearance. • New awning signs require a  


 
 faces. Signs on secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of the wall area to which it is attached.  
 
 building permit.  
Marquee   1  24 sq. ft.  Underside of building overhang or eave.  Not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  
Expressway business (hotel, motel, or restaurant that lies 2,000 feet or less from an expressway on or off- Pole or ground  1  75 sq. ft. per sign  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  Pole sign: 30 ft. Ground sign: 8 ft.  * ECM displays not permitted on pole signs. Allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordance with section 32­39  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • New pole signs see  
ramp.  
 
 
 
 
 * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling  section 32-34 for wind load requirements. • Display of street address per section  


 
 
 
 
 unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  32-38.  
Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 15 percent of leased wall  Below  • Wall signs: 12 in. maximum projection. • Projecting signs may  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting or Awning  No maximum   area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary faces. Signs  On wall.  uppermost building line, not on sloped wall and not above peak or  extend a max. of 5 ft. from the wall of a building, but are limited to an 8 ft. height clearance.  
on secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of  parapet.  • New awning signs require a building permit.  
the wall area to which it is attached.  
Expressway  •  
business  10 ft.  Landscaping  
(hotel,  setback  requirements  
motel,  6 sq. ft. for  from all  per section  
service station or restaurant  Elevated pole sign  1  each ft. of sign height, up to a max  lot lines and outside  90 ft.  32-41. • New pole signs see  
that lies  of 300 sq. ft.  the clear  section 32-34  
2,000 feet  vision  for wind load  
or less from  triangle.  requirements.  
an  
 
 
 
 
 
 • Min. height  



SCHEDULE C — Section 32-30 Signs Permitted in the Commercial (C) District   
Use  Sign Type  Maximum # of signs  Maximum Display Area  Location  Maximum Height  Electronic  Standards  Other  
Individual building containing 1  Pole or Ground  1 located adjacent to each  75 sq. ft. per sign  10 ft. setback from all  Ground sign: 8 ft., Pole sign:  * ECM displays allowed  • 2 ft. standard (base) or  

business  
 street frontage  
 lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  30 ft.  with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordanc e with section 32­39. * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • New pole signs see section 32-34 for wind load requirements . • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting , or Awning  No maximum  Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 15 percent of wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2  On wall.  Below uppermos t building line, not above peak or parapet and not on  • Wall signs: 12 inch projection max. • Projecting signs may extend a max. of 5 ft. from the wall of a building and are limited to an 8 ft. height  

 
 
 primary faces. Signs on secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of the wall area  
 sloped roof.  
 clearance. • New awning signs require a building permit.  


 to which it is attached.  
 
 
 
Marquee   1  24 sq. ft.  Undersid e of building overhang or eave  Not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  
Business Center (1 multi-tenant building/stri p commercial)  Pole or ground sign  1 per street frontage (2 maximum street frontages )  Pole sign: 100 sq. ft. or 1 sq. ft. for each 1 ft. of building wall length facing the street frontage, whichever is greater up to a max. of 300 sq. ft. Ground sign: 150 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  Pole sign: 30 ft. Ground sign: 8 ft.  * ECM displays allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordanc e with section 32­39 * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • New pole signs see section 32-34 for wind load requirements . • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting , or Awning  No maximum per tenant  Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 15  On wall.  Below uppermos t building line, not above peak or parapet  • Wall signs: 12 inch projection max. • Projecting signs may extend a max.  


 percent of leased/owne d wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary facades. Signs on secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of the wall area to which it is attached.  
 and not on sloped roof.  
 of 5 ft. from the wall of a building and are limited to an 8 ft. height clearance. • New awning signs require a building permit.  
Marquee   1 per business  24 sq. ft.  Undersid e of building overhang or eave.  Not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  
Business Complex (Multiple buildings on one parcel each containing one or more businesses)  Pole or ground sign  1 per driveway access  Pole sign: 100 sq. ft. or 1 sq. ft. for each 1 ft. of building wall length facing the street frontage, whichever is greater up to a max. of 300 sq. ft. Ground  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  Pole sign: 30 ft. Ground sign: 8 ft.  * ECM displays allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordanc e with section 32­39 * No ECM  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41.  

 
 
 sign: 150 sq. ft.  
 
 sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a  • New pole signs see section 32-34 for wind load  


 
 
 
 
 
 dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  requirements . • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting , marquee or awning  No maximum per tenant  Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 15 percent of leased/owne d wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary facades. Signs on secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of the wall area to which it is attached.  On wall.  Below uppermos t building line, not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  • Wall signs: 12 inch projection max. • Projecting signs may extend a max. of 5 ft. from the wall of a building and are limited to an 8 ft. height clearance • New awning signs require a building permit  
Marquee   1 per business  24 sq. ft.  Undersid e of building overhang or eave.  Not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  
Individual businesses with two or  Pole or ground  2  75 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all  Pole sign: 30 ft. Ground  * ECM displays allowed  • 2 ft. standard (base) or  

more buildings (examples: Auto sales, lumber yards, etc.)  sign  
 
 lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  sign: 8 ft.  with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordanc e with section 32­39 * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • New pole signs see section 32-34 for wind load requirements . • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting , marquee or awning  No maximum per tenant  Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 15 percent of wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2  On wall.  Below uppermos t building line, not above peak or parapet and not on  • Wall signs: 12 inch projection max. • Projecting signs may extend a max. of 5 ft. from the wall of a building and are limited to an 8 ft. height  

 
 
 primary facades. Signs on secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of the wall area  
 sloped roof.  
 clearance. • New awning signs require a building permit.  


 to which it is attached.  
 
 
 
Marquee   1  24 sq. ft.  Undersid e of building overhang or eave.  Not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  
Expressway business (hotel, motel, service station or restaurant that lies 2,000 feet or less from an expressway on or off­ramp.  Pole or ground  1  75 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  Pole sign: 30 ft. Ground sign: 8 ft.  * ECM displays allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordanc e with section 32­39 * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • New pole signs see section 32-34 for wind load requirements . • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign,  Cumulative total sq.  Below the uppermos  • Wall signs: 12 inch  
canopy, projecting  footage of signs on  On wall.  t building line, not  display area  projection max.  
, or Awning  primary facades shall not exceed 15  above peak or parapet  permitted.  • Projecting signs may extend a max.  


 percent of leased/owne d wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary facades. Signs on secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of the wall area to which it is attached.  
 and not on sloped roof.  
 of 5 ft. from the wall of a building and are limited to an 8 ft. height clearance • New awning signs require a building permit.  
Elevated pole sign  1  6 sq. ft. for each ft. of sign height, up to a max of 300 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  90 ft.  • 2 ft. standard (base) • Landscaping requirements per section 32-36. • New pole signs see section 32-34 for wind load requirements . • Min. height above grade of 60 ft. • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Marquee   1  24 sq. ft.  Undersid e of building overhang or eave.  Not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  
Institutional use  Ground  1  40 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback  Ground  * ECM displays  • 2 ft. standard  

(including, but not limited to places of worship and schools)  sign  
 
 from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  sign: 8 ft.  allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordanc e with section 32­39 * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting , marquee or awning  No maximum  Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 10 percent of wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary facades. Signs on secondary facades shall not exceed 5 percent of the wall area to which it is attached.  On wall.  Below uppermos t building line, not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  • Wall signs: 12 in. maximum projection. • Projecting signs may extend a max. of 5 ft. from the wall of a building, but are limited to an 8 ft. height clearance. • New awning signs require a building permit.  

SCHEDULE D — Section 32-31 Signs Permitted in the Industrial (I) District   
Use  Sign Type  Maximum # of signs  Maximum Display Area  Location  Maximum Height  Electronic  Standards  Other  
Individual business in one building (including individual businesses with 2 or more buildings)  Pole or ground sign  1  Pole: 100 sq. ft. or 1 sq. ft. for each 1 ft. of building wall length whichever is greater up to a maximum of 300 sq. ft. Ground: 75 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  Pole sign: 30 ft. Ground sign: 8 ft.  * ECM displays allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordance with section 32­39 * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting or Awning  No maximum  Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 15 percent of leased wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary facades. Signs on secondary facades shall not exceed 5  On wall.  Below uppermost building line, not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  • Wall signs: 12 in. maximum projection. • Projecting signs may extend a max. of 5 ft. from the wall of a building, but are limited to an 8 ft. height clearance. • New awning signs require a building  

percent of the  permit.  
wall area to  
which it is  

 
 
 attached.  
 
 
 
 
Multi-tenant industrial building  Pole or ground sign  1  Pole: 100 sq. ft. or 1 sq. ft. for each 1 ft. of building wall length whichever is greater up to a maximum of 300 sq. ft. Ground: 150 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  Pole sign: 30 ft. Ground sign: 8 ft.  * ECM displays allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordance with section 32­39 * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • Display of street address per section 32-38.  
Wall sign, canopy, projecting or awning  No maximum per tenant  Cumulative total sq. footage of signs on primary facades shall not exceed 15 percent of leased/owned wall area to which it is attached; a building is limited to 2 primary facades. Signs on secondary facades shall  On wall.  Below uppermost building line, not above peak or parapet and not on sloped roof.  • Wall signs: 12 in. maximum projection. • Projecting signs may extend a max. of 5 ft. from the wall of a building, but are limited to an 8 ft. height clearance. • New awning signs require a building  

not exceed 5  permit.  
percent of the  
wall area to  
which it is  

 
 
 attached.  
 
 
 
 
Any parcel  Billboard sign  No maximum  672 sq. ft. maximum if located on a parcel adjoining a limited access freeway right­of-way. 300 sq. ft. if not located on a parcel adjoining a limited access freeway right­of-way.  * 1,500 ft. minimum spacing between billboard signs on the same side of a public road * Minimum setback of 75 ft. from a public right-of­way, except that no setback is required from a limited access state highway right-of­way. * Minimum  30 ft.  * ECM displays allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordance with section 32­39. * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM display area  

 
 
 
 setback of 500 ft. from the property boundary of a residential district use, or from property  
 limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  
 


 
 
 
 boundary of a place of worship, a public park, or a public or private elementary or secondary school  
 
 
 
Industrial park  Pole or ground sign  1 per driveway access  Pole sign: 100 sq. ft. or 1 sq. ft. for each 1 ft. of building wall length whichever is greater up to a maximum of 300 sq. ft. Ground sign: 75 sq. ft.  10 ft. setback from all lot lines and outside the clear vision triangle.  Pole sign: 30 ft. Ground sign 8 ft.  * ECM displays allowed with a permitted wall or ground sign and in accordance with section 32­39. * No ECM sign shall be located within 200 ft. from a dwelling unit. * ECM  • 2 ft. standard (base) or bottom of sign face at least 2 ft. above grade (ground sign). • Landscaping requirements per section 32-41. • New pole signs see section 32-34 for wind load  

 
 
 
 
 
 display area limited to 50 percent of total display area permitted.  requirements. • Display of street address per section 32-38.  

( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, adopted Mar. 19, 2018, amended the title of § 32-31 from signs permitted in limited industrial (I1) and general industrial (I2) to signs permitted in the industrial (I) zoning district. 
Sec. 32-32. - Temporary signs—General regulations. 
(a) 	
Permit required. A temporary sign shall not be placed on any lot, parcel or premises, with the exception of single-family, two-family and multiple-family residential uses, unless a permit authorizing such temporary sign has been issued by the administrator.  

(b) 	
Required application contents. Application for a permit to display a temporary sign shall be in accordance with the application procedure outlined in section 32-11(b).  

(c) 	
Deposit required. If the temporary sign is a trailer mounted sign, or changeable copy sign over 20 square feet, a refundable deposit in an amount as set by resolution of the township board shall be submitted, to financially guarantee conformance with the provisions herein, including removal of the sign on the permit expiration date.  

(d) 	
Standards for display of temporary signs. The display of temporary signs, including banners, shall conform to the provisions of schedule E in section 32-33. In addition, the following standards shall apply to display of temporary signs for all nonresidential uses, in all zoning districts:  

(1) 	
A maximum of five permits authorizing display of a temporary sign for nine consecutive days shall be issued in any calendar year for any individual business premises.  

(2) 	
The beginning of the display period for a temporary sign shall not be more than 14 calendar days from the date of the issuance of the permit.  

(3) 	
There shall not be more than one temporary sign displayed per business on a property at any one time. 

(4) 	
A temporary sign over three feet in height above grade shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any right-of-way line and not within the clear vision triangle as per section 32-25(b).  

(5) 
Portable signs shall be subject to the following additional standards: 

a. 	
Illuminated portable signs shall be installed in conformance with all state and township electrical codes. No flashing or moving lights shall be used on any portable sign.  

b. 	
All portable signs and components shall be firmly anchored to the ground in a manner that ensures that the sign will not constitute a safety hazard in the event of high winds, as determined by the building official.  

c. 	
Any portable sign displayed in violation of this chapter may be impounded by the township as per section 32-14(b).  




( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-33. - Permitted temporary signs. 
The requirements for permitted temporary signs in the following schedule E shall govern sign use, area, type, height, and numbers, in addition to requirements elsewhere in this chapter: 
SCHEDULE E — Section 32-33 Permitted Temporary Sign Standards   
Use  Sign Type  Permit Required ?  Maximum # of signs  Maximu m Display Area  Maximu m Height   Maximum Duration  Location Standard s  
Single-family and 2 family subdivisions and condominium s in all  Construction sign (Signs illustrating or advertising lots for sale in a subdivision)  No  1 per developmen t  32 sq. ft.  8 ft.  Until 90 percent of the lots are sold.  May not encroach on or over right-of­way line. Minimu m 10 ft. setback for any sign over 3 ft. in height.  
districts  
 
 
 
 
 
 * Must comply with clear vision standard s section 32-25.  
Single-family and 2 family residential uses in all districts  Ground sign   No   No maximum   Total area of all signs may not exceed 12 sq. ft.  5 ft.  7 days.   May not encroach on or over right-of­way. Minimu m 10 ft. setback for any sign over  
Real estate sign (For sale/lease)  No  1 per lot/parcel  6 sq. ft.  8 ft.  5 days after the purpose of the sign is  


 
 
 
 
 
 fulfilled.  3 ft. in height. * Must comply with clear vision standard s section 32-25.  
Political signs  No  No maximum   See section 32-26 N  8 ft.  14 days after the election to which they pertain.  
Multiple-family residential use in RC and RM districts  Construction sign (Signs illustrating or advertising lots for sale)  No  1 per developmen t  32 sq. ft.  8 ft.  Coinciding with expiration of building permit.  May not encroach on or over right-of­way. Minimu m 10 ft. setback for any sign over 3 ft. in height. * Must comply with clear vision standard s section 32-25.  
Real estate sign (For sale/lease)  No  1 per developmen t  10 sq. ft.  5 ft.  5 days after the purpose of the sign is fulfilled.  
Political signs  No  No maximum   See section 32-26 N  8 ft.  14 days after the election to which they pertain.  
Non­residential uses in all districts  Construction sign (Name of project/future development, architects, builders/lenders.. .)  No  1 per lot or parcel  32 sq. ft.  8 ft.  Upon occupancy of any part of the premises  May not encroach on or over right-of­way. Minimu  


 Real estate (for sale/lease)  No  1 per lot or premises  32 sq. ft.  8 ft.  5 days after the purpose of the sign  m 10 ft. setback for any sign over 3 ft. in height * Must comply with clear vision standard s section 32-25.  
Political signs  No  Limited by the aggregate display area of all signs  See section 32-26 N  8 ft.  14 days after the election to which they pertain.  
Portable sign or other temporary sign  Yes  1 per premises, of either type  Portable sign: 32 sq. ft. Other: 24 sq. ft.  Portable sign: 8 ft. Other: Below roofline  Max. of 5 permits for 9 consecutiv e days per calendar year * See section 32­32.  

( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 32-34. - Wind load. 
Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces of not less than 20 pounds per square foot on signs up to 60 feet in height and not less than 30 pounds per square foot for signs over 60 feet in height. Signs shall be designed in compliance with the Michigan Building Code.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-35. - Bracing. 
All bracing systems for signs shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundation. For signs on buildings, all loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such manner as to not overstress any of the elements thereof. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or the structural frame of the building. 
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-36. - Anchorage. 
Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to safely support the loads applied.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-37. - Electrical. 
All permanent or temporary electrical installations shall comply with the current electrical code of the township. The full number of illuminating elements shall be kept in satisfactory working condition or be immediately repaired or replaced. Signs that are only partially illuminated shall meet all electrical requirements for that portion directly illuminated. All electrical wiring shall be in conduit and not exposed to the elements. All electrical signs shall have a disconnecting switch located in a readily accessible place. All electrical signs shall have a disconnecting switch capable of being reached quickly for operation, renewal, or inspections without requiring those to whom ready access is requisite to climb over or remove obstacles or to resort to portable ladders, and so forth.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-38. -Display of street address of premises on signs. 
(a) 	
Street address. The street address number shall be displayed on the primary freestanding identification sign for each premises on land located in an office (O), commercial (C), or industrial (I) district (Figure 19). The display of street address numbers shall conform with the following standards:  

(1) 	
Address numbers shall be displayed on the sign face or on the supporting structure of the sign, at a minimum height of two feet above grade.  

(2) 
The height of the numbers shall be a minimum of four inches. 

(3) 	
The street address number shall be displayed using Arabic numerals, in a readily legible text style, and in a contrasting color from the background surface on which the number is placed. 

(4) 	
If the premises which are identified by a primary freestanding identification sign contains more than one street address number, the street address number displayed on the sign shall identify the lower and upper ends of the address range to which the sign pertains.  

(5) 	
Display of street address numbers on a sign structure shall not be considered a sign subject to the regulations contained in schedules B through E of this article, unless the height of the address numbers exceeds eight inches, in which case the street address number shall be considered a sign, subject to the limitations on size and number of signs contained in this chapter. 



( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 32-39. - Electronic changeable message signs (ECM). 
(a) Regulations generally. 
(1) 	
Movement prohibition. Messages shall be stationary and the use of animation, flashing, traveling, scrolling or blinking characters is prohibited. 

(2) 	
Minimum message copy interval. The message copy on electronic changeable message signs shall appear in intervals of no less than 15 seconds and transition between messages shall be instantaneous. Roll, splice, unveil, venetian, zoom, fade, dissolve, exploding, scroll and other methods of transition between messages shall not be permitted. 

(3) 	
Pole sign prohibition. Electronic changeable message signs shall be prohibited on pole signs with the exception of billboard signs, elevated pole signs and embedded electronic message devices as per section 32-25(e).  

(4) 
The ECM portion on a pole sign or elevated pole sign must abut the primary sign face.  

(5) 	
Display area. No more than 50 percent of the maximum display area of a sign shall be devoted to an ECM display.  

(6) 	
Display brightness shall be adjusted as ambient light levels change and shall be subject to review and regulation, as determined by the administrator. Luminance shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles above the ambient (i.e., naturally illuminated environment) light measurement when measured from the sign face.  

(7) 	
ECM components are not permitted within 200 feet of any dwelling unit except in those instances where dwelling units are located on the same parcel as an office or commercial use.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-40. - Illumination. 
(a) General requirements. 
(1) 	
Illumination of signs shall not exceed 100 footcandles as measured on the sign face. Luminance is a measure of the light on the surface of the sign. A footcandle is a measure of luminance equal to one lumen per square foot.  

(2) 	
The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed that the light intensity or brightness will not be objectionable to the surrounding areas. No light shall shine directly onto adjacent property or the roadway.  

(b) 	
Externally lit signs. Externally lighted signs are allowed in all commercial and industrial districts and for non-residential uses in residential districts, except home occupations, and shall comply with the following standards.  

(1) 	
Sign lighting shall be of low intensity with effective provisions made to minimize spillover of light beyond the actual sign face.  

(2) 	
The light source shall be enclosed and directed to prevent light from shining directly onto traffic or neighboring property.  

(c) 	
Internally lit signs. Internally lighted signs are allowed in all commercial and industrial districts. Sign faces shall be opaque so individual lamps are muted and cannot be distinguished behind the sign face.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-41. - Ground sign landscaping. 
(a) 	
Ground signs shall be landscaped in order to prevent damage and to screen and protect electrical components of the structure. The landscaping shall meet the following requirements:  

(1) 	
Landscaping must extend at least two feet from the base of the sign standard (Figure 20). If landscaping is not possible, such as cases where signs are in parking areas, other measures, such as curbs, bollards, or methods acceptable to the administrator may be used to protect the sign. 

(2) 	
The length and width of the sign standard (base) shall be totaled to provide the linear feet around the perimeter of the ground sign. One spreading evergreen shrub shall be installed in the landscape area for each four linear feet around the ground sign subject to a minimum of four shrubs required regardless of the size of the standard. The shrubs shall be evenly distributed around the sign standard. The administrator shall maintain a list of low spreading evergreen shrubs.  



Figure 20 Ground Sign Landscaping 

( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-42. - On-premises product displays. 
(a) 	
General. Product manufacturers located on industrially zoned properties adjacent to Interstate 69 or Interstate 96 may provide an on-premises product display of their manufactured merchandise.  

(b) 	
Permit required. An on-premises product display shall not be installed unless a permit authorizing said display has been issued by the administrator. 

(c) 	
Required application contents. Application for a permit to install an on-premises product display shall be made to the administrator by submission of the required forms, fees, exhibits and other required information by the owner, or the owner's agent or lessee, of the property on which the on-premises product display is proposed to be located. The application shall contain the following information: 

(1) 	
The name, mailing address and telephone number of the property owner, business owner and applicant for the permit.  

(2) 	
Identification of the street address and parcel number of the parcel on which the on-premises product display is proposed to be installed.  

(3) 	
A site plan, drawn to scale, accurately identifying the location of the proposed on-premises product display on the subject property.  

(4) 	
A scaled drawing that accurately depicts the proposed on-premises product display and which accurately depicts the dimensions and display area of the proposed on-premises product display.  

(5) 	
A brief written explanation listing the specific reason(s) an on-premises product display is needed.  

(6) 
A nonrefundable application fee as set forth within section 32-11(f). 

(d) 	
Standards for displays. The following standards shall apply to all on-premises product displays under this section:  

(1) 	
Products to be displayed shall be manufactured or assembled on the premises where the on-premises product display is to be located. Products to be displayed shall be actual size and in no way modified so as to be larger or smaller in dimension.  

(2) 	
On-premises product display colors should accent, blend with, or complement surroundings and be compatible with materials and colors of nearby structures.  

(3) 	
On-premises product displays shall be permanently constructed and shall consist of high quality durable materials.  

(4) 	
On-premises product displays shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. When required, all exposed surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay, peeling, or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials such as paint or similar surface treatment.  

(5) 
On-premises product displays shall not exceed 500 square feet in total area.  

(6) 	
On-premises product displays shall not exceed 20 feet in total height; total height including any berm or any other object a product is proposed to be displayed upon. Products shall not be displayed on poles or roofs.  

(7) 
No portion of an on-premises product display shall be located within ten feet of any property line. 

(8) 	
On-premises product displays shall serve only to advertise and/or display a product; products to be displayed shall not be offered for sale from the location of said display.  

(9) 	
As allowed pursuant to the township's electrical code, on-premises product displays may be illuminated but said illumination shall not constitute a traffic hazard. 

(10) 	
On-premises product displays without signage shall be exempt from the calculation of the permitted sign area. On-premises product displays that propose to incorporate signage shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
ARTICLE VI. - UNIFIED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT 
Sec. 32-43. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of the unified business development (UBD) regulations to allow flexibility in signage under a unified plan. The regulations are intended to result in a comprehensive signage plan which results in less signage overall than would typically result.  
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-44. - Eligibility requirements. 
(a) 	
Minimum acreage. In order to qualify for unified business development (UBD) designation, the subject parcels must consist of a minimum of ten acres.  

(b) 	
Consent. All property owners with a UBD shall sign the UBD application thereby consenting to compliance with the UBD regulations. 

(c)  
Zoning. Properties must be commercially zoned in order to qualify for UBD designation. 


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-45. - Procedure. 
The processing of a unified business development (UBD) shall be as follows: 
(1) 	
Application. Submittal of an application as provided by the administrator. A fee shall be paid as established by a resolution of the township board.  

(2) 
Site plan. A site plan shall accompany the UBD application. The site plan shall include: 

a. 	
A legal description of the site, dimensions of site boundary lines, total site area, north arrow, legend, graphic scale and title block containing the project name.  

b. 	
Location of buildings, structures, streets, parking lots, driveways, landscaped areas and easements proposed or existing on the property.  



(3) 	
Signage plan. A signage plan shall accompany the UBD application. The signage plan shall include the following: 

a. 	
Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, and the number of freestanding signs, both existing and proposed, on the property.  

b. 	
An accurate indication on the site plan of the proposed location of all signs.  

c.  	
An indication of sign materials, colors, height, size and illumination.  



(4) 	
Review and report. The building department shall prepare a written analysis of the proposed UBD site plan and signage plan. The site plan, signage plan and staff report shall be forwarded to the sign board of appeals.  

(5) 	
Sign board of appeals review. The sign board of appeals shall review the site plan, signage plan and staff report when considering a UBD request. The sign board of appeals shall have final authority as to whether a UBD designation shall be granted in whole or in part.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 32-46. - Review criteria. 
When reviewing the proposed unified business development (UBD) site plan and signage plan, the sign board of appeals shall apply the following criteria to determine its acceptance and the plan shall include the following elements:  
(1) 	
The proposed signage shall not be contrary to the public interest or to the purpose of this chapter. 

(2) 	
The UBD shall not cause a substantial adverse effect upon properties in the immediate vicinity of the subject parcel.  

(3) 
The signage plan shall provide common name identification to the public.  

(4) 
Shared access to parking and shared driveways within the development.  

(5) 	
Shared signage shall be provided including the identification of the common name of the development. 

(6) 	
The physical layout of the project shall result in a cohesive and unified development. However, the development may include out parcels for lease or for sale, which may be intersected by public streets.  

(7) 	
The area proposed for the UBD shall not be a combination of individual parcels, solely assembled for the purposes of creating the UBD. 

(8) 	
Signs shall be organized such that visual clutter is reduced and signs are integrated with other elements of the property such as architecture and landscaping. 

(9) 	
Signs shall be designed and constructed in a manner that allows pedestrians and motorists to identify, interpret and respond in an efficient and safe manner to information contained on the signs. 

(10) 
The primary purpose of signs within the UBD shall be for identification rather than advertising.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-47. - Waiver authority. 
The sign board of appeals shall have authority to waive the following provisions of this chapter:  
(1) 
Off-premises signs, not to include signs placed in public rights-of-way, may be permitted.  

(2) 	
The maximum display area and maximum height of permitted individual signs may be increased by a maximum of 25 percent.  

(3) 	
Properties may be permitted to have an individual business sign in addition to being permitted a business center sign.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-48. - Sign restrictions. 
The following requirements shall apply to all signs within a unified business development (UBD):  
(1) 	
The total sign area permitted for all signs within a UBD shall not exceed 75 percent of the sign area permitted under the sign ordinance regulations.  

(2) 	
Mobile signs, as defined herein, shall not be permitted on properties for which a UBD has been approved. 

(3) 	
Within the area of the UBD, spacing between business center signs shall be a minimum of 500 feet. 


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-49. - Amendments. 
A unified business development (UBD) signage plan may be amended by filing a new site plan and signage plan along with an application and the fee with the building division. The plan shall be submitted to the sign board of appeals and the criteria in sections 32-46, 32-47 and 32-48 applied. 
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-50. - Existing signs. 
If a unified business development (UBD) application is filed for a property on which existing signs are located, the signage plan shall include a schedule for bringing into conformance, no later than three years from the date of the sign board of appeals approval of the UBD, all signs not conforming to the UBD signage plan. 
( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Sec. 32-51. - Binding effect. 
(a) 	
Following approval of the signage plan for the unified business development (UBD), no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in conformance with the approved plan. Normal maintenance and repair of signs shall not be subject to the signage plan for the UBD. 

(b) 
The signage plan for the UBD shall be enforced in the same way as any provision of this chapter. 

(c) 	
The UBD signage plan shall be binding on the property owners and their successors, assigns, tenants, and subtenants. A copy of the UBD signage plan shall be filed at the township clerk's office.  

(d) 	
The existence of a UBD shall be noted in all leases pertaining to properties on which a UBD has been granted by the sign board of appeals. A deed restriction, acknowledging the existence of a UBD on the subject parcel, shall be recorded at the county register of deed's office and said restriction shall be binding on the property owners and their successors, assigns, tenants and subtenants. In addition, any sale of property on which a UBD has been granted shall include a disclosure regarding the UBD on the property.  


( Ord. of 6-15-2015(1) ) 
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-83, adopted July 7, 2014 , set out provisions for use herein. At the editor's discretion those provisions have been treated as repealing art. II, §§ 34-19—34-29, and enacting a new art. II, §§ 34-19—34-31. Former art. II, pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1992, §§ 15.5-26—15.5-29, 15.5-31—15.5-37; Ord. No. 93-9, adopted November 1, 1993; Ord. No. 03­03, §§ 1—3, adopted February 17, 2003 and Ord. No. 10-50, adopted April 19, 2010.  
Sec. 34-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Abutting or adjacent property means any lot or parcel of land adjoining, bordering or touching a street as defined in this section.  
Adjacent sidewalk means that portion of the sidewalk located within the street next to an abutting or adjacent property as defined in this section.  
Alteration of existing principal building means any alteration, construction or reconstruction related to an existing principal building that results in a change in said principal building of 25 percent of the floor area or more, or that results in the replacement of an existing principal building.  
Building means an enclosed structure having a roof supported by columns, walls, arches or other devices used for the housing, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
Flag means a section of sidewalk, typically five feet by five feet, between expansion joints. 
Principal building means a building in which is conducted the main or principal uses of the lot or parcel on which said building is located. 
Private street means any street, road or thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is privately owned or maintained and which provides the principal means of access to abutting properties. A street includes the land between the street right of way lines, whether improved or unimproved.  
Public street means a dedicated public right of way, which is a state or county roadway affording the principal means of access to abutting property. A street includes the land between the street right of way lines, whether improved or unimproved.  
Sidewalk means that portion of the street right of way improved with concrete and designed for non- motorized travel. 
Street means a dedicated public or private right of way affording the principal means of access to abutting property. A street includes the land between the street right of way lines, whether improved or unimproved. 
( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the construction, maintenance, and repair of sidewalks for the public safety pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 359 of 1947 (MCL 42.1 et seq.). 
( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-21. - Sidewalk construction required. 
(a) 	
All owners of lots and parcels abutting dedicated public streets or private streets shall be required to construct sidewalks at the time of construction of any new principal buildings, or at the time of alteration of existing principal buildings on such lots or parcels. This provision shall not apply in conjunction with the construction or alteration of principal buildings on lots or parcels located within the NR, AG1, AG2, RA, and I zoning districts, or in conjunction with the construction of one- and two-family dwellings on lots or parcels created prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Residential, office or commercial zoned lots or parcels located within subdivisions that have received final preliminary plat approval prior to said effective date shall have sidewalks installed as required by the board at the time final preliminary approval of the subdivision was granted. Additionally, residential, office or commercially zoned lots or parcels created prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall have sidewalks installed as required by the planning commission, township board, or zoning administrator at the time of final site plan approval for the construction of new, or alteration of existing, principal buildings on such lots or parcels. Sidewalks required to be constructed pursuant to this section shall be installed within one-year of issuance of the building permit for construction or alteration of any principal buildings on said lots or parcels unless otherwise authorized by the township engineer or their designee. All sidewalks constructed shall comply with the construction standards referred to in section 34-27. 

(b) 	
The board may, by resolution, require the owners of lots and parcels abutting public or private streets, to construct sidewalks where the presence of sidewalks may be declared by the board to be necessary to provide safe and convenient routes for non-motorized traffic. The board may order the construction of the sidewalks and assess all or part of the costs of sidewalk construction to the abutting property owners involved, or may permit the abutting property owners to provide for the construction of the required sidewalks on their own in accordance with the construction standards referred to in section 34-27, and any other specifications required by the board. A resolution requiring the construction of sidewalks shall note the time period in days in which the owners must construct the required sidewalk. The construction of any sidewalk under this section shall be in compliance with the requirements of Public Act No. 80 of 1989 (MCL 41.288A), as amended.  

(c) 	
Prior to adoption of a resolution requiring sidewalks, the board shall hold a public hearing. The township clerk shall cause notice of the time and place of the public hearing to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the township at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.  

(d) 	
In addition, all abutting property owners affected by such a resolution shall be given due notice of the public hearing by the township clerk by way of regular mail at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Said notice shall be prepared and the public hearing conducted in accordance with Michigan Public Acts No. 64 and 65 of 1989 (MCL 211.741 et seq., 205.735).  


( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 34-22. - Variances. 
(a) 	
The board may, by resolution, authorize a variance from the requirements of section 34-21 under the following circumstances:  

(1) 	
The board shall determine that the proposed variance will not impair the public health, safety or general welfare of township residents.  

(2) 	
The board shall determine that a strict application of such requirements would result in practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon, the owners of such lots or parcels. Practical difficulties 

may include, but shall not be limited to, severe variations in topography, unsuitable soils or difficulty in providing safe separation between pedestrian and vehicular traffic due to site location, layout or existing building arrangements. The cost of installing a sidewalk shall not constitute the sole basis for an undue hardship. 

(3) 	
A variance may be granted by the board when the preponderance of lots or parcels of land on the street in question are already developed with no sidewalks existing, and accordingly that a sidewalk would not likely connect to any other walk, and thus not serve the purpose of a non-motorized transportation system.  

(b) 	
A variance request shall be filed by the property owner or their designated agent. An application for a variance shall be submitted to the township clerk on a special form for that purpose. Applications shall be submitted at least two weeks in advance of a regular meeting of the board. A fee, as established by the board, shall be submitted with the variance application. 

(c) 	
The community development department shall prepare a written report which shall be submitted to the board prior to the meeting at which the board will consider a variance.  


( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-23. - Repair of sidewalks. 
(a) 	
It shall, be the responsibility of the owner of every lot or parcel of land to keep the sidewalks adjacent to their lot or parcel in good repair. Sidewalks shall be repaired or replaced when the condition of same is detrimental to public safety. Conditions requiring repair include, but are not limited to, the following: 

(1) 	
A rise or drop of more than one-inch between any two flags or a vertical discontinuity of more than one-inch on any flag.  

(2) 
More than two cracks of one-quarter-inch in width or in any two linear feet of flag. 

(3) 	
Any flag which is tilted in excess of one-inch per foot from inside edge to outside edge. (The outside edge being the edge of the sidewalk nearest the street line.)  

(4) 	
If, in any flag, more than 50 percent of the surface has scaled off to a depth of one-quarter-inch or greater. 

(5) 
An undermined flag below which there is a visible void causing the sidewalk to rock or seesaw. 

(6) 	
One or more flags, or a portion of a flag, are missing due to, but not limited to, construction activities, driveway repairs, and utility repairs and installations.  

(b) 	
Whenever the township engineer or their designee determines that an owner of a lot or parcel adjacent to a sidewalk has left the sidewalk in a state of disrepair or has not properly maintained the sidewalk in accordance with subsection (a), a notice shall be sent by regular mail to the owner of the adjacent lot or parcel to repair the sidewalk. The notice shall specify the time period within which such work shall be commenced. In no case shall the time period allowed for repair of a sidewalk exceed 30 days unless authorized otherwise by the township engineer or their designee. 

(c) 	
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of every lot or parcel of land to maintain the sidewalks adjacent to their lot or parcel. Sidewalks must be maintained free from encroaching obstructions including, but not limited to, overhanging tree limbs, bushes, vines, fences, walls, and structures.  

(d) 	
The temporary removal of any portion of an existing permanent sidewalk for any reason shall require the prior approval of the township engineer; who shall determine on a case by case basis the necessary provisions required to be implemented for safe pedestrian passage. The township engineer's requirements shall be installed within five days of removal of the permanent sidewalk, unless otherwise authorized by the township engineer.  


( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ; Ord. No. 17-100 , § I, 11-6-2017) 
Sec. 34-24. - Sidewalk defects caused by negligence. 
The township engineer may order a sidewalk repaired by persons who have caused the repair to be necessary through their own actions by excavating under or adjacent to the sidewalk, placing weight upon the sidewalk greater than its designated capacity, or any other negligent act.  
( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-25. - Construction or repair by the township. 
If any owner shall fail or neglect to construct or repair any sidewalk adjacent to their lot or parcel of land within such time as herein required, or as may be required by a resolution of the board, the board may cause the same to be done in accordance with the provisions of Public Act No. 80 of 1989 (MCL 41.288A), and the board may use any lawful means available to recover the cost of said construction or repair.  
( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-26. - Sidewalk permits. 
A permit is required prior to beginning construction, removal, or repair of a sidewalk. The permit shall be in a form provided by the township engineer.  
( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-27. - Construction standards. 
All sidewalks hereafter constructed, repaired or rebuilt shall be constructed, repaired or rebuilt according to the township sidewalk construction standards as adopted by the board.  
( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-28. -Authority of township board. 
The board, or the board's designee, shall have authority to provide for the construction or repair of sidewalks as well as the clearance of ice and snow by general contract, or in such other manner as it shall determine.  
( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-29. - Administration. 
It shall be the responsibility of the township engineer, or their designee to supervise and control all sidewalks and the construction, repair, and maintenance thereof, including inspection. 
( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-30. - Violations. 
(a) 	
Violations of the provisions of this article, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction, subject to a fine in the amount of $50.00 if paid within ten days of issuance, or $100.00 if paid after ten days of issuance. 

(b) 	
Municipal civil infractions shall be issued and served to the owner of the property upon which the violation has occurred.  

(c) 	
The imposition of any fine shall not exempt the violator from compliance with the provisions of this article. Each day a violation remains in existence may be treated as a separate offense. 

(d) 	
If any fines and/or costs associated with this section are not paid, the civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court in accordance with section 20-22(g).  

(e) 
The civil fine associated with this section shall be set from time to time by the board by resolution.  


( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-31. - Violations deemed municipal civil infraction. 
For each violation of a provision of this article, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, a township appointed official shall be authorized to issue and serve a municipal civil infraction citation, in accordance with article II of chapter 20, on any person with respect to a violation of this article when there is reasonable cause to believe that person has committed such an offense. 
( Ord. No. 14-83, 7-7-2014 ) 
Secs. 34-32—34-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE ROADS 
Sec. 34-47. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Private road means a road intended for vehicular traffic which services two or more properties and which is not under the jurisdiction of a public agency.  
(Code 1992, § 15.5-62; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.2, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-48. - Purpose. 
The township has hereby determined that as tracts of land are divided, sold, transferred, and developed, private access roads are being created to provide access to the newly divided properties which are not subject to regulation under the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), and other state regulations. The township determines it is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare to regulate the construction, improvement, extension, relocation and use of private roads to ensure the following:  
(1) 	
Private roads are designed with width, surface and grade to ensure the safe passage and maneuverability of private vehicles, police, fire, ambulance and other emergency vehicles.  

(2) 	
Said roads are constructed of suitable materials to ensure their minimal maintenance and safe passage.  


(Code 1992, § 15.5-61; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.1, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-49. - Exemptions. 
The provisions herein are not applicable to private roads serving two-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, mobile home parks, condominium subdivisions, planned unit developments and properties within commercial, office or industrial zoning districts.  
(Code 1992, § 15.5-63; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.3, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-50. - Design standards. 
All private roads constructed after the effective date of Ordinance No. 01-01 shall comply with the following standards:  
(1) 	
Driving surface. The private road shall consist of at least two lanes (two directions) with a minimum lane width of ten feet each.  

(2) 	
Crown. The road surface shall have a minimum crown of 0.2 of one foot from the centerline of the private road to the outside edge of the pavement.  

(3) 	
Base materials. The driving surface shall have a minimum of six inches of bank run gravel and two inches minimum of processed gravel over a compacted base. Where the road is being constructed in impervious soils, a 12-inch sand subbase with a subbase drainage system shall be required.  

(4) 	
Shoulder. A road shoulder shall be provided on each side of the private road surface with a minimum width of two feet containing a slope of 0.22 of one foot from the outside edge of the road surface to the toe of the slope. A shoulder shall not be required where curb and gutter has been installed.  

(5) 	
Turnaround. The end of the private road shall have a turnaround and the easement shall allow enough land for a 30-foot inside radius or a 48-foot outside radius or a second means of ingress and egress. The cul-de-sac shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in this subsection.  

(6) 	
Culverts. Culverts shall be placed at all natural drainage courses or other waterways. Culvert sizes, materials, and grades shall be determined using the county road commission standards.  

(7) 	
Drainage. Drainage provisions for private roads shall be in compliance with the private road regulations of the county drain commissioner's office.  

(8) 
Slope. Street grades shall not exceed ten percent. 


(Code 1992, § 15.5-64; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.4, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-51. - General requirements. 
All private roads constructed after the effective date of Ordinance No. 01-01 shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1) 	
Easement. A 30-foot wide easement shall be dedicated for the private road. Private roads shall be centered within the street right-of-way.  

(2) 	
Road name. A road name shall be approved by the Tri-County Regional Planning Commission and the county 911 central dispatch. 

(3) 	
Signage. A road name sign of a type approved by the county road commission shall be placed at the intersection of the private roads and public or private roads. The bottom of the sign face shall be placed a minimum of six feet above the adjacent road surface. 

(4) 	
Erosion. All private roads are subject to regulation under the county's soil erosion program as administered by the county drain commissioner.  

(5) 	
Sight distance and road clearance. Areas at or near intersections shall be kept free of obstructions in order to provide adequate sight distance for motorists. The area above the road surface must be kept free of obstructions such as tree limbs to accommodate the safe passage of emergency service vehicles.  

(6) 	
Maintenance. All private roads shall be maintained in a safe manner. Maintenance, repair, and liability for private roads shall not be the responsibility of the township.  


(Code 1992, § 15.5-65; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.5, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-52. - Preliminary private road permit. 
(a) 	
New private roads. Construction of a single-family dwelling shall not begin on a new private road or on adjacent properties which depend on the private road for access until a preliminary private road permit has been issued.  

(b) 	
Application. The applicant for a preliminary private road permit shall submit an application for said permit, together with a review fee as determined by the township board, to the zoning administrator. The following documents shall accompany the application:  

(1) 
Legal description. A legal description of the proposed private road right-of-way. 

(2) 	
Site plan. A reproducible site plan, drawn on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet to a scale of not more than one inch to 200 feet, illustrating the location of the proposed road and the property lines of parcels adjacent to the proposed road. The site plan shall superimpose topographic elevations, at not more than two-foot contour intervals, over the proposed road right-of-way. 

(3) 	
Construction plans. A reproducible copy of construction plans, drawn on a 24-inch by 36-inch sheet to a horizontal scale of not less than one inch to 50 feet, prepared by a licensed professional engineer including a cross section of the proposed road illustrating the subbase, base and driving surface, the street grades, drainage and other improvements, as necessary. 

(4) 	
Phasing. If an applicant proposes to initially only construct a portion of the private road, they shall provide a general layout for the entire road.  

(5) 	
Maintenance agreement. A private road maintenance agreement which provides a detailed description of how the road will be maintained and how the maintenance costs will be apportioned and paid for by benefitting property owners. The primary purpose of said maintenance agreement shall be to ensure the provision of suitable access by emergency vehicles. The applicant shall agree that subsequent owners of any and all building sites accessed by the proposed private road shall enter into the maintenance agreement. The agreement shall be recorded in the records of the county register of deeds, and a recorded copy shall be filed with the zoning administrator, prior to issuance of the final private road permit. The township shall not be responsible for the legality or enforcement of a private road maintenance agreement. 

(c) 	
Review. Following receipt of the required materials, the zoning administrator shall refer the application to the fire chief, township engineer, utilities director, county drain commissioner and other individuals or agencies deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator. Review of the application shall include its conformance with applicable regulations, and whether the health, safety, and general welfare of persons using or affected by the private road will be adequately protected. The township board shall review and approve or disapprove the proposed private road. If approval is granted, by the township board and if the zoning administrator finds that all of the applicable regulations have been complied with, the zoning administrator shall issue a preliminary private road permit to the applicant which shall allow the applicant to proceed with construction of the private road. No construction of the private road shall be started until the preliminary private road permit is issued by 


the zoning administrator. The preliminary private road permit shall expire two years after it is granted, unless road construction is completed within that time. If the application is not approved, the zoning administrator shall set forth in writing the reasons for rejection and the requirements for resubmittal and shall provide the applicant with a copy thereof.  
(Code 1992, § 15.5-66; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.6, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-53. - Final private road permit. 
Upon completion of construction of a private road, the owner shall submit to the township a completion certificate signed by a registered engineer that the road has been completed in accordance with the construction plans. The owner shall correct any deficiencies identified. Upon final review and approval of the completed private improvements by the township engineer, the zoning administrator shall issue a final private road permit to the owner. Certificates of zoning compliance for the construction of a single-family dwelling on properties served by the private road shall not be issued until the final private road permit has been issued or the applicant for a building permit or owners of the private road right-of­way have provided the township with a cash deposit, certified check, surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit in an amount determined by the township engineer to ensure construction of the private road in accordance with the private road construction plans within two years from the issuance of the certificate of zoning compliance.  
(Code 1992, § 15.5-67; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.7, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-54. - Amendments. 
Any additions, deletions or alterations from the original recorded agreement or construction plans shall be recorded as amendments to the original at the register of deeds' office and submitted to the zoning administrator to determine compliance with this article. 
(Code 1992, § 15.5-68; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.8, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-55. - Township liability. 
The owners of the private road agree, by applying for and securing a permit to construct the private road, that they shall indemnify, save and hold the township harmless from all claims for personal injury and/or property damage arising out of the failure to properly construct, maintain, repair and replace the private road. Such wording shall appear on the application for the permit and be shall be signed by the applicant.  
(Code 1992, § 15.5-69; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.9, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-56. - Variances. 
Any person affected by a decision regarding this article shall have the right to appeal the decision to the township board within ten calendar days. Such appeal shall be filed with the zoning administrator in writing and shall state the reasons for appeal and include any documents in support thereof. The township board shall establish a time for hearing the appeals which shall be not later than 30 calendar days after filing. Written notice of such hearing by first class mail shall be provided to all adjacent properties which depend on or may depend in the future on the private road for access and all properties within 300 feet of such private road. Such notice shall be given not less than 72 hours prior to such hearing. The decision of the township board shall be set forth in writing and be delivered to the applicant within ten calendar days following the hearing. The decision of the township board shall be final. The township board shall grant variances only upon a finding, from reasonable evidence, that the following facts and conditions exist:  
(1) 	
That the authorizing of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and will not materially impair the intent and purposes of this article or the public interest. The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be deemed sufficient to warrant a variance.  

(2) 	
That the condition or situation of the specific piece of property, for which the variance is sought is of so general or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formation of a general regulation for such conditions or situations.  

(3) 	
That by reason of exceptional narrowness in width, breadth, length, or shape of a specific piece of property on the effective date of Ordinance No. 01-01, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions, or other extraordinary situation or condition of the land, building or structure, or of the use or development of property immediately adjoining the property in question, the literal enforcement of the requirements of this article would involve practical difficulties or would cause undue hardship.  

(4) 	
Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this article, the township board may vary or modify any of its rules or provisions so that the spirit of this article is observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done.  


(Code 1992, § 15.5-70; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.10, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-57. - Violations. 
(a) 	
Upon determination that a violation of the provisions of this article exists, the persons believed to have committed the violation shall be notified by certified letter of the nature of the violation. The notice shall specify the time period in which the person shall come in compliance with the provisions of this article. In no case shall the time period specified in the notice to come in compliance with the provisions of this article exceed 90 calendar days.  

(b) 	
Violations of the provisions of this article, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 

(c) 	
Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  

(d) 	
The owner of record or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any engineer, builder, contractor, agent or person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.  

(e) 	
The imposition of any fine, or jail sentence, or both shall not exempt the violator from compliance with the provisions of this article. 


(Code 1992, § 15.5-71; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.11, 3-19-2001) 
Sec. 34-58. - Appearance tickets. 
After a notice of violation is given to a person pursuant to section 34-57, and compliance with the provisions of this article have not been obtained, the zoning administrator shall be authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets on any person with respect to any violation of this article when there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed such an offense. This authority is granted pursuant to Public Act No. 147 of 1968 (MCL 764.9a et seq.). 
(Code 1992, § 15.5-72; Ord. No. 01-01, § 20.12, 3-19-2001) 
Secs. 34-59—34-89. - Reserved. 

ARTICLE IV. - ICE AND SNOW REMOVAL 
Sec. 34-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Private property means any area, space, lot or parcel, whether improved or unimproved, occupied or unoccupied, which is privately owned and maintained for the purposes of snow and ice removal.  
(Code 1992, § 15.5-87; Ord. No. 03-03, § 5, 2-17-2003) 
Sec. 34-91. - Purpose. 
This article is intended to provide the township with a means of applying reasonable regulations to require snow and ice removal from sidewalks, and to require that the removal of snow from private property shall not be deposited or placed in a manner deemed inappropriate, in order to promote public health, safety and welfare.  
(Code 1992, § 15.5-86; Ord. No. 03-03, § 5, 2-17-2003) 
Sec. 34-92. - Removal required. 
No person shall permit ice or an accumulation of more than two inches of snow to remain on any sidewalk adjacent to a lot or parcel occupied by them, or on a sidewalk adjacent to any unoccupied lot or parcel owned by them for a longer period than 24 hours after the same has formed or fallen. Snow and ice shall be removed from the entire constructed width and length of the sidewalk.  
(Code 1992, § 15.5-88; Ord. No. 03-03, § 5, 2-17-2003; Ord. No. 03-12, 11-17-2003; Ord. No. 17-94 , § I, 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 34-93. - Requirements for removal. 
(a) 	
All persons removing snow from private property, whether by use of a shovel, snow blower, plough, or any other method, shall comply with the following regulations: 

(1) 
Snow shall not be deposited or spread into sidewalks, alleys, streets or highways.  

(2) 
Snow shall not be deposited so as to obstruct fire hydrants or fire appliances.  

(3) 	
Snow shall not be deposited so as to create any visual or physical obstruction which would impair the safe use of sidewalks, alleys, streets or highways. 


(Code 1992, § 15.5-89; Ord. No. 03-03, § 5, 2-17-2003; Ord. No. 17-94 , § I, 1-3-2017) 
Sec. 34-94. - Removal by the township. 
Failure to remove snow and/or ice, as stipulated in section 34-92, may result in the township removing or causing to remove the snow and/or ice from the sidewalk and seeking to recover the actual cost and an administrative fee from the property owner. The township may cause the snow and/or ice to be removed from the sidewalk as many times as necessary to ensure compliance with section 34-92.  
(Ord. No. 17-94 , § I, 1-3-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-94 , § I, adopted Jan. 3, 2017, repealed the former §§ 34-94—34-97, and enacted new §§ 34-94—34-97 as set out herein. The former §§ 34-94—34-97 pertained to administration, enforcement, violations, and violations deemed municipal civil infraction, and derived from the Code of 1992, §§ 15.5-89—15.5-93; and Ord. No. 03-03, § 5, 2-17-2003. 
Sec. 34-95. - Notice. 
The township shall publish an annual notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the township during the month of October that snow and ice must be removed from sidewalks within 24 hours after it has formed or fallen and noting that failure to comply may result in the township causing the sidewalk to be cleared at the property owner's expense. (Ord. No. 17-94 , § I, 1-3-2017) Note— See editor's note at § 34-94. 
Sec. 34-96. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the township manager and his/her designees to enforce the terms of this article.  (Ord. No. 17-94 , § I, 1-3-2017) Note— See editor's note at § 34-94. 
Sec. 34-97. - Violations. 
(a) 	
Violations of the provisions of this article, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction subject to the penalties specified in section 1-7(c) of this Code. 

(b) 	
The imposition of any fine shall not exempt the violator from compliance with the provisions of this article. 

(c) 	
If any fines and/or costs associated with this section are not paid, the civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court in accordance with section 20-22(g).  


(Ord. No. 17-94 , § I, 1-3-2017) Note— See editor's note at § 34-94. 
Secs. 34-98, 34-99. - Reserved. ARTICLE V. - COMPLETE STREETS Sec. 34-100. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Complete streets infrastructure means roadways and/or public rights-of-way planned, designed, and constructed to provide appropriate access to all legal users in a manner that promotes safe and efficient movement of people and goods whether by car, truck, transit, assistive device, foot, or bicycle. 
Street project means the construction, reconstruction, retrofit, or alteration, and includes the planning, design, approval, and implementation processes, except that "street project" does not include maintenance such as cleaning, sweeping, mowing, spot repair, or interim measures on detour routes. 
Users means legal users of the roadways and public right-of-way, including pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle drivers, public transportation riders and drivers, and people of all ages and abilities including children, youth, families, older adults, and individuals with disabilities. 
( Ord. No. 14-80, 1-21-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-101. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are as follows:  
(1) 	
To promote public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the community by providing opportunities for walking, bicycling, personal vehicular transportation and public transportation. 

(2) 
To encourage increased use of non-motorized modes of transportation. 

(3) 	
To attempt to maximize access for all segments of the population including both persons with and without disabilities.  


( Ord. No. 14-80, 1-21-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-102. - Complete street infrastructure. 
(a) 	
The township shall endeavor to make complete streets practices a routine part of operations, strive to make every street project accessible for all users, and coordinate efforts with other agencies and jurisdictions to achieve complete streets. The township shall work in partnership with the county road commission and the state department of transportation to facilitate implementation of complete streets to the extent feasible, pursuant to this article. 

(b) 	
To the extent possible, the township resolves to consider complete streets practices for every street project in order to provide reasonably safe travel along and across the road right-of-way for each category of users; provided, however, that such infrastructure may be excluded, upon agreement of the township board and the applicable public road agency, subject to each agency's powers and duties, where documentation and data indicate that:  

(1) 
Use by non-motorized users is prohibited by law.  

(2) 	
The cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need or probable future use over the long term, or funding is simply not available.  

(3) 
There is an absence of current or future need.  

(4) 	
Inclusion of complete streets infrastructure would be unreasonable or inappropriate in light of the scope of the project.  

(5) 	
Implementation of complete streets infrastructure is not possible due to physical restraints imposed by the project area.  

(c) 	
As feasible pursuant to subsection (b), the township will consider incorporating complete streets infrastructure into existing streets to improve the safety and convenience of users, construct and enhance the transportation network for each category of users, and create a walkable community.  

(d) 	
As feasible pursuant to subsection (b), if the safety and convenience of users can be improved within the scope of a street project that includes pavement resurfacing, restriping, or signalization operations, the township board will review the possibility of incorporating complete streets improvements.  

(e) 	
The township will review all appropriate plans, zoning and subdivision codes, laws, procedures, and rules, including the comprehensive plan, non-motorized transportation plan, and sidewalk plan of the township to attempt to address the needs of all users in all street projects on public and private streets. This shall be done through the normal course of revisions and updates to these documents. 


( Ord. No. 14-80, 1-21-2014 ) 
Sec. 34-103. - Data collection, standards, and public input. 
(a) 	
The township has collected a significant amount of data and obtained public input by various means pertaining to multiple modes of transportation which is reflected in the township's comprehensive plan, non-motorized transportation plan, sidewalk plan, and parks and recreation plan. Like any planning document, these plans may be amended and/or updated from time to time.  

(b) 	
The township shall continue to encourage public participation in decisions concerning the design and use of streets.  

(c) 	
The township shall work in concert with the county road commission and the state department of transportation when evaluating future roadway projects for the inclusion or feasibility of complete streets infrastructure. 

(d) 
All street projects requiring funding and/or approval by the township board shall:  

(1) 
Evaluate the effect of the proposed project on safe travel by all users. 

(2) 
Identify measures to mitigate any adverse impacts on such travel that are identified.  

(3) 
Achieve implementation of complete street infrastructure to the extent feasible.  


( Ord. No. 14-80, 1-21-2014 ) 
Chapter 36 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
State Law reference— Michigan telecommunications act, MCL 484.2101 et seq.; metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq.; Michigan broadband development authority act, MCL 484.3201 et seq.; uniform video services local franchise act, MCL 484.3301 et seq.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. -USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) ---  

State Law reference— Metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, MCL 484.3101 et seq.  
Sec. 36-19. - Definitions. 
(a) 	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Act means the metropolitan extension telecommunication rights-of-way oversight act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.). 
Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the township for its telecommunications facilities. 
Township board means the township board or its designee. This definition does not authorize the delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the township board.  
(b) 	All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
Metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight authority means the authority created pursuant to section 3 of the Act. 
Michigan Public Service Commission (MPSC) means the commission in the department of consumer and industry services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act.  
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
Telecommunication facilities or facilities. 
(1) 	
The term "telecommunication facilities" or "facilities" means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify or provide telecommunication services or signals.  

(2) 	
The term "telecommunication facilities" or "facilities" does not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.  


Telecommunication provider, provider and telecommunication services. 
(1) 	
The terms "telecommunication provider," "provider" and "telecommunication services" mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2102). For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 

a. 	
A cable television operator that provides a telecommunication service. 

b. 	
Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.  

c. 	
A person providing broadband internet transport access service.  



(2) 	
The term "telecommunication provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 


and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device.  
(Code 1992, § 8-174; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-20. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the metropolitan extension telecommunication rights-of-way oversight act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.) (the Act) and other applicable law, and to ensure that the township qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act.  
(Code 1992, § 8-172; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-21. - Conflict. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act, other township ordinance or other applicable law. 
(Code 1992, § 8-173; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-22. - Permit. 
(a) 	
Required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the township for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article.  

(b) 	
Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form to be provided by the township clerk, and which has been approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(1)). A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the township clerk and two copies with the township manager. Upon receipt, the township clerk shall make copies of the application and distribute them to the appropriate township departments. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(5)).  

(c) 	
Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the freedom of information act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), pursuant to section 6(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(5)), the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 

(d) 	
Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 

(e) 	
Additional information. The township manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the township manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the township manager. If the township and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the township, the township or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(2)).  

(f) 	
Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the Act (MCL 484.3105(1)), authorizations or permits previously issued by the township under section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications 

act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251) and authorizations or permits issued by the township to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article.  

(g) 	
Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3105(3)), within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the township as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2251), shall submit to the township an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3105(3)), a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) of this section. A provider under this subsection shall be given an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3105(4)).  


(Code 1992, § 8-175; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-23. - Issuance of permit. 
(a) 	
Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the township manager. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(3)), the township manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under subsection 36-22(b) for access to a public right-of-way within the township. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(6)), the township manager shall notify the MPSC when the township manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The township manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit.  

(b) 	
Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the township manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act (MCL 484.3106(1),(2), 484.3115). 

(c) 	
Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(4)), the township manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way.  

(d) 	
Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(3)), and without limitation on subsection (c) of this section, the township manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use.  


(Code 1992, § 8-176; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-24. - Right-of-way permit. 
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the township without first obtaining a right-of-way permit from the engineering department as required for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for said permit. 
(Code 1992, § 8-177; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-25. - Conduit or utility poles. 
Pursuant to section 4(3) of the Act (MCL 484.3104(3)), obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Code 1992, § 8-178; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-26. - Route maps. 
Pursuant to section 6(7) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(7)), a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the township, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the township. The route maps should be in electronic format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the Act (MCL 484.3106(8)). 
(Code 1992, § 8-179; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-27. - Repair of damage. 
Pursuant to section 15(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(5)), a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the township, as authorized by permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installation under, over, below, or within the public right-of­way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Code 1992, § 8-180; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-28. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the township set forth in section 36-22(d), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the township's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the Act.  
(Code 1992, § 8-181; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-29. - Modification of existing fees. 
In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(1)), the township hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the Act (MCL 484.313(4)), the township also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the township's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the Act (MCL 484.3108). The township shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(4)). To the extent any fees are charged to the telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the township's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the township, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Code 1992, § 8-182; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-30. - Savings clause. 
Pursuant to section 13(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(5)), if section 8 of the Act (MCL 484.3108) is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 36-29 shall be void from the date the modification was made.  
(Code 1992, § 8-183; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-31. - Use of funds. 
Pursuant to section 10(4) of the Act (MCL 484.3110(4)), all amounts received by the township from the authority shall be used by the township solely for rights-of-way related purposes.  
(Code 1992, § 8-184; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-32. - Annual report. 
Pursuant to section 10(5) of the Act (MCL 484.3110(5)), the township manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority.  
(Code 1992, § 8-185; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-33. - Cable television operators. 
Pursuant to section 13(6) of the Act (MCL 484.3113(6)), the township shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Code 1992, § 8-186; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-34. - Existing rights. 
Pursuant to section 4(2) of the Act (MCL 484.3104(2)), except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunication provider or the township may have under a permit issued by the township or under a contract or franchise except as indicated in section 36-33, between the township and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.  
(Code 1992, § 8-187; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-35. - Compliance. 
The township hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The township shall comply in all aspects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1) 	
Exempting certain route maps from the freedom of information act, Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), as provided in section 36-22(c);  

(2) 
Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 36-22(f); 

(3) 	
Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the application fee, in accordance with section 36-22(g);  

(4) 	
Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the township, in accordance with section 36-23(a);  

(5) 	
Notifying the MPSC when the township has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 36-23(a); 

(6) 
Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 36-23(a);  

(7) 	
Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 36-23(b);  

(8) 	
Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 36-23(c); 

(9) 	
Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 36-23(d);  

(10) 	
Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for right-of-way permits, in accordance with section 36-24; 

(11) 
Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 36-32; and 

(12) 	
Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 36-33. 


(Code 1992, § 8-188; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-36. - Reservation of police powers. 
Pursuant to section 15(2) of the Act (MCL 484.3115(2)), this article shall not limit the township's right to review and approve or deny a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the township's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.  
(Code 1992, § 8-189; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-37. - Authorized township officials. 
The township manager or his designee is hereby designated as the authorized township official to enforce the terms of this article and to issue and serve municipal civil infraction citations with respect to violation of any provision of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 8-190; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Sec. 36-38. - Violations deemed municipal civil infraction. 
(a) 	
A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction in accordance with article II of chapter 20. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the township in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit.  

(b) 	
If any fines and or costs associated with this article are not paid, the civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court in accordance with section 20-22(g).  


(Code 1992, § 8-191; Ord. No. 03-06, 4-21-2003) 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
State Law reference— Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; authority for township to regulate streets and highways within its jurisdiction, MCL 257.606.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 38-1. - Parking in fire lane; violation. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, trailer or other object, whether occupied or unoccupied, or shall block in any manner, an area designated as a fire lane by ordinance, whether upon public or private property, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic in compliance with law or at the direction of a police officer or fire department personnel.  
(1) 	
Each violation of this section shall be punishable as a civil infraction, subject to a civil fine in the amount of $25.00 if paid within ten days of issuance, or $50.00 if paid after ten days of issuance. 

(2) 	
The sheriff's department personnel and fire department personnel shall be authorized to issue and serve citations with respect to violations of this section. 

(3) 	
In addition to such penalty as provided in this section, any sheriff or fire department personnel may have any vehicle, trailer or other object, left illegally unattended in an area designated as a fire lane by ordinance in violation of this section removed therefrom at the owner's expense without liability to the sheriff's department, fire department, sheriff's department or fire department personnel, or township. Such vehicle, trailer or other object may be held until the civil fine, towing and storage charges have been paid in full. 

(4) 	
If any fines and or costs associated with this section are not paid, the civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court.  

(5) 	
The civil fine associated with this section shall be set from time to time by the township board by resolution. 


(Code 1992, § 17-1; Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, 2-3-2003) 
Secs. 38-2—38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CODES 
Sec. 38-21. - Adoption of Uniform Traffic Code by reference. 
The Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships and villages as promulgated by the director of the department of state police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act No. 306 of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.) and made effective October 30, 2002, including all future amendments and revisions, is hereby adopted by reference. All references in said Uniform Traffic Code to a "governmental unit" means the township.  
(Code 1992, § 17-27; Ord. No. 10-58, 9-6-2011) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt the Uniform Traffic Code, MCL 257.951. 

Sec. 38-22. -Adoption of provisions of state vehicle code by reference. 
The state vehicle code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), and all future amendments and revisions to the state vehicle code when they are effective in the state are hereby adopted by reference.  (Code 1992, § 17-28; Ord. No. 03-04, 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 10-59, 9-6-2011)  State Law reference— Authority to adopt the Michigan vehicle code by reference, MCL 42.23. 
Sec. 38-23. -Adoption of other state laws by reference. 
The following provisions of state law are hereby adopted by reference: section 3102 of the insurance code of 1956, Public Act No. 218 of 1956 (MCL 500.3102), pertaining to required insurance. (Code 1992, § 17-29; Ord. No. 03-04, 2-3-2003) State Law reference— Authority to adopt state law by reference, MCL 42.23. 
Sec. 38-24. - Penalties. 
The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code and the provisions of the state laws hereinabove adopted by reference are hereby adopted as the penalties for violations of the corresponding provisions of this article except where a civil fine is specified within a township fee schedule, or where a civil fine is specified within a township ordinance, in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1992, § 17-30; Ord. No. 03-04, 2-3-2003) 
Sec. 38-25. - Severability. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this article or the Uniform Traffic Code or a statutory provision adopted herein to be unenforceable, in whole or in part, such declaration shall only affect the provision held to be unenforceable and shall not affect any other part or provision; provided that if a court of competent jurisdiction declares a penalty provision to exceed the authority of the township, the penalty shall be construed as the maximum penalty that is determined by the court to be within the authority of the township to impose. 
(Code 1992, § 17-31; Ord. No. 03-04, 2-3-2003) 
Sec. 38-26. - All-night parking prohibited. 
(a) 	
No person shall park any vehicle, including a vehicle used for commercial or recreational purposes, or any trailer on either side of any highway, freeway, street or roadway located within the township between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.  

(b) 	
A person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. The civil fine associated with this section shall be set from time to time by the township board by resolution. 


(Code 1992, § 17-32; Ord. No. 7-33, § 1, 2-5-2007) 
Secs. 38-27—38-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -TRUCK TRAFFIC AND PARKING 
Sec. 38-56. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Local truck traffic means trucks operated to transport products, goods, commodities or raw materials, either from within the township to another place within or outside the township, or from outside the township to a place within the township. Incidental or emergency local truck traffic, as defined in section 38-59, shall be permitted. 
Truck means any commercial motor vehicle, common carrier, delivery truck, dump truck, double bottom truck, pole trailer, semitrailer, tank vehicle, truck tractor, wrecker, or any other vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property including, but not limited to, raw materials, products, commodities or other commercial items.  
(Code 1992, § 17-47; Ord. No. 01-02, § 2, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-57. - Violations. 
A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a civil infraction, and shall be subject to civil fine for a first offence not to exceed $100.00, plus other costs, damages or sanctions which the court in its discretion may impose. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the township in the event of a violation by a person of this article.  
(1) 	
Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeat violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this article. As used in this section, repeat offenses means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision: 

a. 	
Committed by a person within any one-year period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this article); and  

b. 	
For which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this article for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows:  

1. 	
The fine for any offense, which is a first, repeat offense, shall be no less than $250.00, plus costs.  

2. 	
The fine for any offense, which is a second, repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500.00, plus costs per offense. 





(2) 	
Failure to answer a citation or notice to appear in court for a municipal civil infraction is a misdemeanor violation punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, plus other costs, or by imprisonment for term not to exceed 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment.  

(3) 	
Failure to comply with an order, judgment, or default in payment of a civil fine, costs, damage, or expenses so ordered may result in enforcement actions, including but not limited to imprisonment, collections, placement of liens or other remedies as permitted in chapter 87 of Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.).  

(4) 	
A municipal civil infraction is not lesser included offense of a criminal offense or an ordinance violation that is not a civil infraction. 

(5) 	
Impounding of motor vehicles. Motor vehicles which have failed to answer six or more parking violation notices or citations under this article may be immobilized or impounded by the township. 

(6) 	
Continuing offenses. Each day on which a violation of this article continues, constitutes a separate or repeat offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate or repeat offense.  


(Code 1992, § 17-51; Ord. No. 01-02, § 6, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 10-51, § 1(17-51), 5-17-2010) 
Sec. 38-58. -Approved truck routes. 
No person shall operate or drive a truck upon a street within the corporate limits of the township, except on the following streets:  
(1)  Interstate 96.   
(2)  Interstate 69.   
(3)  Interstate 496.   
(4)  M-43.   
(5)  Canal Rd. from Mt. Hope Hwy. south to Davis Hwy.   
(6)  Creyts Rd. from I-496 interchange south to Lansing Rd.   
(7)  Sanders Rd. from Pierson Hwy. south to Millett Hwy.   
(8)  Snow Rd. from Mt. Hope south to Pierson Hwy.   
(9)  Lansing Rd.   
(10)  Mt. Hope Hwy. from Lansing Rd. west to I-96/I-69 bridge.  
(11)  Pierson Hwy. from Snow Rd. west to Sanders Rd.   
(12)  Millett Hwy. from Lansing Rd. to Sanders Rd.; and from Creyts Rd. to the west of I-96 1,800  

feet. 
(13) 	
Davis Hwy. from Lansing Rd. west to CN railroad tracks; and from Canal Rd. west to Guinea Rd. 

(14) 
Rickle St. 

(15) 
Ena Dr. 

(16) 
Lanac St. 

(17) 
North Port Dr. 

(18) 
Central Circle.  

(19) 
Sloan Hwy.  

(20) 
Westland Way.  

(21) 
Empire Way. 


(Code 1992, § 17-46; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-59. - Incidental or emergency local truck traffic. 
No provision of this article shall restrict the emergency use of nor the casual or incidental commercial truck pickup or delivery to any individual, residence or business upon the streets within the corporate 
limits of the township. Use of approved truck routes for such casual or incidental pickup or delivery is mandatory only if such delivery or pickup can be made without operation on streets other than said established truck routes. All trucks within the township shall return to the nearest approved truck route by the most direct route when finished delivering or picking up goods on nondesignated routes. This includes trucks having additional destinations within the township. Shortcuts on nontruck routes are expressly prohibited.  
(Code 1992, § 17-48; Ord. No. 01-02, § 3, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-60. -Certain vehicles prohibited from parking on public streets. 
No person shall park the following upon public streets within the corporate limits of the township:  
(1) 
A vehicle with three or more axles. 

(2) 
A vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) exceeding 10,000 pounds.  

(3) 
A vehicle which exceeds 12 feet in height or 35 feet in length.  


(Code 1992, § 17-49; Ord. No. 01-02, § 4, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 10-49, 4-19-2010) 
Sec. 38-61. - Signs. 
The road commissioner of the county road commission shall erect signs at all entrances to the township giving notice of the restrictions on truck traffic and shall erect signs on the appropriate streets, designating them as truck routes.  
(Code 1992, § 17-50; Ord. No. 01-02, § 5, 5-7-2001) 
Sec. 38-62. - Enforcement actions. 
This article shall be enforced by officers and law enforcement personnel of the county sheriff's office/department, as well as other authorized township officials as designated by section 20-19. A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court.  
(Code 1992, § 17-52; Ord. No. 01-02, § 7, 5-7-2001; Ord. No. 10-51, § 2(17-52), 5-17-2010) 
Secs. 38-63—38-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT 
Sec. 38-83. - Adoption of Motor Carrier Act of 1963 by reference. 

The motor carrier safety act of 1963, Public Act No. 181 of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.), as amended, and made effective September 6, 1963, is hereby adopted by reference as the Charter Township of Delta Motor Carrier Safety Act Ordinance, and each and all of the sections, regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said motor carrier safety act of 1963 are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribed within section 38-84. 
(Code 1992, § 17-61; Ord. No. 07-40, 11-5-2007) State Law reference— Authority to adopt state law by reference, MCL 42.23. 
Sec. 38-84. - Amendments. 
The following sections are hereby revised:  
All references within the motor carrier safety act of 1963, as adopted herein, to "the Act" shall be revised to include the terms "and this ordinance" immediately following "the Act" throughout this article. 
480.11. Motor carrier safety act; short title. 
Section 1. Revise as follows: "This article shall be known as the "Charter Township of Delta Motor Carrier Safety Act Ordinance."  
480.11a. Adoption of federal regulations; exceptions; definitions. 
Section 1a(1). Revise as follows: "Delta Township by reference hereunder contemporaneously with this state adopts the following provisions of title 49 of the code of federal regulations, on file with the office of the secretary of state except where modified by this act and this ordinance:"  
All reference to a "state civil infraction" within this section shall be deleted and revised so as to be referred to as a "municipal civil infraction punishable as set forth within section 1-7 of the township Code of Ordinances."  
480.17c. Transporting package relating to hazardous material required to be marked or labeled; violation; penalty; owner or user of hazardous materials vehicle inspection or repair facility; violation as a misdemeanor.  
All reference to a "state civil infraction" within this section shall be deleted and revised so as to be referred to as a "municipal civil infraction punishable as set forth within section 1-7 of the township Code of Ordinances".  
Section (2) Delete: "… guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 1 year or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, for each violation."  
Insert: "… guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth within section 1-7 of the township Code of Ordinances for each violation."  
Section (3) Delete: "… guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 1 year or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, for each violation."  
Insert: "… guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth within the section 1-7 of the township Code of Ordinances for each violation."  
480.17d. Definitions; compliance order; shut down order; noncompliance as misdemeanor; impoundment of vehicle. 
Section (7) Delete: "… guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both."  
Insert: "… guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth within the section 1-7 of the township Code of Ordinances for each violation."  
480.24. Enforcement of state civil infraction. 
Delete the entire section. 
(Code 1992, § 17-62; Ord. No. 07-40, 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 38-85. - Severability. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this article or a statutory provision adopted herein to be unenforceable, in whole or in part, such declaration shall only affect the provision held to be unenforceable and shall not affect any other part or provision; provided that if a court of competent jurisdiction declares a penalty provision to exceed the authority of the township, the penalty shall be construed as the maximum penalty that is determined by the court to be within the authority of the township to impose. 
(Code 1992, § 17-63; Ord. No. 07-40, 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 38-86. - Violations. 
A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to civil fine as established from time to time in this article or by resolution of the township board, plus other costs, damages, or sanctions which the court may impose. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the township in the event of a violation by a person of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-51, § 1(17-66), 5-17-2010) 
Sec. 38-87. - Enforcement actions. 
This article shall be enforced by officers and law enforcement personnel of the county sheriff's office/department, as well as other authorized township officials as designated by section 20-19. A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court.  
(Ord. No. 10-51, § 2(17-67), 5-17-2010) 
Secs. 38-88—38-106. - Reserved. 
Chapter 40 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  

State Law reference— Authority to provide for water and sewer systems, MCL 41.411; local authority to provide and regulate sewer and water service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; water and sewer authorities, MCL 
124.281 et seq.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL Sec. 40-1. - Use of hydrants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized township personnel, to draw or take water from any public hydrant, except for emergency fire use, without notifying and obtaining permission from the utilities department. 
(Code 1992, § 18-1; Ord. No. 101, 9-16-1963; Ord. No. 102, 9-16-1963) 
Secs. 40-2—40-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ASSESSABLE COSTS 
Sec. 40-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Assessable costs means the reasonable costs incurred by the township, or by a private person, corporation, or other assisting government agency, operating at the request or direction of the township, in connection with an incident involving a belowground, collapsed trench, structural collapse, confined space, high angle or other complex rescue situation or a terrorist act as defined in this section. The term "assessable costs" includes, but is not limited to:  
(1) 	
The costs of providing police, fire, rescue, and emergency medical services at the scene of such an incident.  

(2) 	
All salaries, wages, and compensation of responding, supervising, investigating, reporting, and testifying township personnel for services rendered in connection with such an incident, its investigation or any prosecution brought in connection with same. 

(3) 	
All salaries, wages, and compensation of responding, supervising, investigating, reporting, and testifying personnel of any assisting government agencies acting at the request or direction of the township for services rendered in connection with such an incident, its investigation or any prosecution brought in connection with same.  

(4) 	
All costs, expenses, and fees, including actual expert witness and attorney fees, incurred in connection with the prosecution of the responsible party.  

(5) 	
The replacement cost of all equipment, materials and supplies lost or rendered beyond reuse or repair as a result of such an incident. 

(6) 
All rental or leasing costs incurred for equipment used in connection with such an incident.  


Responsible party means any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, or other legal entity whose actions or inactions cause, in whole or in part, an incident involving a belowground, collapsed trench, structural collapse, confined space, high angle or other complex rescue situation or terrorist act as defined in this article.  
Terrorist act means conduct utilizing terror, intimidation, violence or the threat of violence to commit or aid in the commission of an unlawful act including, but not limited to, hijacking, assassination and the use of explosives, biological or chemical agents to endanger persons or property.  
Underground utility facilities means any item buried or placed below ground or submerged under water for use in connection with the storage or conveyance of water or sewage including, but not limited to, all operational underground pipes, sewers, tubing, conduits, cables, valves, lines, wires, manholes and attachments that are owned and operated by the township.  
(Code 1992, § 18-2; Ord. No. 03-14, 3-1-2004; Ord. of 2-20-2012, § 1(18-2)) 
Sec. 40-22. - Findings and purpose. 
The township finds that a significant and continuous potential exists for incidents involving a belowground, collapsed trench, structural collapse, confined space, high angle or other complex rescue situation or a terrorist act that will place a substantial financial and operational burden upon police, firefighting, rescue and emergency medical services. The township finds that this article is necessary to fairly allocate the costs resulting from such incidents among those responsible for them. The township further finds that this article is necessary to establish a policy and set forth the methods by which it may recover costs incurred in making appropriate responses and providing services in connection with same, pursuant to state law, including Public Act No. 33 of 1951 (MCL 41.801 et seq.).  
(Code 1992, § 18-3; Ord. No. 03-14, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 40-23. - Underground utility facility maintenance. 
(a) 	
No person shall cause any earth changes or grade alterations over any existing township underground utility facility absent express written permission of the township manager or the township manager's designee.  

(b) 	
A person seeking to engage in activities that may temporarily or permanently cause any earth changes or grade alterations over any existing township underground utility shall, prior to commencement of any work, obtain a permit from the township. Upon completion of the work, the property subject to the permit shall be subject to a final inspection.  

(c) 	
Violation of this section by any person is a municipal civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00. 

(d) 	
In the event any person causes unauthorized earth changes or grade alterations to occur over any existing underground utility facility which the township manager or the township manager's designee has ordered to be corrected shall be responsible for restoration of the property to its previous state. If the responsible party fails to restore the property as directed by the township manager or the township manager's designee, the township shall have the authority to take all actions deemed necessary by the township and assess all costs to the responsible party.  

(e) 	
In the event any person's violation of this section causes any underground utility facility to be damaged or lost in any manner, as determined by the township manager or the township manager's designee, that person shall, in addition to the fines set forth in this section, be liable for assessable costs, as set forth in section 40-25, and any attorney fees and costs incurred by the township as a result of this violation.  


(Ord. of 2-20-2012, § 1(18-3.1)) 
Sec. 40-24. - Liability. 
(a) 	
The township may recover all assessable costs relating to an incident involving a belowground, collapsed trench, structural collapse, confined space, high angle or other complex rescue situation or a terrorist act from any or all responsible parties jointly or severally.  

(b) 	
The township manager or the manager's designee, shall determine the total assessable costs and shall, in consultation with other township personnel involved in responding to the incident for which cost recovery may be sought, determine whether to assess all or part of such costs against any responsible party. The factors considered in making such a determination include, but are not limited to, the following: 

(1) 
The total assessable costs. 

(2) 
The risk the incident presented to the township, its residents and their property.  

(3) 	
Whether the incident resulted in any injury or damage to person or property, and the extent of such injury or damage. 

(4) 	
The extent to which the incident required an unusual or extraordinary use of township personnel and equipment.  

(5) 	
Whether the incident resulted in any damage to the environment and the extent of such damage.  

(6) 
Such other factors as the township deems appropriate.  

(c) 	
Assessable costs may be allocated among and between responsible parties, including allocating all or some assessable costs jointly and severally against more than one responsible party, regardless of whether a responsible party has liability for those costs in addition to that imposed by this article.  

(d) 	
A determination not to assess costs pursuant to this article shall in no way limit, extinguish or constitute a defense to the liability of any responsible party to any third party.  


(Code 1992, § 18-4; Ord. No. 03-14, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 40-25. - Billing and collection and late payment fees. 
(a) 	
Upon a determination to assess costs made pursuant to this article, the township shall submit an itemized invoice, by first class mail or personal service, to each responsible party. Invoices for assessable costs will be due and payable within 30 days of the date of mailing. Thereafter, a late payment fee equal to one percent per month of the unpaid balance shall be assessed, added to the total unpaid balance, and collected in the same manner as assessable costs.  

(b) 	
If a responsible party appeals an assessment of costs, and that assessment is upheld in whole or in part, the costs upheld shall be due and payable within 30 days from the date of determination of the appeal, and late payment fees shall thereafter apply as provided in subsection (a) of this section.  

(c) 	
The township may proceed by action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect any assessable costs due and owing under the provisions of this article and it shall have all remedies provided by law in connection with the collection of same.  


(Code 1992, § 18-5; Ord. No. 03-14, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 40-26. - Appeals to township manager. 
(a) 	
Any responsible party may appeal a determination and invoice of assessable costs as provided for in this section. Within seven business days of the date of mailing the invoice, the responsible party shall deliver, or cause to be delivered, a written request to meet with the township manager or designee. This request must include the current address and telephone number of the responsible party and specify all objections to the assessment determination. Any reason, basis or argument challenging that determination which is not set forth in the request shall be deemed waived by the responsible party.  

(b) 	
Within seven business days after receipt of a request satisfying the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, the township will notify the responsible party of the time, date, and place of a meeting at which that party's objections will be considered by the manager or designee. The responsible party's failure to attend this meeting will constitute a waiver of that party's objections to the assessment determination. 

(c) 	
The manager or designee may, at the conclusion of the meeting with the responsible party, or within a reasonable time thereafter, reduce, increase, set aside, or leave unchanged the determination of assessable costs. Written notification of the decision made by the manager or designee will be mailed to the responsible party at the address provided by the responsible party.  


(Code 1992, § 18-6; Ord. No. 03-14, 3-1-2004) 
Sec. 40-27. -Appeal of township manager's decision to township board. 
(a) 	
The decision of the manager or designee to reduce, increase or leave unchanged a determination of assessable costs may be appealed to the township board if the responsible party has fully complied with section 40-26 and files a written request for township board review with the township 

clerk not later than seven business days after the date of the written notification of the decision sought to be appealed. 

(b) 	
Upon receipt of a request for township board review, the township clerk will place the appeal on the agenda of a regularly scheduled township board meeting which is at least 14 calendar days after the date the responsible party's request for township board review is received. 

(c) 	
On appeal of a determination of assessable costs to the township board, the responsible party shall appear before the board in person or through a designated representative; limit objections only to those set forth in the written request as required by section 40-26; and have the burden of proving, by a preponderance of relevant facts, that the determination appealed from is erroneous in whole or in part. 

(d) 	
On appeal of a determination of assessable costs, the township board shall, within a reasonable time, reverse, affirm, or modify the determination appealed from. The decision of the township board shall be final when made. The township clerk shall notify the responsible party in writing of the township board's decision on appeal.  


(Code 1992, § 18-7; Ord. No. 03-14, 3-1-2004) 
Secs. 40-28—40-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. -WATER SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) ---  
Editor's note— The voters of the township authorized the township to add fluoride to the township water supply system in 1992.  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 40-58. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are as follows:  
(1) 
To preserve, protect, and maintain the township water supply system. 

(2) 
To comply with state and federal water quality standards. 

(3) 	
To complement the design standards for water mains and appurtenances within the township municipal utility standards. 


( Ord. No. 14-87, 11-17-14 ) 
Sec. 40-59. - Definitions. 
Curb valve or curb stop means the township owned valve at the end of the water service stub, located at or near the property line/road right-of-way or easement line, used to turn a water service on or off to a specific building.  
Distribution system water main means that part of the POWSS located within easements or road rights of way and designed to supply one or more water service lines.  
Fire service line means a water main connecting a property or premises to the distribution system water main solely for providing fire protection.  
POWSS means the publicly owned water supply system consisting of distribution system water mains, pumps, equipment and other appurtenances owned, operated and maintained by the township for the transmission, treatment, storage, distribution and supply of potable water for domestic, commercial, industrial and fire protection uses.  
Utilities department means the Delta Township Utilities Department.  
Utilities director means the Delta Township Utilities Director. 
Water meter means a device for measuring and registering the quantity of water that passes through a water service line or fire service line. 
Water service line means a pipe from the curb valve to the water meter situated on a property or within a premise.  
Water service stub means that part of the POWSS between the distribution system water main and the curb valve, including the curb valve.  
( Ord. No. 14-87, 11-17-14 ) 
Sec. 40-60. - Connection to the public water supply system. 
(a) 
Connections to the POWSS shall be as mandated by section 40-93 herein.  

(b) 	
An application for a water connection shall be made to the township accounting department on forms prescribed and furnished by it.  

(c) 	
Water connections shall not be made by the utilities department until payment of the required connection fees and main charge, if any. 

(d) 
Water connections shall be installed in accordance with the township municipal utility standards.  

(e) 	
Water service lines smaller than two inches shall be installed by the utilities department, unless otherwise authorized by the utilities director or his/her designee. 

(1) 	
Water service lines may not be installed absent payment of the required installation costs, capital charges, main charges and inspection fees.  

(2) 	
Water service lines smaller than two inches shall be guaranteed by the utilities department for one year from the date of installation of the water meter. Existing water service lines smaller than two inches shall be guaranteed by the utilities department for one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived.  

(f) 	
Water service lines two inches and larger shall be installed by the property owner's contractor and be subject to inspection by the utilities department following approval of construction plans for the installation and payment for the required plan review, installation and inspection fees and capital charges and main charges, if any.  

(g) 	
The utilities department may refuse to authorize larger service lines than reasonably required by the premises served.  

(h) 	
Curb valves shall not be located in driveways or sidewalks and shall be relocated at the property owner's expense if necessary.  

(i) 	
Fire service lines are under the direct authority of the township fire chief or his/her designee. All fire service line installations and/or repairs shall require a permit issued by the township building division. The utilities department shall not be responsible for the installation or maintenance of fire service lines. 

(j) 	
No water service lines shall be connected to a fire service line. 


( Ord. No. 14-87, 11-17-14 ) 
Sec. 40-61. - Maintenance of a water service line. 
(a) 	
After the one year guarantee provided in section 40-60(e)(2) has expired, the maintenance of a water service line smaller than two inches shall be the sole obligation of the property owner. All maintenance of a water service line smaller than two inches shall be performed by the utilities department, unless otherwise authorized by the utilities director, and billed to the property owner.  

(b) 	
Maintenance of water service lines two inches and larger shall be the sole obligation of the property owner. 

(c) 	
Water service lines shall be maintained in good condition, free of leaks and able to withstand normal water system operations, including but not limited to turning water on and off whether at the main or curb stop or replacement of a water meter and metering appurtenances. 


( Ord. No. 14-87, 11-17-14 ) 
Sec. 40-62. - Maintenance of a water service stub. 
Maintenance of water service stubs shall be the responsibility of the utilities department.  
( Ord. No. 14-87, 11-17-14 ) 
Sec. 40-63. - Water meters. 
(a) 
All premises shall be metered. All meters shall be equipped with automatic remote reading devices.  

(b) 	
Each duplex/condo unit shall have their own water service line and water meter. The water meter must be located in the unit being served.  

(c) 	
No person except a utilities department employee shall tamper with a water meter, change the location of, alter, or interfere in any way with a water meter. 

(d) 	
A utilities department employee shall, at all reasonable hours, have the right to enter the premises that are served by the POWSS for the purpose of installing, testing, maintaining, removing, replacing or inspecting a water meter(s) and no person shall hinder, obstruct, or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of his/her duties of such water meter. 

(e) 	
Any damage that a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the owner, agent, or tenant or from neglect of any of them, to properly secure and protect the meter as well as any damage which may be wrought by frost or hot water shall be paid by the property owner to the township. Nonpayment of the bill may result in discontinuance of water service until all charges have been paid to the township. 

(f) 	
If any water meter shall fail to register properly, the utilities department shall estimate the consumption on the basis of past consumption and bill accordingly.  

(g) 	
A consumer may request that the meter be tested. If the meter is found defective, a new meter will be installed and no charge will be made. If the meter is found to be accurate, the customer will be charged the cost of the meter replacement.  


( Ord. No. 14-87, 11-17-14 ) 
Secs. 40-64—40-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE WELLS 
Sec. 40-88. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Private well means any opening in the surface of the earth for the removal of water through mechanical or nonmechanical means for any purpose, including, but in no manner limited to, human consumption, sanitation, irrigation, the filling of ponds, landscaping, recreation, employment, maintenance or industrial uses.  
(Code 1992, § 18-26.1; Ord. No. 06-29, 5-1-2006) 
Sec. 40-89. - Operation of public water system. 
The operation, maintenance and management of the public water supply system of the township shall be under the immediate supervision and control of the utilities department.  
(Code 1992, § 18-26; Ord. No. 06-29, 5-1-2006) 
Sec. 40-90. - New private wells; prohibitions; licenses. 
No person shall install a new private well without first obtaining a license from the township and a permit from the Barry-Eaton District Health Department. A license shall not be granted for a private well on a parcel of land within 200 feet of the township water system or for any new private well to be used for industrial purposes without authorization from the township. Licenses shall not be required from the township for private wells providing drinkable water which are located on parcels of land more than 200 feet from the township water system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a private well for the sole purpose of treating groundwater may be installed and operated under a plan approved by the state department of environmental quality. The intent of this section is to promote public health and the general welfare and to facilitate the adequate provision of public water.  
(Code 1992, § 18-26.2; Ord. No. 06-29, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 10-48, 2-1-2010) 
Sec. 40-91. -Exceptions for new private wells by issuance of a license. 
(a) 	
Private well licenses. Notwithstanding the prohibition set forth in section 40-90, the township engineer may grant a license for the installation and operation of a new private, nondrinking, water well, even if the subject parcel is served by the township water system. 

(b) 	
Application and fee. Applicants requesting a private well shall submit a license application and the required filing fee to the township engineer. 

(c) 	
Term of license. A private well license shall expire and become null and void at the first occurrence of any one of the following: 

(1) 
The use of the private well ceases. 

(2) 
The licensee leases or sells the property on which the private well is located.  

(3) 
A period of five years elapses following the issuance of the license. 

(d) 	
Renewal of license. A private well license may be renewed by the township engineer subject to the submittal of a license application and fee for renewal and compliance with the criteria for the granting of a well license provided hereafter.  

(e) 	
Transferability of license. A private well license shall not be transferred to any person or property. All licenses shall be subject to compliance with the criteria for granting of a well license. 

(f) 	
Enforcement. All enforcement issues pertaining to a private well license shall be the responsibility of the township engineer. 

(g) 	
Criteria for the granting of a private well license. The township engineer shall determine that all of the following criteria have been met prior to the issuance of a private well license:  

(1) 
A practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship will result if the license is not granted.  

(2) 
The public health, safety and welfare shall not be adversely impacted.  

(3) 	
There shall not be any substantial adverse impacts upon properties in the immediate vicinity as a result of granting the license. 

(4) 
The installation and operation of the private well is not solely for economic reasons.  

(h) 	
Suspension of license. The township engineer may suspend a private well license upon a finding that an applicable federal, state or local law has been violated or that the continued operation of the well constitutes a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The township engineer shall have the authority to reinstate a private well license.  


(Code 1992, § 18-26.2-1; Ord. No. 10-48, 2-1-2010) 
Sec. 40-92. - Existing private wells; licenses required for expansion. 
Existing private wells may continue to be used for their current purposes, but shall not be expanded without first obtaining a license from the township engineer and the required permit from the Barry-Eaton District Health Department. Existing private wells may continue to be used for their current purposes and may be expanded only upon issuance of a duly granted license under the criteria established under section 40-91. 
(Code 1992, § 18-26.3; Ord. No. 06-29, 5-1-2006; Ord. No. 10-48, 2-1-2010) 
Sec. 40-93. - Mandatory connection to the township water system. 
To ensure the payment of the township's obligations relating to the creation, maintenance and extension of the public water supply system, and to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare, all water for human consumption, employment, recreation, irrigation, landscaping, sanitation, maintenance, industrial or other similar purposes, regardless of whether such use is related to the existence, operation, or construction of a building or other structure, except as otherwise permitted by sections 40-90 through 40-92, shall be obtained entirely from the water system pursuant to an approved connection to said system. 
(Code 1992, § 18-27; Ord. No. 06-29, 5-1-2006) 
Sec. 40-94. -Connection to water system. 
For the purposes of this division, all connections to the township water system shall be completed in a manner, location, and time frame reasonably acceptable to township. Connections to interior plumbing systems shall be completed within 30 days of the extension of the township water system to the point of connection and, if applicable or required, the disconnection of a private well to the interior plumbing system. The interior plumbing requirements of this section may be waived only at the discretion of the township utilities director. All costs associated with this section shall be the responsibility of the property owner unless otherwise determined and agreed to by the township board.  
(Code 1992, § 18-28; Ord. No. 06-29, 5-1-2006) 
Sec. 40-95. - Mandatory well plugging. 
At the time of a connection to the township water system, the existing well on the premises must be abandoned and plugged. In those instances where the well is inaccessible, such as under a building/structure or covered by concrete/asphalt, the township engineer shall determine if the mandatory well plugging can be waived. A licensed well driller retained and under the supervision of the township engineering department, shall perform the plugging of the well. All costs associated with this section shall be the responsibility of the property owner unless otherwise determined and agreed to by the township board. 
(Code 1992, § 18-29; Ord. No. 06-29, 5-1-2006) 
Sec. 40-96. -Extensions to water system. 
Any extension to the township water system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the township's water installation standards, as amended, and applicable state law. All costs associated with extending the township water system to comply with connection requirements shall be the responsibility of the property owner unless otherwise determined and agreed to by the township board.  
(Code 1992, § 18-30; Ord. No. 06-29, 5-1-2006) 
Sec. 40-97. - Fees. 
All users of the water system shall be responsible for the payment of user fees based on a fee schedule adopted by the township. The fees shall be binding upon all users of the water system, as well as their successors in interest, assigns, estates and heirs.  
(Code 1992, § 18-31; Ord. No. 06-29, 5-1-2006) 
Sec. 40-98. - License issuance; denial; appeal process. 
(a) 	
If, as a result of the township engineer's review, the application is satisfactory, the township engineer shall approve the license and issue a certificate bearing the words "private well license" having the signature of the township engineer. The license and certificate shall be issued within ten business days from the day the application was originally filed. The certificate shall also stipulate the period for which the license is valid and the license number. The certificate shall be displayed by the business so as to be conspicuous during the time of the business operation.  

(b) 	
If, as a result of the township engineer's review, the application is unsatisfactory, the township engineer shall deny the application within ten business days from the day the application was originally filed. The township engineer shall notify the applicant in writing of the specific reasons why the application was denied. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, to the address as stated on the application. 

(c) 	
The denial of the license by the township engineer may be appealed to the township board if so desired by the applicant, provided that a written request to appeal is filed with the township engineer within 30 days of the receipt of license denial. A failure to file a request for appeal within 30 days shall be deemed to constitute a waiver of appeal. Upon proper filing of a timely request for appeal by the applicant, the township engineer shall take the appropriate steps necessary to place the applicant's appeal on the next township board agenda. The township board shall deny, approve, or approve with conditions the application as determined by the board to be in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare.  

(d) 	
If after an appeal to the township board the application is approved, the township engineer shall issue a certificate bearing the words "private well license" and the signature of the township engineer. The license and certificate shall be issued on the next business day following the township board meeting. The certificate shall stipulate the period for which the license is valid and the number 

of the license. The certificate shall be displayed by the business so as to be conspicuous during the time of the business' operation.  

(e) 	
If the township board denies the application, the township engineer shall notify the applicant thereof in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, sent to the address as stated on the application with a statement of the specific reasons for denial.  

(f) 	
Any person aggrieved by any action of the township board in the administration of this division may appeal to the county circuit court.  


(Code 1992, § 18-32; Ord. No. 10-48, 2-1-2010) 
Secs. 40-99—40-124. - Reserved. DIVISION 3. - CONSERVATION Sec. 40-125. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Emergency water shortage alert means an emergency declared by the township supervisor and/or township board to reduce water consumption to a level necessary to maintain water storage sufficient for intended firefighting and to provide water for the basic health and welfare of all water users.  
Water means the water which is obtained from the township water supply system.  
(Code 1992, § 18-37; Ord. No. 256, § 2, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-126. - Penalties. 
Users of water supplied by the township water system who violate the terms and provisions of this division, or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this division, shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  
(Code 1992, § 18-49; Ord. No. 256, § 12, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-127. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a method for limiting and, where necessary, terminating the nonessential use of water within the township.  
(Code 1992, § 18-36; Ord. No. 256, § 1, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-128. - Application of regulations. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to all persons using water both inside and outside the township, and regardless of whether any person using water shall have a contract for water service with the township. 
(Code 1992, § 18-38; Ord. No. 256, § 3, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-129. - Declaration of emergency water shortage alert. 
(a) 	
The supervisor and/or township board may declare an emergency water shortage alert when water consumption levels exceed the ability of the water system to produce sufficient quantities of water to meet consumption demands and/or to maintain sufficient reserves of water for fighting fires.  

(b) 	
When declared by the township supervisor, the alert shall not exceed 72 consecutive hours unless confirmed by the township board. An alert declared by the township board shall not exceed 180 consecutive days unless renewed by the board. The board may at any time declare the end of the alert. 

(c) 	
The extent of the emergency water shortage alert shall be specified by the township board when the alert is declared. This may be a total ban or a restricted ban during certain designated high usage hours of the day. 


(Code 1992, § 18-39; Ord. No. 256, § 4, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-130. - Certain uses prohibited. 
The use and withdrawal of water by any person for the following purposes is hereby prohibited when such use and withdrawal of water is subsequent to the declaration of an emergency water shortage alert:  
(1) 	
Watering yards. The sprinkling, watering, or irrigating of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground cover, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers or any vegetation.  

(2) 	
Washing mobile equipment. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer houses, railroad cars or any other kind of mobile equipment.  

(3) 	
Cleaning outdoor surfaces. The washing of sidewalks, driveways, service station aprons, porches and other outdoor surfaces.  

(4) 	
Cleaning buildings. The washing of the outside of dwellings; the washing of the inside and outside of office buildings.  

(5) 	
Cleaning of equipment and machinery. The washing of any business and industrial equipment and machinery. This restriction shall not apply to equipment used in the preparation of food for human consumption.  

(6) 	
Ornamental fountains. The operation of any ornamental fountain or any other structure making a similar use of water. This restriction shall not apply to fountains which recirculate water. 

(7) 	
Swimming pools. Swimming and wading pools not employing a filtering and recirculating system. 

(8) 	
Escape through defective plumbing. The escape of water through defective plumbing shall be deemed to be with the knowledge and permission of the owner, where such water loss is discovered. 


(Code 1992, § 18-40; Ord. No. 256, § 5, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-131. - Exceptions to maintain sanitation and public safety. 
The township shall have the authority to permit a reasonable use of water in any case necessary to maintain adequate health and sanitation standards. Use of water to extinguish or prevent fires shall not be impaired. 
(Code 1992, § 18-41; Ord. No. 256, § 6, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-132. - Restriction on business and industrial uses. 
Businesses and industries using township water shall be restricted to the use of an amount of water used by the business during the corresponding month of the preceding year.  
(1) 	
Exception for business necessary for public health, safety and welfare. The provisions of this section shall not apply to those businesses and industries declared by resolution of the township board to be necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.  

(2) 	
Exception for food manufacturer. Businesses and industries processing animal, vegetable and mineral matter for food purposes shall be regulated in the use of water as follows: The township board shall hold a public hearing to determine the amount of water to be used based on the amount needed during normal years in a particular food processing business. 


(Code 1992, § 18-42; Ord. No. 256, § 7, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-133. - Emergency notice. 
If the township board or supervisor of the township declares an emergency water shortage alert, this alert will be brought to the attention of all residents within the township by means of radio, television, local newspaper or social media, as directed by the board or by the supervisor. 
(Code 1992, § 18-43; Ord. No. 256, § 8, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-134. - Township water supply system information. 
The township water supply system shall have available and shall furnish all records necessary to determine the uses of water restricted by this division. 
(Code 1992, § 18-44; Ord. No. 256, § 9, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-135. - Enforcement. 
Every police officer of the township shall, in connection with his duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this division.  
(Code 1992, § 18-45; Ord. No. 256, § 10, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-136. - Discontinuance of service. 
The township board shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section by discontinuance of water service in the event of a violation in usage where there is an emergency shortage alert. 
(Code 1992, § 18-46; Ord. No. 256, § 11, 9-19-1977) 
Sec. 40-137. - Lawn sprinkling—Restrictions. 
Lawn sprinkling is hereby allowed on even-numbered days of the month at all residences which are even-numbered in the township which use water supplied by the township and is prohibited on odd-numbered days of the month thereat. Lawn sprinkling is hereby allowed on odd-numbered days of the month at all residences which are odd-numbered in the township which use water supplied by the township water system, and is prohibited on even-numbered days of the month thereat. The regulations and limitations of use set forth in this section shall be effective during the months of May, June, July and August of every year.  
(Code 1992, § 18-47; Ord. No. 231, § 2, 5-20-1974) 
Sec. 40-138. - Same—Notice. 
Notice of the lawn sprinkling regulations set forth in section 40-137 shall be published each year by the clerk of the township in a newspaper circulated within the township between April 15 and 30 of every year. Such notice shall set out the lawn sprinkling regulations in section 40-137.  
(Code 1992, § 18-48; Ord. No. 231, § 3, 5-20-1974) 

Secs. 40-139—40-159. - Reserved. DIVISION 4. - CROSS CONNECTIONS Sec. 40-160. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Backflow means water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow. 
Cross connection means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which a backflow could occur. 
Nonpotable water means water not safe to drink.  
Potable water means water free from impurities present in amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects and conforming in its bacteriological and chemical quality to Barry-Eaton District Health Department standards.  
(Code 1992, § 18-62; Ord. No. 248, § 3.00, 3-3-1975) 
Sec. 40-161. - Penalty. 
Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this division, or any written order of the township in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1992, § 18-68; Ord. No. 248, § 9.00, 3-3-1975) 
Sec. 40-162. - Adoption of rules. 
The township hereby adopts by reference the water supply cross connection rules of the state department of environmental quality, being R 325.11401 through R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code.  
(Code 1992, § 18-61; Ord. No. 248, § 2.00, 3-3-1975) 
Sec. 40-163. - Inspections. 
It shall be the duty of the township to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connection with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the township and as approved by the state department of environmental quality.  
(Code 1992, § 18-63; Ord. No. 248, § 4.00, 3-3-1975) 
Sec. 40-164. - Right to enter property; owner to furnish information. 
The representative of the township shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the township for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Code 1992, § 18-64; Ord. No. 248, § 5.00, 3-3-1975) 
Sec. 40-165. - Discontinuance of water service. 
The township is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1992, § 18-65; Ord. No. 248, § 6.00, 3-3-1975) 
Sec. 40-166. - Labeling nonpotable water supply. 
Any water outlet in a nonpotable water system shall be labeled as: 
WATER UNSAFE  
FOR DRINKING 

(Code 1992, § 18-66; Ord. No. 248, § 7.00, 3-3-1975) 
Sec. 40-167. - Effect on state plumbing code. 
This division does not supersede the state plumbing code but is supplementary to it.  
(Code 1992, § 18-67; Ord. No. 248, § 8.00, 3-3-1975) 
Secs. 40-168—40-187. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CHARGES 
Sec. 40-188. - Definitions. 

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Abutting property means property abutting a public water main, whether through or from the front, side or the back of the premises.  
Average cost per linear foot of main according to pipe size means, for the calculations of a water main, the water main shall be calculated by dividing the total project cost by the total linear feet of pipe, valves, manholes and fittings installed in the project of interest prorated by pipe size.  
Building official means the individual appointed by the township board delegated to administer the state construction code. 
Capital charge means such charge as may be established, which represents the respective portion of the capital investment of the water system, which may be allocated or attributed to any premises, including but not limited to the oversizing of lines and treatment plant capacity and production facilities. A capital charge also may be known as an equity charge. When square footage must be calculated to determine capital charge unit factors, the outside dimensions of buildings shall be used.  
Connection means the act of joining a water lead to a new or existing building which results in the providing of public water to the building. 
Deferral charge means a charge as set by resolution of the township board utilizing a set interest rate, ENR factor or other methodology to reflect the increased cost of the main from the date the project was accepted by the township board until the date of payment of the main charge.  
ENR means the Engineering News Record as published weekly by McGraw-Hill, Inc. 
First party means persons and their successors, heirs or assignees entering into a contract with the township board to privately participate in funding additions to the water system.  
Inspector means any person duly authorized by the township board to inspect and approve any or all facilities affected by this division. 
Installation charge means the cost of extending water service from the main to the building. 
Lateral water main means a water main, four inches or larger in diameter, that serves, or is intended to serve, two or more buildings and is connected to, and part of, the public water system. 
Main charge means a footage charge to defray the cost of a public water line abutting the premises which cost has not been previously defrayed by special assessment or other charge. 
Premises or properties means land and any building located thereon.  
Public water means a water conduit in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.  
Second party means the township board for the township.  
Stubs means water leads from the main to the lot line.  
Third party means those persons and their successors, heirs or assignees that do not join with the first party and/or the township board in a contract to privately fund additions to the water system addition of the first party. 
Total project cost, for any water main installation, means and shall include, but not be limited to, the following costs:  
(1) 
Installed cost of the main, valves, manholes, fittings and other appurtenances thereto; 

(2) 	
All repair, replacement, restoration or protection of roads, landscape, waterways or other environment; 

(3) 
All engineering, planning, advertising, administrative cost and bidding cost. 


Township engineer means the staff engineer of the township or such professional engineer retained by the township board to review the engineering aspects of the township water system, or the authorized representative of such engineer. 
(Code 1992, § 18-82; Ord. No. 251, § 2, 12-1-1975; Ord. No. 93-5, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 40-189. - Properties affected. 

Main and capital charges hereinafter established shall apply to all properties located within the boundaries of the township served by the public water system owned by the township. Those properties within the township served by public water furnished by the City of Lansing, or any other municipal corporation or township shall be subject to such charges as may be provided for by contract between the township and any other municipality.  
(Code 1992, § 18-81; Ord. No. 251, § 1, 12-1-1975) 
Sec. 40-190. - Times and conditions of collection of charges. 
Charges imposed by this section shall be paid in full or refunded under the following conditions and at the following times unless otherwise provided herein:  
(1) 	
From each premises requesting to use, or required to use the public water system, a capital charge and a main charge will be charged and collected, as per section 40-191, unless previously paid.  

(2) 	
Upon application for a building permit for the purpose of erecting new buildings, main charges shall be collected. 

(3) 	
Upon application for authorization to connect a new building or existing building to the public water, all applicable charges shall be collected. 

(4) 	
Prior to start of construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings when a building permit is not required, or prior to a lateral connection to the public water system, all applicable charges shall be paid (for example, schools).  

(5) 	
If an application is withdrawn (in writing), then the charges due under this division shall be refunded less an administrative charge as set by resolution of the township board.  

(6) 	
The requirements of this section shall not apply to those properties served by water furnished by a municipal corporation or township other than the township but rather the contracted terms, amounts and methods of payment shall apply.  


(Code 1992, § 18-83; Ord. No. 251.2, § 1, 8-2-1982; Ord. No. 93-5, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 40-191. - Establishment of main charges. 
Main charges for water are hereby established for the privilege of connecting premises to the public water system as follows:  
(1) 	
When the public water mains available to such premises were constructed with public funds and the premises have not been specially assessed for any portion of the installing cost.  

(2) 	
When the public water mains available to such premises were financed by nonpublic funds and such premises did not participate in full in the financing of these services. 

(3) 	
It is the intent of these main charges to ensure that each premises connecting to the public water system of the township shall share its respective portion of the cost of installation of mains. 

(4) 	
Lateral water main connections to the public water system shall be subject to a benefit charge in lieu of a water main charge, as per section 40-192(3).  


(Code 1992, § 18-84; Ord. No. 251, § 4, 12-1-1975; Ord. No. 93-5, 8-16-1993) 
Sec. 40-192. - Water main charges. 
Water main charges shall be as follows:  
(1) 	
Water main charges for premises served by water mains installed as part of assessment districts but not assessed thereunder. The water main charge shall be levied against a premises on the same basis as originally determined by the township board for the assessment district with a deferral charge added as set by resolution by the township board. 

(2) 	
Water main charges for other premises. One-half of the average cost per linear foot of the main according to pipe size (subject to the size provisions following) in the project under which the water main being charged for was actually installed, times the length of abutting property on each side of the water main. A deferral charge as set by resolution of the township board shall be added. The water installation charges are not included in this price. Even though the water main size abutting the actual premises may be greater than that listed in the following table, the premises' main charge shall be based on that portion of cost which would have been charged under the project of interest for a main of the size listed:  


Premises  Main Size (in inches)  
Residential structures from one through four units   6  
Residential structures from four units to 12,000 sq. ft. of total floor area   8  
Residential structures over 12,000 sq. ft. of total floor area  10  
Nonresidential structures less than 40,000 sq. ft. of total floor area   8  
All structures over 40,000 sq. ft. of total floor area   10  

If the actual main size abutting the premises is less than that listed in the table in this subsection, then the actual main size shall be used for determining the proportionate cost.  
(3) 	
Water main charges for lateral water main connections or premises not directly abutting mains. Where a lateral water main is connected to the public water system or where premises do not directly abut a water main, such as, but not limited to, premises beyond the end of a dead-end street, on a court or street turnaround, landlocked premises or property served from the end of the public water system, the township board shall by resolution determine the benefit to be charged in lieu of a water main charge.  

(4) 	
Exception for lateral mains. Where privately funded water mains (under contract with the township board) are installed and individual building water services are connected to such lateral mains those services may be connected into the public water system without paying a water main charge. However, the lateral water main is subject to the benefit charge, pursuant to subsection (3) of this section. This provision in no way exempts water main charges to those platted lots or other parcels which stub into a public main directly rather than via the privately funded lateral mains. 

(5) 	
Exception for parcels at the intersection of streets. Where a parcel lies at the intersection of two streets or roads and is abutted on both of those sides by water mains, the footage for which a 


water main charge is made shall be calculated as follows to grant a measure of relief to the property owner:  
a. 	
Where both property lines and mains abutting the intersecting streets are less than 200 feet long, only the shorter of the two sides shall be used in calculating water main charges.  

b. 	
If one or both property lines and abutting mains are over 200 feet in length, 200 feet shall be subtracted from the total footage of abutting mains in calculating the water main charge. 


(Code 1992, § 18-85; Ord. No. 251, § 7, 12-1-1975; Ord. No. 93-5, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 40-193. - Water capital charge. 
(a) 	
A water capital charge shall be established by board resolution based upon a schedule of fees which shall be as set by resolution of the township board that shall apply to all new water service connections made to the township facilities and for any increase in sizing thereafter there shall be charged the difference between the charge for an existing meter and the fee herein established for the larger meter. 

(b) 	
The water capital charges shall be paid upon making application to the township or upon application for installation of a larger meter size. Subsequent amendments of the schedule of fees shall be by board resolution.  


(Code 1992, § 18-86; Ord. No. 251.3, 3-26-1991) 
Sec. 40-194. - Installation charges. 
From the water main to the service valve (applicable to a 66-foot road right-of-way only), where water services are installed by another entity than the township, there shall be an inspection fee as shall be set by resolution of the township board.  
(Code 1992, § 18-87; Ord. No. 251, § 8(b), 12-1-1975; Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 40-195. - Responsibility for calculating main and stub charges. 
The township engineer shall be responsible for providing the necessary data for the determination of cost for the water main charges and stub charges to particular individual premises under section 40-192. 
(Code 1992, § 18-88; Ord. No. 251, § 9, 12-1-1975) 
Sec. 40-196. - Restriction on issuing permits and authorizations. 
(a) 	
No building permit shall be issued and no construction or alteration shall commence until the main and/or benefit charges have been paid in accordance with this division, subject to the exceptions in sections 40-169, 40-190(6), 40-197 and 40-202.  

(b) 	
No authorizations to connect water shall be granted until the capital charges have been paid in accordance with this division subject to the exceptions in sections 40-190(6) and 40-202.  


(Code 1992, § 18-89; Ord. No. 251, § 10, 12-1-1975; Ord. No. 93-5, 8-16-1993) 
Sec. 40-197. - Deposits and time deferred payments. 
Main, stub, capital, and lateral benefit charges are reflective of costs which customarily are spread over a period of years through special assessments or other bond financing by the township. In addition, lateral benefit charges may be reflective of these types of costs. In order to avail more township customers within the township's boundaries of the advantages of long-term financing, such charges may be deferred and paid in installments as permitted herein:  
(1) 	
Main and stub charges. Main and stub charges established under sections 40-192 and 40-193 may be paid in 15 equal annual installments bearing interest at a rate as determined by resolution of the township board on the unpaid principal balance as computed at the time of connection. This deferral of main and stub charges shall apply only to those properties situated within the boundaries of the township. 

(2) 	
Lateral benefit charges. The township board by resolution may permit lateral benefit charges established under section 40-192 to be paid at such times and upon such other terms and conditions as the township board determines, in its discretion, to be proper. 

(3) 	
Recognition of lien. As a condition precedent to deferral of capital, main or stub charges, the township board shall require a statement from the mortgage holder or, in the event such premises are not subject to a mortgage, a statement from the property owner recognizing the validity of the lien of the charges under the provision of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), and agreeing that the charges, when in default, shall be subject to acceleration to be collected in the same manner as other delinquent charges under the provision of such act.  


(Code 1992, § 18-90; Ord. No. 251.2, § III, 8-2-1982; Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 40-198. - Water service rates. 
(a) 	
Monthly charge for meter and service maintenance (customer charge). The monthly charge for meter and service maintenance shall be as set by resolution of the township board.  

(b) 	
Consumption rates. Consumption rates shall be computed based upon the metered water consumption for those users connected to the township water supply system and shall be billed monthly at a rate set by resolution of the township board.  

(c) 	
Fire hydrant rental. For the use of water through fire hydrants and for the availability of such water, the township shall pay a fee as set by resolution of the township board, payments to be made from funds legally available for such purpose or from the proceeds of taxes which the township shall levy within charter tax rate limitations. 

(d) 	
Fire hydrant maintenance. Fire hydrants shall be installed on private property at the property owner's expense. Water supply and maintenance of fire hydrants installed on private property shall be provided by the township for a charge as set by resolution of the township board. Hydrants installed on private property shall be used for fire protection only and shall not be used for any other purposes, except as may be permitted by this division. No additional charge will be made for water used from these hydrants for fire purposes.  

(e) 	
Charge for turn-on or turn-off of water services. For new customers, no charge shall be made. For customers who have defaulted on bills, a charge for turn-off or turn-on shall be as set by resolution of the township board.  

(f) 	
Special rates. Special rates for miscellaneous or special services shall be fixed by the township board. 

(g) 
Water from hydrants. No one shall be allowed to use water from fire hydrants, except as follows:  

(1) 	
Through a meter installed and read by the utility department, or by measured amounts controlled by the utility department, to be billed to the user, at a rate set by the township board.  

(2) 	
By the utility department, for sewer flushing, unmetered, but the number of tank truck fills, and tank capacity thereof to be reported to the accounting department, and billed to the utility department. 

(3) 	
For water main flushing and such other uses determined as necessary by the utility department, not to be billed. 

(4) 
For firefighting and fire training, not to be billed.  

(5) 	
For fire flow testing by the engineering department or for a sprinkler consultant under the supervision of the engineering department.  


(h) Billings. 
(1) 
Bills shall be rendered to users no less often than on a monthly basis. 

(2) 	
The township board may require meter readings and/or billings to be made more often than on a monthly basis. Billings made more often than on a monthly basis may be estimated and prorated on a monthly basis with the balance due to be adjusted by a meter reading and billing at the end of each month. 

(3) 	
All bills rendered to users shall become due and payable 15 days after the billing date. Payments made by mail shall be postmarked no later than 15 days after the billing date. No utility department employee in the field shall be permitted to receive payments for billings or other charges.  


(i) 	Past due bills. 
(1) 	
All bills not paid on or before the due date as herein established shall be subject to a penalty as shall be set by resolution of the township board.  

(2) 	
Water service shall be discontinued 35 days after the billing date, if all necessary payments have not been made as required by this division, except as follows by subsection (i)(3) of this section. The 35-day requirement notwithstanding, the service shall not be discontinued unless the accounting department is open to receive payment on the day of and the day following discontinuation of service.  

(3) 	
When a customer claims hardship, the controller, at his discretion, may allow the customer to make reduced payments at intervals more frequent than the usual billing interval. These payments shall equal in total the monthly bill. This method of payment shall not allow a customer to defer full payment of the bill beyond 35 days after the billing date.  

(4) 	
The procedure for notification of default in payment of bills prior to service discontinuation shall be by sending a past due notice 20 days after the billing date. The past due notice shall state the amount due, the service discontinuation date, the additional charge to reinstate discontinued service, and that payment made after the discontinuation date must be for all charges.  

(5) 	
Where service to a customer in default of a bill has been discontinued, the service shall not be restored until authorized by the accounting department. The accounting department shall not authorize restoration of service until arrangements for payment of all charges, as may be required by ordinance, have been made. 

(j) 	
Returned (NSF) checks. An administrative fee as set by resolution of the township board shall be charged for handling returned checks.  

(k)  
Water service deposits. Water service deposits shall not be required, except as follows:  

(1) 	
Where annual notice is given in writing, as provided for in section 21, Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.121), that a tenant is responsible for such charges and services as is provided for by this division, then a cash deposit as set by resolution by the township board shall be made as security for payment of such charges and services. The deposit shall be returned after two years, if no default in payment of bills has occurred and if the customer has not been past due more than two times within a two-year period. 

(2) 
As required by subsection (l) of this section, pertaining to enforcement.  

(l) 	
Enforcement. Charges for water services shall constitute a lien on the property served, pursuant to section 21, Public Act No. 94 1933 (MCL 141.121), unless annual notice is given that a tenant is responsible and whenever such charges shall be delinquent for two months or more, the township officer or officers in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually before September 1 of each year, to the tax-assessing officer of the township, the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be by him entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general township taxes against such premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced. Provided, however, where annual notice is given in writing that a tenant is responsible for such charges and services as provided by section 21, Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.121), no further service shall be rendered such premises until a cash deposit equal to six months' water charges shall have been made as security for payment of such charges and service. In addition to the other lawful enforcement methods, the payment of charges for service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing the water service to such premises.  


(Code 1992, § 18-92; Ord. No. 1.14, 12-17-1990; Ord. No. 98-9, § 1, 12-7-1998) 
Sec. 40-199. - Enforcement. 
If any premises is found to be connected to the public water mains in violation of this division or failed to have paid the main or capital charges in accordance with the provisions of this division, the director shall be notified of any violation within ten days of its discovery; the director shall cause notice to be given to the owners of record of the property by certified mail and by posting such notice conspicuously upon such building. The notice shall state the amount of main and/or capital charges due and owing, the last day of payment, the public office where such payment must be made and the right of appeal as provided in section 40-200. 
(Code 1992, § 18-93; Ord. No. 251, § 12, 12-1-1975) 
Sec. 40-200. - Appeal. 
Persons receiving notice of the charge may, within 30 days from the mailing of such notice, request a hearing before the township board as to the nature of the charges and the amounts thereof. The board shall determine the amount of charges due and owing and shall direct the director to place such charges upon the next tax roll of the township unless paid within ten days and such charges shall become a lien and collected in the same manner as provided for delinquent charges set forth in section 40-201.  
(Code 1992, § 18-94; Ord. No. 251, § 13, 12-1-1975) 
Sec. 40-201. - Collection of delinquent charges. 
(a) 	
Charges for water service and capital connection charges established by this division furnished to any property shall be a lien thereof, as provided by section 21, Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.121), and any charges delinquent for three months or more shall be certified annually prior to September 1 to the township treasurer who shall enter the same upon the next tax roll against the property for which such charges were incurred and such charges shall be collected and such lien shall be enforced in the same manner and subject to the same collection and penalty charges as provided for in the collection of general ad valorem taxes except such delinquent charges shall bear a delinquent interest rate of one-half of one percent per month from the date of delinquency in addition to the delinquent charges made and provided for the collection of ad valorem taxes. In addition to any other lawful enforcement methods, the payment may be enforced by discontinuing 

the water service to such property. Further, all charges and penalties may be recovered by the township by court action.  

(b) 	
Such capital charges, equity charges, main charges or connection charges as may apply to water improvements furnished within the corporate limits of the township by the City of Lansing or any other state municipal corporation or township shall become a lien on property and may be collected in the same manner as provided for in subsection (a) of this section. The township shall, upon collection of these charges, rebate them to the municipal corporation or township owed, less the interest as a collection fee. 


(Code 1992, § 18-95; Ord. No. 251, § 14, 12-1-1975) 
Sec. 40-202. - Hardship. 
(a) 	
Persons owning property with buildings located thereon and residing thereon who are required by state law, the Barry-Eaton District Health Department or by ordinance to connect to a public water main or who desire to connect to same may apply to the township board for hardship consideration in regard to payment of the various charges required by this division.  

(b) 	
The board shall determine in its discretion for each application if a hardship exists. The board may require such proofs as it deems necessary to determine if a hardship actually exists and the degree thereof. 

(c) 	
If the township board determines that a hardship exists, a lien shall be placed against the property. All charges (including capital charges) required under this division may be deferred by use of the methods listed in subsection (d) of this section, chosen at the discretion of the board. In no event shall the property change ownership without payment in full of the charges due. (Survivorship of part owners shall not be considered an ownership change.)  

(d) 	
At its discretion, the board may require one or more of the following hardship payment methods, in full, in part, or in combination:  

(1) 
Use of the method allowed in section 40-197(1), for all charges (including capital charges). 

(2) 	
Deferral of all charges (including capital charges) until the property changes ownership. Charges shall bear interest at the rate of eight percent per annum. The property owner may pay off any and all charges with interest due at any time. The township board may at its discretion determine that the hardship is ending and require immediate payment of all charges due (the property owner may still elect to use section 40-197(1), to the extent allowed therein to nonhardship cases). If, at its discretion, the board determines that the hardship is reduced, it may require payment by use of subsection (d)(1) of this section. 


(Code 1992, § 18-96; Ord. No. 251, § 15, 12-1-1975) 
Sec. 40-203. - Nonexclusivity of fees. 
The charges herein established are in addition to any fee the township has heretofore or may hereinafter establish for a contractor's permit to construct, cut into or connect to the public water.  
(Code 1992, § 18-97; Ord. No. 251, § 16, 12-1-1975) 
Sec. 40-204. - Additions and connections to the public water system. 
(a) 	
No additions by other than the township shall be allowed to the public water system except by prior contract with the township board.  

(b) 	
Where the township board contracts with the first party to extend the water system with private funds, then the first party shall not be levied main charges on the privately funded water mains specifically covered by the contract. The foregoing also applies to water service installation charges if the first party also installs same under contract with the township board. The exemption on main charges and water installation charges set forth in this subsection shall not extend to either water mains abutting the first party's property which were funded publicly or by persons other than first party; or the benefit charge for lateral water main connections to the public water system. 

(c) 	
The township, by contract with the first party, may agree to collect main and stub charges from third parties and rebate such charges to the first party. Such charges shall not be collected from third parties prior to the times and conditions specified in section 40-190. The contract shall specify that total rebates shall not exceed the actual cost of construction abutting the third party's properties or the amount of main and stub charges to be collected from the third party, whichever is the lesser amount. The township shall have the sole authority to determine what future connections are subject to rebate main charges to the first party. The first party shall not contract with, or otherwise exact any fee from, any third party who desires to connect to and/or use any addition to the public water system. 

(d) 
No persons shall be exempted from capital charges.  

(e) 	
All plans and specifications for additions and connections to the public water system, including lateral connections, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the township engineer.  

(f) 	
Except as permitted herein, no permits for use of the public water system shall be requested or issued until after the addition to the water system has been certified in writing as being satisfactorily complete by the township engineer and the proper deeds of grant, waivers of lien and easement agreements are provided to the township. The township manager may grant temporary use permits for periods not to exceed 60 days. In the event of a violation of this section, the township may, without notice or any liability to the first party, disconnect the addition to the public water system and/or take any other action necessary to prevent the flow of water into the addition to the public water system. The first party shall pay all costs, including actual attorney's fees, which the township incurs in enforcing the provisions of this section.  


(Code 1992, § 18-98; Ord. No. 251, § 17, 12-1-1975; Ord. No. 93-5, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 95-7, § 1, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 40-205. - Costs of special or miscellaneous services and facilities. 
(a) 	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Facilities means utility equipment which is owned and/or operated by the township, including, but not limited to, booster pumping stations and/or sewage lift stations, which serve only a single customer.  
Special, miscellaneous or additional services means services requested by a township utility customer or required to be provided to a township utility customer which exceed services provided under this division to a similar customer in the ordinary course, including, but not limited to, electrical services, operational and maintenance services, installation, replacement, and laboratory services.  
(b) 	
Purpose. This section shall serve to provide a method for the township to recover costs associated with special, miscellaneous or additional services rendered to customers who have specifically requested such services from the township, under circumstances where the township is required to provide such services due to customer operation, and/or to recover costs from a customer who has facilities. 

(c) 	
Costs. Any authorized person or similar entity who shall request special, miscellaneous or additional services shall be liable for any and all cost or expense incurred by the township in connection with the provision of said services as applicable.  

(d) 	
Billing. Costs imposed under this section shall appear as a separate line item upon a customer billing, being due and collected as set forth herein. Township personnel shall reserve the right to refuse or delay any services under this section to any person, firm, corporation, or similar entity that has not paid for those services or that owes for previous services. 


(Code 1992, § 18-99; Ord. No. 07-37, 7-16-2007) 
Secs. 40-206—40-233. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WASTEWATER SYSTEM USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
Sec. 40-234. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the supervisor of the Shiawassee District of the state department of environmental quality.  
Authorized representative of industrial user means a duly authorized representative who is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.  
Available public sanitary sewer system means a public sanitary sewer system located in a right-of­way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins, or abuts upon the property and passes not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a structure in which sanitary sewage originates.  
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.  
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from waste and other drainpipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning approximately five feet outside the inner face of the building wall and is not part of the public sewer. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer main or other place of disposal and is not part of the public sewer. 
Building stub (house lead) means that part of the building sewer from the public sewer main to the right-of-way and is not part of the public sewer. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of the wastestream from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test.  
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
Combined wastestream means the flow of wastewater from an industrial facility where the sanitary wastestream is combined with the process regulated wastestream following treatment.  
Commercial user means a person whose premises are used to offer services and/or products such as retail and wholesale stores, gasoline stations, restaurants, schools, churches, hotels, motels, nursing homes, hospitals, warehouses, private clubs, theaters and governmental buildings.  
Compatible pollutants means those pollutants that the township wastewater treatment plant was specifically designed to remove taking into account biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and means suspended solids, fecal coliform bacteria, and total phosphorous.  
Contamination means any introduction into water of microorganisms, chemicals, wastes or wastewater in a concentration that makes the water unfit for its intended use. 
Control authority means and shall refer to the director of the wastewater treatment plant as defined in the approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.  
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Director means the head of the township utility department or his authorized representative.  
Discharge means spilling, leaking, seeping, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, dumping or depositing. 
Domestic sewage means liquid or water-carried waste discharged from residential living units and resulting from activities usually considered to be carried on in a domicile.  
Domestic user means a person whose premises are for single-family or multiple-family use.  
Effluent means wastewater or other liquid, partially or completely treated, flowing out of a reservoir, basin, treatment plant, or industrial treatment plant or part thereof.  
Environmental protection agency (EPA) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency.  
Federal categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of Federal Water Pollution Act, amendments of 1972 (PL 92-500), which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
Federal prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of Federal Water Pollution Act, amendments of 1972 (PL 92-500), and 40 CFR 403.5. 
Garbage, shredded, means garbage that has been cut or shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Garbage, solid, means solid wastes resulting from the domestic, commercial and industrial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce or from the canning or packing of food.  
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time.  
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Incompatible pollutant means a environmentally undesirable substance discharged to the township treatment works for which the treatment facility is not designed to remove or alter. The substance may also cause treatment upset, adverse effects on the safety and/or health of the treatment plant workers, or pass through. 
Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of pollutants from any source into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user means the user that discharges to the public sewer system from manufacturing or processing operations, including users engaged in profit seeking ventures which discharge a trade or process waste. This includes any user identifiable in divisions A, B, D, E and I in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 
Industrial waste means the liquid or water-carried waste resulting from industrial or manufacturing process, trade or business, or from the development, recovery or processing of a natural resource, with or without suspended or dissolved solids as distinct from sanitary sewage.  
Infiltration. 
(1) 	
The term "infiltration" means the water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.  

(2) 
The term "infiltration" does not include inflow.  


Inflow. 
(1) 	
The term "inflow" means the water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catchbasins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. 

(2) 
The term "inflow" does not include infiltration.  


Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations, or that which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the township NPDES permit. The term "interference" includes limitations of sewage sludge use of disposal by the POTW in accordance with 405 of the Act (33 USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria or those guidelines and criteria contained in any sludge management plan of the POTW applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW. 
mg/l means milligrams per liter and represents a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent used in reporting the results of water or wastewater analysis. 
Natural outlet means any watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or any other body of water, either surface or ground.  
New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 301(c) (33 USC 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source. The term "new source" includes the following: 
(1) 	
Construction of new or additional facilities which produce a process wastestream at a site where there has been no previous process discharge. The term "construction," as defined in this provision, is considered to have commenced when:  

a. 	
Installation or assembly of facilities or equipment has begun.  

b. 	
Significant site preparation has begun for installation or assembly.  

c. 	
The owner or operator has entered into a binding contractual obligation. 



(2) 	
Complete replacement of process or production equipment which has previously been the source of wastewater discharge.  

(3) 	
Wastewater production or wastewater generating processes which come on line at a facility which are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site.  


Nondomestic user means an industrial user, commercial establishment or other entity that discharges wastewater to a publicly owned treatment works other than, or in addition to, sanitary sewage. 
Normal domestic strength sewage means that sewage having a biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids not to exceed 300 milligrams per liter.  
NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System prescribed in U.S. PL 92-500.  
Owner means the owner of any real property from which sewage is discharged. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.  
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
Pollution means a condition created by the presence of harmful or objectionable material in the water. See Contamination. 
POTW means publicly owned treatment works and is comprised of the collection systems including the sanitary sewers, pumping stations, and the treatment plant. 
Premises means each lot or parcel of land or building, having any connection to the sewer disposal system of the township.  
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).  
Pretreatment requirements means substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user.  
Private sewage treatment and disposal facility means any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or outlet into any pond, ditch, lake, watercourse or other body of water or any other device privately owned and maintained for the disposal of sewage.  
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.  
Sanitary sewage or sewage means any combination of liquid or water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial, commercial, and governmental establishments including any infiltration or inflow as may be present.  
Sanitary sewer means a sewer intended to carry only sanitary, or sanitary and industrial wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.  
Severe property damage. 
(1) 	
The term "severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. 

(2) 	
The term "severe property damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delay in production.  


Sewer means any pipe, tile, tube or conduit for carrying sewage.  
Sewer permit means a permit issued by the township building department as written authorization to construct, install, or connect building sewers to the public sewer. 
Significant noncompliance means chronic violations indicating significant noncompliance include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1) 	
Violation of a particular effluent limit in at least 66 percent of the samples taken over a six-month period of the same pollutant parameters.  

(2) 	
Exceeding by 40 percent a conventional pollutant (BOD, solids, etc.) effluent limit in 33 percent of the samples taken over a six-month period. 

(3) 	
Exceeding by 20 percent any other effluent limit (nonconventionals and toxins) in 33 percent of the samples taken in a six-month period. 

(4) 
Discharges which violate general prohibition standards or endanger public health.  

(5) 
Failure to achieve compliance schedule milestones within 90 days of the milestone date. 

(6) 
Failure to submit required reports within 30 days of the due date.  

(7) 
Failure to report noncompliance. 

(8) 
Other cases of significant noncompliance as determined by the utilities director. 

Significant user means any user of the township sanitary sewer system that is: 

(1) 	
A nondomestic user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N.  

(2) 
A nondomestic user to which one of the following applies: 

a. 	
Discharges 25,000 gallons each day or more of process water to the POTW, excluding sanitary noncontact cooling water and boiler blowdown wastewater; 

b. 	
Contributes a waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic (biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, phosphates and ammonia nitrogen) capacity of the treatment plant; or  

c. 	
Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the control authority, to adversely affect the POTW treatment plant or collection system through inhibition, pass through of pollutants, equipment damage, sludge contamination or endangerment of POTW workers.  



(3) 	
Upon finding that a nondomestic user meeting the criteria in subsection (1) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may, at any time on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a nondomestic user or POTW, determine that a nondomestic user is not a significant nondomestic user.  


Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given waste component or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of time longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or quantity of flow during normal discharge. Flow shall not exceed 350 gallons per minute above the normal flow.  
Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage and to which sewage is not admitted.  
Structure in which sanitary sewage originates means a building in which the toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facility generates water-carried sanitary sewage is used or is available for use in household, commercial, industrial or other purpose. 
Substantial change means an anticipated shift in manufacturing process, production rate, or treatment which causes the makeup of a regulated or nonregulated wastestream to be altered in content, or amount of a pollutant with potential adverse impact to the treatment system or final discharge waters, or to contain discharged flow beyond the predetermined maximum flow for the facility.  
Surcharge means that any user discharging to the public sewer a wastewater having biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, phosphates, or suspended solids within the range specified in section 40-286 shall be subject to an additional cost over and above the basic rates. The surcharge shall be the yearly average per pound of treatment cost computed as a percent of replacement reserve, and operation and maintenance divided by the yearly pounds of biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, phosphates or suspended solids. The surcharge per pound of pollutant shall be calculated annually by the superintendent and approved by the township board.  
Suspended solids means all matter existing in nonliquid state which is removable by filtration in accordance with standard laboratory procedures. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination or pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other Acts. 
Uncontaminated industrial effluents means water which has not come into contact with any substance used in or incidental to industrial processing operations and to which no deleterious or toxic substance has been added.  
Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards and/or an ordinance prohibiting or limiting standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user; excluding such factors as changes in wastewater characteristics, operational error, improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, or improper operation and maintenance or lack thereof. Affirmative defense of an upset by an industrial user must be established in accordance with the conditions of 40 CFR 403.16C. 
User means any person, establishment or owner who discharges any domestic sewage or industrial waste into the sanitary sewer system of the township.  
Utilities director means the head of the township wastewater treatment plant or his authorized representative.  
Wastewater. See Sanitary sewage or sewage. 
Wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued by the township POTW as written authorization to discharge wastewater into the township sanitary sewer system. 
Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, whether surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.  
(Code 1992, § 18-126; Ord. No. 284.2, § 1.5, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 2, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-235. - Purpose. 
This article establishes regulations regarding the discharge of all domestic, industrial and commercial waste into the sanitary sewer system of the township, in order to service the following public purposes:  
(1) 
To prevent the pollution of public waters. 

(2) 	
To preserve, protect and maintain the sewage collection and treatment facilities of the township. 

(3) 
To comply with state and federal water quality standards. 


(Code 1992, § 18-121; Ord. No. 284.2, § 1.1, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-236. - Regulation through permits. 
This article provides for the regulation of all contributors to the township wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for other users, authorized monitoring and enforcement activities, and requires nondomestic user reports.  
(Code 1992, § 18-122; Ord. No. 284.2, § 1.2, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-237. - Relation to other provisions. 
No provision contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional regulations or requirements that may be imposed by the township board, the county, the state health department or any other lawfully constituted authority with respect to public or private sewage disposal.  
(Code 1992, § 18-123; Ord. No. 284.2, § 9.1, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-238. - Director's responsibilities. 
The administration, implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this article for the industrial waste pretreatment and nondomestic users control program and the authorization of the industrial discharges shall be the sole responsibility of the director of the township utility department or his designee for the purpose of controlling and monitoring wastewater discharged into the publicly owned treatment works.  
(Code 1992, § 18-124; Ord. No. 284.2, § 1.3, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 1, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-239. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to the users of the township sanitary sewer system and to persons outside the township who are, by contract or agreement with the township, connected to the township sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1992, § 18-125; Ord. No. 284.2, § 1.4, 4-15-1991) 
Secs. 40-240—40-256. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS, RULES AND REGULATIONS 
Sec. 40-257. - Scope. 

The standards, rules and regulations established in or pursuant to this article are deemed to be the absolute minimum consistent with the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent pollution of the environment, and to fulfill the obligations of the township with respect to state and federal law and all rules and regulations adopted in conformance hereto. The discharge into the sewage disposal system of any substance which exceeds the limitations contained herein, or in any manner fails to conform hereto, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this article.  
(Code 1992, § 18-136; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.1, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-258. - Unlawful discharge. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon any public or private property within the township, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1992, § 18-137; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.2, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-259. - Disposal facilities. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any private sewage disposal facility in the township, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the township. 
(Code 1992, § 18-138; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.3, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-260. - Unavailability of public sewer. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal facility constructed in compliance with state law, regulations of the county, the state and local health departments, and the regulations of the township. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facility in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the township. 
(Code 1992, § 18-139; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.4, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-261. - Availability of public sewer. 
(a) 	
At such time there is an available public sewer within 200 feet of a structure served by private sewage disposal facilities, the supervisor of the township shall cause appropriate notice to be served upon the owner of such property, that a public sewer is ready and available to receive connections thereto and that within 18 months from the service of such notice the use of a private sewage disposal facility for the structure shall be discontinued, and the following will be completed: 

(1) 
The plumbing shall be disconnected therefrom; 

(2) 	
All underground structures shall be filled with fresh earth, in accordance with the Barry-Eaton District Health Department; and  

(3) 
All plumbing shall be connected with the public sewer.  

(b) 	
Such notice shall be served by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, in sealed envelopes addressed to the owner at his regular place of residence and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. This section shall be supplemental to such provisions of law and the public health code as may exist and shall not be construed to limit enforcement of connection requirements to the provisions hereof.  


(Code 1992, § 18-140; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.5, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-262. - Availability of capacity. 
No connection to the system will be permitted unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains, and the sewage treatment plant, including capacity for treatment of the BOD, suspended solids and other contaminants. 
(Code 1992, § 18-141; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.6, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-263. - Utility agreement. 
Any municipality outside the jurisdiction of the township requesting the use of the township public sewers shall grant the township legal authority to administer and enforce this article, within the municipality, including the industrial pretreatment program. This may include the adoption of an ordinance by the municipality equivalent to this Code of Ordinances. In addition, whenever substantive changes are made to this Code of Ordinances, any municipality operating under an equivalent ordinance or code shall be required to adopt equivalent modification within 180 days of the required modifications approval by the township board.  
(Code 1992, § 18-142; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.7, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 3, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-264. - Water pollution. 

(a) 	
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any waters of the state or any storm sewer within the township any sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided and the direct discharger has a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued by the state department of environmental quality.  

(b) 	
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted waters into any sanitary sewer under the jurisdiction of the township.  

(c) 	
The discharge of groundwater into the sanitary sewer is prohibited except in cases where such a discharge is regulated under the terms of a wastewater discharge permit issued by the wastewater division of the utility department of the township. 


(Code 1992, § 18-143; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.8, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 4, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-265. - General prohibited discharge standards. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no commercial, domestic or industrial user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into any public sewer: 
(1) 	
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than the maximum limitation established by resolution of the township board at the user's point of discharge. If the wastewater influent temperature at the treatment plant exceeds the maximum limitation established by resolution of the township board, a lower temperature shall be imposed on the discharger.  

(2) 	
Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, fat, wax, grease, oil (emulsified or not) in excess of the maximum limitation established by resolution of the township board; any floating oil, oil sheen or grease particles. 

(3) 	
The discharge of any flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas with a flash point of less than the minimum limitation established by resolution of the township board including, but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, benzene, toluene, xylene, naphtha, alcohols, ethers, fuel oil or antifreeze is prohibited except as allowed under the terms of a legally issued wastewater discharge permit. Also prohibited are residual BTEX compounds that may be present in waters discharged under a wastewater discharge permit from a groundwater remediation site.  

(4) 	
Any garbage that has not been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under normal flow conditions, or having particles with dimensions greater than the maximum limitations established by resolution of the township board.  

(5) 	
Any substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage disposal system including, but not limited to, mineral oil, grease, eggshells, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, soil, plastics, bones, wood, paunch manure, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, asphalt, tar and manure. 

(6) 	
Any waters or wastes having a pH outside the range established by resolution of the township board or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to personnel, structures, or equipment of the sewage works.  

(7) 	
Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance which would injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans, animals, fish or aquatic life or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.  

(8) 
Any waste of sufficient flow or concentration, or both, defined as a slug.  

(9) 	
Any waters or waste of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials in the POTW.  

(10) 	
Any color, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solution, or any unusual chemical oxygen demand, chlorides, sulfates, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the POTW or as otherwise established by resolution of the township board.  

(11) 	
Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, fumes, vapors, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance, create a health or safety problem for workers, a hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.  

(12) 
Any radioactive waste.  

(13) 	
Any substance which may cause the POTW effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for disposal, applicable to the sludge management method being used. 

(14) 
Any wastewater or substance containing polychlorinated biphenyl (PCBs).  

(15) 	
No industrial waste shall be permitted into the sanitary sewers that may cause violation of the NPDES permit requirements, pretreatment standards, and all other township, state, or any federal regulations.  

(16) 	
Discharge of trucked or hauled wastes into the sanitary sewer serving the premises without written approval from the superintendent.  

(17) 
Waste that would violate the user's commercial industrial wastewater discharge permit.  

(18) 	
Discharge of detectable mercury is prohibited, except as specifically established by resolution of the township board.  


(Code 1992, § 18-144; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.9, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 5, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 00-02, § 1, 4-17-2000; Ord. No. 02-05, § 1, 4-15-2002) 
Sec. 40-266. - Pollutant limitations on wastewater discharges. 
In addition to the general prohibited discharge standards, no person shall discharge into the sanitary sewer wastewater any of the pollutants designated by resolution of the township board in excess of the quantities established in that resolution of the township board as measured on a 24-hour composite sample basis, except for cyanide, oil and grease, pH, and phenols, which shall be analyzed from a grab sample.  
(Code 1992, § 18-145; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.10, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 6, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 00-02, § 2, 4-17-2000) 
Sec. 40-267. - Reject, surcharge, or require pretreatment. 
The township reserves the right to reject, surcharge, require pretreatment or establish special contractual provisions to handle high strength or toxic waste, or waste for which discharge is not defined within the foregoing prohibited discharge standards or limitations. The township utility department's wastewater division will not grant a variance to any categorical pretreatment requirements, local limit or prohibited discharge standard. 
(Code 1992, § 18-146; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.11, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 7, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-268. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards (EPA). 
Upon promulgation of a federal categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial subcategory, all industrial users affected by the pretreatment standard will be required to conform to the new pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12. The federal standard, if more stringent than the limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede any limitations imposed under this article. In the event a new pretreatment standard is less stringent than a standard imposed in this article, the limitations in this article shall prevail. The superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 
403.12. 
(Code 1992, § 18-147; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.12, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 8, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-269. - Township right to revision. 
The township reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system to comply with the public purpose established in section 40-235. 
(Code 1992, § 18-148; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.13, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-270. - State requirements. 
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 18-149; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.14, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-271. - Dilution. 
No user shall dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the township or state. 
(Code 1992, § 18-150; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.15, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-272. - Notification of changed discharges. 
All industrial users are required to notify the township wastewater treatment plant in advance of substantial changes in volume or character of discharge released to the treatment plant. In addition, federal regulation 403.12(P)(1) requires industrial users to notify the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Regional Waste Management Division Director, and the state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which otherwise disposed of would be a hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR 261. These changes could include, but are not limited to the following:  
(1) 
Groundwater purged for remediation action; 

(2) 
Groundwaters containing pollutants which infiltrate into the sanitary sewer; and  

(3) 
Listed or characteristic hazardous wastes. 


(Code 1992, § 18-151; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.16, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 9, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-273. - Treatment bypass conditions. 

Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass unless:  
(1) 	The bypass does not violate pretreatment standards. When necessary for essential maintenance, an industrial user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation.  
(2) Notice of bypass. 
a. 	
If an industrial user knows of the need to bypass in advance, it shall submit prior notice and where possible, at least ten days before date of the bypass.  

b. 	
An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause, the duration of the bypass, the exact date and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The written report may be waived if the oral report is received within 24 hours. 


(3) 	Prohibition of bypass. The bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass unless:  
a. 	
The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage.  

b. 	
There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated process water or maintenance during normal periods of downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance.  

c. 	
The nondomestic user submitted notices as required under subsection (2)b of this section.  


(Code 1992, § 18-152; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.17, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 10, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-274. - Accidental discharge. 
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of general prohibited materials shall be installed and maintained at the owner's or user's expense when they are necessary. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the township for review and approval before construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after April 23, 1991, shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the township. 
(Code 1992, § 18-153; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.18, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-275. - Notification. 
In case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the superintendent of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, the type of hazard associated with the waste and the proper method of treatment. The user shall also provide technical data and personnel to assist the POTW in the proper method for treating the accidental discharge. 
(Code 1992, § 18-154; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.19, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 11, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-276. - Written notice. 

Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(Code 1992, § 18-155; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.20, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 12, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-277. - Notice to employees. 
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental or dangerous discharge.  
(Code 1992, § 18-156; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.21, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-278. - Fats, oils, grease and sand interceptors; installation and maintenance. 
(a) 	
Fats, oils, grease and/or sand interceptors shall be provided at the owner's expense for the proper handling of liquid waste containing grease, any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Interceptors are required to receive the drainage from fixtures and equipment with grease-laden waste located in food preparation areas, such as in restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias, clubs and/or establishments engaged in the maintenance and washing of motor vehicles or as required by the township. Interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by a qualified engineer and shall be installed and located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning, inspection and sampling. Fats, oils, grease and sand interceptors shall be constructed as specified in the state plumbing code.  

(b) 	
Interceptors shall be cleaned and maintained by the owner and shall be operated in accordance with manufacturer instructions in a continuously efficient manner whenever the facility is in operation. An interior or exterior interceptor shall be maintained at a frequency that ensures efficient operation and protects the township sanitary sewer from accumulation of grease. Interceptor maintenance should be performed frequently enough that the discharge from the facility does not violate the township ordinance limit for fats, oil and grease. The owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and legal disposal of interceptor waste. Under no circumstances shall pumped interceptor waste be discharged into the sanitary sewer. 

(c) 	
Interceptors must be upgraded if any changes are made to the facility that would not allow the interceptor to meet township ordinance limits.  

(d) 	
The use of enzymes, emulsifiers or other products that may temporarily modify the physical properties of grease and oil is prohibited unless authorized in writing by the director of utilities or his designee.  

(e) 	
The owner of an interceptor is required to maintain records pertaining to the maintenance of the unit and disposal of the waste removed from the interceptor. The required records must be made available during an on-site inspection of the facility.  

(f) 	
The owner of an interceptor, who fails to properly maintain the installed equipment, will be subject to civil infraction penalties or other remedies as deemed necessary by the township to ensure the consistent performance of the sanitary sewer system.  


(Code 1992, § 18-157; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.22, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 05-23, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 40-279. - Pretreatment facilities. 

The owner shall provide, at his expense, such treatment facilities as may be necessary to control the quality and quantity of discharge of waters and wastes to meet all applicable state and federal regulations including the limitations set forth in the township NPDES permit and the limitations on wastewater discharges contained in this article. The provision for pretreatment facilities in this section is to ensure that the user will consistently provide for the reduction in the amount of a pollutant in the effluent to a less toxic or harmless state.  
(Code 1992, § 18-158; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.23, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-280. - Construction of pretreatment facilities. 
Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted to the township for review and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such plans are approved.  
(Code 1992, § 18-159; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.24, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-281. - Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. 
Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. Records of maintenance performed on pretreatment equipment shall be provided to the township upon request.  
(Code 1992, § 18-160; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.25, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-282. - Control manholes. 
When required by the township, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes. Such manhole shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the township. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. If a sampling manhole has not been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.  
(Code 1992, § 18-161; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.26, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-283. - Removal credits. 
There shall be no variance, adjustment or revisions of the federal categorical pretreatment standards as provided for in 40 CFR 403.7(b). It is the intent of the township POTW not to issue removal credits that would allow a user to discharge higher amounts of toxic compounds than established by the existing federal categorical pretreatment standards or standards that may be amended or promulgated in the future or standards as established in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 18-162; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.27, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-284. - Measurements and analyses. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes shall be determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136 or in accordance with methodology approved by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Code 1992, § 18-163; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.28, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-285. - Inspection; powers and authority of inspectors. 
Authorized employees of the township bearing credentials shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, investigation, measurement, sampling and testing, and to examine and copy any records pertaining to the pretreatment program. Any person who applies for and/or receives services from the POTW shall be deemed to have consented to the conditions of this section, including entrance upon that person's property. All significant industrial users will be sampled and inspected at least once each year. 
(Code 1992, § 18-164; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.29, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-286. - Surcharge. 
Any user discharge to the public sewer wastewater having a pollutant concentration within the range as established by resolution of the township board shall be subject to an additional surcharge over and above the basic rates. The surcharge shall be the yearly average per pound of treatment cost computed as a percent of the total operating costs divided by the pounds of treated pollutant. 
(Code 1992, § 18-165; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.30, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 13, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 00-02, § 3, 4-17-2000; Ord. No. 05-23, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 40-287. - Waste discharged from external sources. 
The discharge of waste into the township wastewater system from an external source such as trucked or hauled waste, test well residuals, pump and haul, or spent water from an abatement site, or other external contributors is not permitted unless prior written consent has been obtained from the superintendent. Permission may be granted on a case-by-case basis for discharge of such wastes into a pre-identified manhole of the sanitary sewer system, or at the treatment plant. Analysis and pretreatment of any waste proposed for discharge into the treatment system may be required prior to commencement of the discharge of the waste.  
(Code 1992, § 18-166; Ord. No. 284.2, § 2.31, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 14, 10-6-1997) 
Secs. 40-288—40-307. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
Sec. 40-308. - Authorization required. 
No person shall cover, uncover, obstruct or make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer, manhole, service access or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining written authorization from the appropriate township department.  
(Code 1992, § 18-176; Ord. No. 284.2, § 3.1, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-309. - Authorization forms; fees. 
All connections with any sewer of the township and any grading, excavation, or backfilling that will result in the obstruction, or placing above or below grade level, of any public sewer, manhole, service access, or any appurtenance thereof, shall be made only on written authorization issued by the township and on such forms and on payment of such fees and in accordance with such conditions as shall be established from time to time by the township board. Authorization to connect to the sewer shall be subject to specific requirements of the township relating to sewer design and/or the more stringent requirements of the state construction code, state plumbing code or any subsequent ordinance or amendment adopted by the township board with regard to standards for construction of building drains, sewers and stubs.  
(Code 1992, § 18-177; Ord. No. 284.2, § 3.2, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-310. - Owner's expense and liability. 
(a) 	
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer, and to the repair, replacement and maintenance of such building sewer, shall be borne by the owner of the premises served by the building sewer.  

(b) 	
All costs and expenses incident to the raising or lowering of any public sewer, or manhole, or service access to surface grade required as a result of any grading, excavating or backfilling, shall be borne by the person requiring the grading, excavating or backfilling.  

(c) 	
The owner shall indemnify the township from all loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer or by grading, excavating or backfilling that requires any public sewer, manhole or service access to be raised or lowered to grade level.  

(d) 	
Only that portion considered as a public sewer main shall be maintained at the expense of the township. The building sewer (including the house lead) is not a part of the public sewer main.  


(Code 1992, § 18-178; Ord. No. 284.2, § 3.3, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-311. - Vandalism. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with or alter any structure, property, appurtenance, equipment, or any other item which is part of the POTW. 
(Code 1992, § 18-179; Ord. No. 284.2, § 3.4, 4-15-1991) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief generally, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Secs. 40-312—40-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 
Sec. 40-341. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
All significant users proposing to discharge nondomestic waste into the sanitary sewers of the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit prior to contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived (October 6, 1997.) It shall be unlawful for a significant user to discharge any wastewater to the POTW without a permit except as authorized by the superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 18-191; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.1, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 15, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-342. - Permit conditions. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the township. Permits shall contain no less than the following conditions, where appropriate: 
(1) 	
A wastewater permit shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation.  

(2) 
The duration of a wastewater permit shall be one year. 

(3) 	
A condition of permit requirements may include submission of facility plans for accidental spill prevention, cleanup procedures, notification, and reporting of a spill incident.  

(4) 	
The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the township during the term of the permit. (Refer to sections 40-268, 40-269 and 40-270.)  

(5) 
Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 

(6) 	
Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.  

(7) 
Requirement for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities.  

(8) 
Compliance schedules.  

(9) 	
Requirements for submission of a baseline monitoring report, special technical reports, discharge reports, or compliance schedule reports different from those prescribed in this article, all of which shall comply with the standards and guidelines which are (or in the future may be) established by the township.  

(10) 
Requirement for notification to the township of significant change in discharge. 

(11) 	
Special conditions as the superintendent may reasonably require under particular circumstances of a given discharge including, but not limited to, sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number and type of sample, standards for testing, and reporting schedule.  


(Code 1992, § 18-192; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.2, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 16, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-343. - Permit application. 
(a) 
A user, upon application for a wastewater discharge permit, shall submit the following information:  

(1) 
The nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge. 

(2) 	
The average and maximum daily flow for process units in the user's facility which are limited by pretreatment standards or requirements. 

(3) 	
An inventory of all chemicals, toxic substances, oils or solvents which are used in conjunction with regulated processes and contained on the user's property. 

(4) 	
The normal usage of all chemicals, toxic substances, oils or solvents, and the normal quantities on hand.  

(5) 	
The method or methods of disposal of spent or used chemicals, toxic substances, oil and solvents used in conjunction with the regulated processes.  

(6) 
A description of the pretreatment methods that will be used to remove regulated pollutants.  

(7) 	
Production data which will aid in determining process flow and types and concentration of regulated pollutants.  

(8) 	
Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans to show all sewers and sewer connections.  

(9) 
Other information that may be required to suitably process the application for the permit.  

(b) 	
The application for permit reissuance shall be signed by an authorized representative of the significant user.  


(Code 1992, § 18-193; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.3, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-344. - Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(a) 	
Ninety-day compliance reports. Within 90 days following the date for compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to such standards shall submit to the township wastewater treatment plant a report containing the information described in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(4)—(6). The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger.  

(b) 	
Periodic compliance reports. All significant users subject to a pretreatment standard set forth in this article, after the compliance date of such a pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new discharger, after commencement of discharge to the township, are required to submit six-month reports to the township unless required more frequently by the township POTW. This report shall contain information as defined in the approved wastewater discharge permit.  

(1) 	
A record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement; provided, however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the township may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. 

(2) 	
Results of all sampling and analysis of the discharge necessary for the monitoring of concentrations of regulated pollutants. Monitoring frequency shall be prescribed in the content of the discharger's sewer use permit.  

(c) 	
Report sampling. Data used in support of a compliance report, a baseline monitoring report, and/or compliance with a pretreatment standard deadline must be representative of the sampling performed during the period covered by the report.  


(Code 1992, § 18-194; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.4, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 17, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-345. - Accidental spill prevention. 
The application for a wastewater discharge permit shall include plans for accidental spill prevention in accordance with sections 40-272 through 40-275.  
(Code 1992, § 18-195; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.5, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-346. - Confidential information. 
(a) 	
Information of a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction. The user may request in writing that the release of information which reveals trade secrets be entitled to protection. The request shall be made to the township manager, or in his absence the township supervisor. The user shall specifically identify which information it wishes accorded confidential treatment and the specific reasons its release of said information would harm the user. The township manager or supervisor may, but is under no obligation to, promise confidentiality of any trade secrets. In the event the township manager or supervisor refuses to promise confidentiality of the information to be submitted, within ten days of such denial, the user may petition the township board for a hearing to be held within 30 days of the user's request to determine the validity of the user's request. Representatives of the US EPA and the state department of environmental quality shall upon request be afforded immediate and unlimited access to all information collected by the township under the industrial pretreatment program. These agencies have established procedures for the handling of confidential information.  

(b) 	
Information accepted by the township as confidential may not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public until the user has been accorded an opportunity by the superintendent to provide further documentation of the user's original request for confidentiality. If, after the user has been allowed 20 days to comment, the superintendent decides that it is in the best interest of the public to release the information, he shall so notify the user and allow ten days for the user to request a hearing before the township board, such hearing to be held within 30 days of notification to the clerk of the user's request for a hearing. 

(c) 
Effluent monitoring data will not be recognized as confidential information.  


(Code 1992, § 18-196; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.6, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 18, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-347. - New source compliance. 
A new source subject to categorical or ordinance defined pretreatment standards shall install and start up all pretreatment equipment necessary for complying with such standards prior to commencement of discharge. Compliance with pretreatment standards shall be completed within the shortest feasible time, but not to exceed 90 days from commencement of discharge. 
(Code 1992, § 18-197; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.7, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-348. - Baseline monitoring report deadline for new sources. 
A new industrial source is required to submit a baseline monitoring report (BMR) at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. 
(1) 	
An existing industrial user is required to submit a BMR to the control authority within 180 days after the effective date of the applicable categorical standard 40 CFR 403.12(b).  

(2) 	
A new categorical industrial user is required to submit a BMR at least 90 days prior to commencement of the facilities, discharge to the POTW.  

a. 	
Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission, whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to the standards which are currently discharging to or are scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall submit to the POTW a report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)—(7). 

b. 	
A new industrial source is required to submit a baseline monitoring report at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The report shall contain information as required in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)—(5). New sources shall also be required to include in this report, information of the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to comply with 




applicable pretreatment standards. Estimated measurements shall be used to provide the information as required in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(4) and (5).  
c. 	Industrial users shall report any changes to information in the baseline monitoring report to the POTW within 60 days. 
(Code 1992, § 18-198; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.8, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 19, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-349. - Signatory requirements. 
Reports shall be signed by a responsible corporate officer in charge of a principal business function: either president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer or a duly authorized representative of a responsible corporate officer. The appropriate corporate officer shall be designated in writing by the permittee prior to issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. If there is any change of the responsible corporate official, the appropriate replacement for the officer shall be designated in writing prior to submittal of any report under his authority. All reports shall include the certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(A)(2)(ii). If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility, then a director or higher official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility or their designee shall be the authorized representative. That authorization shall be made in writing. 
(Code 1992, § 18-199; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.9, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 20, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-350. - Records retention. 
All dischargers subject to this article shall retain and preserve for a period of no less than three years any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a discharger in connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the superintendent pursuant hereto shall be retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired.  
(Code 1992, § 18-200; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.10, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 21, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-351. - Continuation of a permit beyond the expiration date. 
When application for permit reissuance has been filed in a timely and orderly manner, but a new permit has not been issued, an extension of the expiring permit will be given. The length of the extension will reflect the time needed for reissuance of the new permit, but shall not exceed 60 days. 
(Code 1992, § 18-201; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.11, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-352. - Permit appeal. 
(a) 	
Requests for reconsideration should be made within 20 days of final issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. After 20 days, the right to reconsideration by the superintendent or by a court of law is considered waived. 

(b) 	
Requests for reconsideration should be made in writing and include supporting reasons for reconsidering the permit requirement being questioned.  


(Code 1992, § 18-202; Ord. No. 284.2, § 4.12, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 22, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-353. - Temporary permits; site contamination clean-up water. 
(a) 	
The release of water from a temporary point of discharge into the sanitary sewer as a result of site contamination from leakage of underground fuel storage tanks (USTs) is unlawful except as authorized by the superintendent through issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. All temporary users proposing to discharge into the sanitary sewers of the township shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit prior to commencement of discharge to the township POTW. The township reserves the right to reject, surcharge, or establish special contractual provisions in accordance with section 40-267 and the terms of sections 40-354—40-357. 

(b) 	
In addition to the requirements contained in this section, the release of water from a temporary point of discharge into the sanitary sewer as a result of site contamination from leakage of underground fuel storage tanks shall be in full compliance with the provisions of the leaking underground storage tank act, MCL 299.831 et seq., and the Michigan Environmental Response Act, MCL 299.601 et seq.  


(Code 1992, § 18-203; Ord. No. 97-2, § 23, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-354. - Temporary permit conditions. 
Temporary wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this Code of Ordinances and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the township. A temporary permit shall contain no less than the following: 
(1) 	
A temporary permit shall not be reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation.  

(2) 
The duration of a temporary permit shall not exceed one year. 

(3) 
Limits on the maximum allowable discharge of pollutants. 

(4) 
Limits on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge.  

(5) 
Requirements for submission or reports. 

(6) 
Special conditions, as the superintendent may require. 


(Code 1992, § 18-204; Ord. No. 97-2, § 24, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-355. - Temporary permit application. 
A temporary user, upon application for a wastewater discharge permit shall submit the following information: 
(1) 	
The remediation contractor name, address, phone number, and the project coordinator for the site.  

(2) 	
The company name, address, phone number and environmental officer for the location for which the permit is being obtained. 

(3) 
Testing results of a purgeable halocarbon scan (EPA method 601) from each monitoring well.  

(4) 
In addition, background sampling from each monitoring well is required for the following: 

a. 	
Benzene. 

b. 	
Ethyl benzene.  

c. 	
Toluene. 

d. 	
Xylene. 

e. 	
Phosphates.  

f. 
Lead. 

g. 	
Methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE). 



(5) 
An estimate of the anticipated average and maximum flow in gallons/day.  

(6) 
The anticipated start date, and the projected duration of the project.  

(7) 	
The authorized signature of a responsible corporate official in charge of a principal business function; either president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer or a duly authorized representative of a responsible corporate officer. 


(Code 1992, § 18-205; Ord. No. 97-2, § 25, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-356. - Reporting requirements for temporary permits. 
(a) 	
Violation. Should sampling results reveal a treatment violation, it must be immediately reported to the superintendent. In addition, the following information shall also be reported verbally and in writing within five days following receipt of the sampling data:  

(1) 
The cause of the violation.  

(2) 
How the violation was corrected.  

(3) 
When discharge was resumed following the correction in treatment.  


(b) Monitoring reports. 
(1) 
Sampling data shall be reported weekly for the first three months of discharge.  

(2) 	
If no violations are detected during the first three months of discharge, the reporting requirement may be reduced to quarterly thereafter. A reduction in the reporting requirement must be approved in writing by the superintendent.  


(Code 1992, § 18-206; Ord. No. 97-2, § 26, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-357. - Pollutant limitations for temporary wastewater discharge permits. 
Due to the nature of the discharge from sites requiring a temporary wastewater discharge permit, the township board shall establish, by resolution, maximum pollutant limitations for the purpose of ensuring acceptable wastewater discharge from these sites. The limitations set forth in this section are in addition to the pollutant limitations set forth in section 40-266.  
(Code 1992, § 18-207; Ord. No. 97-2, § 27, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 00-02, § 4, 4-17-2000) 
Secs. 40-358—40-387. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 
Sec. 40-388. - Notice of potential harmful discharge. 
All industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW including any slug loadings as defined in this article. All categorical significant users are required to report a violation of pretreatment standards within 24 hours of when the violating discharge was first detected. Resampling to confirm compliance of the wastestream in violation shall be completed within 30 days.  
(Code 1992, § 18-216; Ord. No. 284.2, § 5.1, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 28, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-389. - Notice of violation. 
(a) 	
Generally. Whenever the superintendent finds that a user has violated or is violating this article or a wastewater discharge permit, including any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the township may serve upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the receipt date of this notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the superintendent by the user. 

(b) 	
Damaging contributions. Whenever the township finds that a user has or is violating this article or a wastewater discharge permit, by an actual or threatened discharge that may cause interference to the POTW or cause the township to violate any condition of its NPDES permit, the township may serve upon such a person a verbal and/or written notice to require immediate stoppage or elimination of the violating contribution. Within ten days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violations and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.  


(Code 1992, § 18-217; Ord. No. 284.2, §§ 5.2, 5.3, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 29, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-390. - Consent orders. 
The superintendent is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct noncompliance within a time period specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued in accordance with section 40-393.  
(Code 1992, § 18-218; Ord. No. 284.2, § 5.4, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 30, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-391. - Show cause hearing. 
(a) 	
The superintendent may order any user which causes or contributes to violation of this article, or wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any principal executive, general partner or corporate officer. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued.  

(b) 	
A user may also request, in writing, a hearing before the township board because of enforcement action taken or pending for a violation. The user will be notified of the meeting as described in subsection (a) of this section, and must be prepared to show cause before the township board as to why the enforcement action should not have been taken, or should not be taken. The township board may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate an impartial hearing officer to: 

(1) 	
Issue in the name of the township board notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence to any matter involved in such hearings.  

(2) 	
Take the evidence and transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the township board for action thereon.  

(c) 	
At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded. The transcript will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.  


(Code 1992, § 18-219; Ord. No. 284.2, § 5.5, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 31, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-392. - Affirmative defense. 
When an enforcement action is brought against an industry alleging violation of specific article limits or general prohibitions, the industry may verifiably demonstrate in its defense the following:  
(1) 	
It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources would cause pass through or interference.  

(2) 	
The user was in compliance with local limits designed to prevent interference and/or pass through, directly prior to and during the incidence of interference and/or pass through. 

(3) 	
If a local limit designed to prevent interference or pass through has not been developed for the constituent that caused the interference and/or pass through, the industry may demonstrate that directly prior to, and during the incident of discharge, its effluent did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge activity when the POTW was in compliance with its approved NPDES permit and applicable sludge disposal criteria.  

(4) 	
Affirmative defense will not be allowed in cases where an alleged discharge of pollutants has resulted in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health or safety problems.  


(Code 1992, § 18-220; Ord. No. 284.2, § 5.6, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 32, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-393. - Compliance order. 
When the superintendent finds that an industrial user has violated, or continues to violate this article or a permit or order issued hereunder, he may issue an order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related equipment have been installed and are properly operating. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices. A compliance schedule may also be included in the body of a wastewater discharge permit.  
(Code 1992, § 18-221; Ord. No. 284.2, § 5.7, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 33, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-394. - Permit action. 
This permit may be modified, revoked and reissued, or terminated for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1) 	
To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 

(2) 	
Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation which were not covered in the effective permit;  

(3) 	
A change in any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 

(4) 	
Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the control authority's collection and treatment systems, POTW personnel or the receiving waters; 

(5) 
Violation of any terms or conditions of this permit;  

(6) 
Obtaining this permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts; or 

(7) 	
Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any existing applicable requirements, standards, laws or rules and regulations.  


(Code 1992, § 18-222; Ord. No. 284.2, § 5.8, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-395. - Publication of violations. 
The township shall annually publish in the largest circulation newspaper in the area a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance of applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user during the same 12 months. For the purposes of this section, a significant violation is a violation which:  
(1) 
Remains uncorrected for 45 days after notification of noncompliance.  

(2) 
Is part of a pattern of noncompliance over a 12-month period. 

(3) 
Involves a failure to accurately report noncompliance.  

(4) 
Results in the township exercising its right to suspend service. 


(Code 1992, § 18-223; Ord. No. 284.2, § 5.10, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 35, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-396. - Emergency suspension of service. 
(a) 	
The superintendent may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit of an industrial user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW or the environment.  

(b) 	
Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the superintendent shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The superintendent shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in section 40-393 are initiated against the user.  

(c) 	
An industrial user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. 


(Code 1992, § 18-224; Ord. No. 284.2, § 5.10, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 36, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-397. - Legal action. 
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the township wastewater disposal system contrary to provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the township, or is found to be in violation of any division or section of this article, the superintendent shall notify the township board and the board may commence action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the circuit court of this county.  
(Code 1992, § 18-225; Ord. No. 284.2, § 5.11, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 37, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-398. - Injunctive relief. 
Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate the provisions of this article or permit or order issued hereunder, with the consent of the township board, the superintendent, through the township attorney, may petition the court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the user. The superintendent may recover fees and expenses associated with the enforcement activity in the same manner as other sewer service charges.  
(Code 1992, § 18-226; Ord. No. 284.2, § 5.12, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 38, 10-6-1997) 
Secs. 40-399—40-424. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PENALTIES; COSTS 
Sec. 40-425. - Violations and penalties. 
(a) 	
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, and the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder shall be served by the township with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation.  

(b) 	
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be responsible for a code violation punishable as a municipal civil infraction as prescribed by section 1-7. 

(c) 	
This article shall be enforced by the superintendent of the township wastewater treatment plant or designees who are hereby designated as the authorized township officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations under this article, directing alleged violators to appear in court, or to issue municipal civil infraction notices, directing alleged violators to appear at the township municipal violations bureau as provided by this Code.  

(d) 
The issuance of municipal civil infraction citations shall be pursuant to chapter 20, article II. 

(e) 	
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the amount of a municipal civil infraction found due in response to the issuance of a municipal civil infraction notice for a violation of this article shall be according to the following schedule: 

(1) 
First offense: $1,000.00;  

(2) 
Second offense: $2,500.00;  

(3) 
Third or subsequent offense: $5,000.00.  


A copy of this schedule shall be posted at the township municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(f) 	
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the township may recover costs incurred as a consequence of sampling and monitoring expenses, legal action, or increased operational and maintenance expenditures for the sanitary sewer system or treatment plan, or increased sludge handling expenditures, and such costs shall be recoverable from the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.  

(g) 
The following violations of this article are exempt from enforcement as a municipal civil infraction: 

(1) 	
All acts or omissions which constitute a crime under state law punishable by imprisonment for more than 90 days including, but not limited to, section 40-311.  

(2) 
All violations capable of enforcement pursuant to MCL 324.3115.  


(Code 1992, § 18-241; Ord. No. 284.2, § 6.1, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 39, 10-6-1997; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, 1-22-2002) 
Sec. 40-426. - Tenant responsibility. 
Should the owner of any property, after receipt of notice of violation as specified herein, fail to comply with the provisions of this article against the agent or tenant of the owner or any other person occupying or having charge of such property, the owner shall be jointly and severally responsible with such tenant for any failure to comply with the provisions of this article.  
(Code 1992, § 18-242; Ord. No. 284.2, § 6.2, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-427. - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater discharge permit; or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both.  
(Code 1992, § 18-243; Ord. No. 284.2, § 6.3, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-428. - Cost recovery by the township. 
Any discharger violating any provisions of this article who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the township wastewater disposal system, shall be liable to the township for any damage, loss, or expense including costs as a consequence of legal action resulting from such violation or discharge. The township shall bill the discharger for the costs incurred by the township for any cleaning, repair, replacement, and/or legal fees caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this article enforceable under the provisions of section 40-425. 
(Code 1992, § 18-244; Ord. No. 284.2, § 6.4, 4-15-1991) 
Secs. 40-429—40-454. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FUNDING 
Sec. 40-455. - Funding for POTW service. 

This division allows the use of the fees and charges for the operation and maintenance of the industrial waste pretreatment (IWP) and nondomestic users control program (NUCP).  
(Code 1992, § 18-256; Ord. No. 284.2, § 7.1, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-456. - Additional funding. 
Fees and charges may be established for, but not limited to the following:  
(1) 
Administration of the industrial waste pretreatment and nondomestic users' control program.  

(2) 
Monitoring, inspections, surveillance procedures.  

(3) 
Reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction. 

(4) 
Permit applications.  

(5) 
Filing appeals.  

(6) 
Sampling (grab, composite, or other types of sampling).  

(7) 
Testing costs. 

(8) 
Multiple discharge analysis from an independent testing laboratory.  

(9) 	
Other fees the township may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of the industrial waste pretreatment and nondomestic users' control program.  


(Code 1992, § 18-257; Ord. No. 284.2, § 7.2, 4-15-1991) 
Sec. 40-457. - Fees. 
Fees shall be the amount established by resolution of the township board and shall relate solely to the matters covered in section 40-456 and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the township.  
(Code 1992, § 18-258; Ord. No. 284.2, § 7.3, 4-15-1991) 
Secs. 40-458—40-482. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - APPEALS 
Sec. 40-483. - Aggrieved parties. 

Any user of the township sanitary sewage disposal works or any potential user thereof aggrieved by the application of the provisions hereof is entitled to appeal to the township board as the sanitary sewer board of appeals. Any decisions made by the township board pursuant to request of a user or potential user shall be taken from an adverse decision of the building official or superintendent, and the decision of the township board shall be final and binding except as may be confirmed, set aside or amended by a court of competent jurisdiction.  
(Code 1992, § 18-271; Ord. No. 284.2, § 8.1, 4-15-1991; Ord. No. 97-2, § 40, 10-6-1997) 
Secs. 40-484—40-504. - Reserved. ARTICLE V. - WASTEWATER SYSTEM RATES Sec. 40-505. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Abutting property means property abutting a public sewer main, whether through or from the front, side or the back of the premises.  
Accumulated sanitary sewer system value means that value, per 1,000 cubic feet of sewer use, as established by resolution of the township board which shall be adjusted periodically by resolution of the township board to reflect the most current net system value.  
Average cost per linear foot of main according to pipe size for sewer main shall be calculated by dividing the total project cost by the total linear feet of pipe, valves, manholes and fillings installed in the project of interest, prorated by pipe size. The township engineer shall also proportion the cost of installing a sewer at a depth not exceeding 20 feet.  
Building official means an individual appointed by the township board delegated to administer the state construction code. 
Capital charge means such charge as may be established, which represents the respective portion of the capital investment of sewer system, which may be allocated or attributed to any premises, including but not limited to oversizing of lines and treatment plant capacity and production facilities. A capital charge also may be known as an equity charge. When square footage must be calculated to determine the capital charge unit factors, the outside dimensions of buildings shall be used. 
Commercial user means a user of the system which is primarily engaged in business or commerce (whether for profit or not-for-profit), but not classified as a residential, institutional or governmental user.  
Connection means the act of joining a sewer lead to a new or existing building which results in the providing of public sewer to the building. 
Director means the director of the township utility department.  
First party means persons and their successors, heirs, or assignees entering into a contract with the township board to privately participate in funding additions to the water or sewer system. 
Governmental user means a user of the system which is the state, a municipality, a subdivision of a municipality or of the state, including a school district.  
Household means a claimant and spouse and all other persons residing therein.  
Household income means all income received by all persons of a household in a tax year while members of a household.  
Income means the sum of federal adjusted gross income as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, plus all income specifically excluded or exempt from the computations of the federal adjusted gross income.  
Industrial user means that user that uses water or the public water system for manufacturing or processing purposes including users engaged in profit-seeking ventures which discharge a trade or process waste. 
Inspector means any person duly authorized by the township board to inspect and approve any or all facilities affected by this article.  
Institutional user means a user of the system which is an organizational, establishment, foundation or society of a public, educational, or charitable character such as a hospital, educational facility, charity or church. 
Lateral sewer main means a sewer main, eight inches or larger in diameter, that serves, or is intended to serve, two or more buildings and is connected to, and part of, the public sewer system.  
Main charge means a footage charge to defray the cost of a public sewer line abutting the premises, which cost has not been previously defrayed by special assessment or other charge. 
Normal domestic strength sewage means that sewage characterized by a biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) or concentration of suspended solids of not to exceed 300 milligrams per liter (mg/l).  
Operation and maintenance (O&M) means those items of labor, service, material, utility costs and other charges including replacements which are necessary to the functioning of the sanitary sewage collection and disposal system of the township.  
Premises and properties means land and any building located thereon.  
Pretreatment means the methods and processes as approved by the director, to remove incompatible pollutants from industrial waste prior to the entry of such waste into the township sanitary sewer system. 
Public sewer means a sewer conduit in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights to use and which is controlled by public authority.  
Replacement means any equipment, accessories and appurtenances necessary to cause the system to live out its useful design life.  
Residential user means those users of the system whose primary use is that of a domicile and whose sewage is of normal domestic strength.  
Sanitary sewer system value means the net assets less liabilities and contributed equity of the township sanitary sewer system as determined from the most current, completed yearly audit.  
Second party means the township board for the township.  
Senior citizen means an individual, or either one of two persons filing a joint tax return under Act No. 20 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1973 (MCL 206.30 et seq.), who is 65 years of age or older and whose estimated household income for the current taxable year will not exceed $8,500.00, or such other amount as may be determined by resolution of the township board to be applicable and consistent with the provisions of the aforesaid Act No. 20 as of the date of filing of an application by a senior citizen for a senior citizen rate.  
Sewage means the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial establishments and any other premises.  
Sewage disposal system or system means the sanitary sewage collection and treatment system within the township and all connections thereto, both public and private, used for the purpose of collection and treatment of water-carried waste. 
Sewer service charge means the total charge for sanitary sewer service within the township including charges for operation, maintenance, replacement, local capital cost and the cost of billing.  
Stubs means sewer leads from the main to the lot line.  
Surcharge means that any user discharging to the public sewer a wastewater having biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, phosphates, or suspended solids within the range specified in section 40-286 shall be subject to an additional cost over and above the basic rates. The surcharge shall be the yearly average per pound of treatment cost computed as a percent of replacement reserve, and the operation and maintenance divided by the yearly pounds of biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, phosphates or suspended solids. The surcharge per pound of pollutant shall be calculated annually by the superintendent and approved by the township board.  
Third party means those persons and their successors, heirs or assignees that do not join with the first party and/or the township board in a contract to privately fund additions to the sewer system addition of the first party. 
Total project cost means, for any sewer or water main installation, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following costs:  
(1) 
Installed cost of the main, valves, manholes, fittings and other appurtenances thereto; 

(2) 	
All repair, replacement, restoration or protection of roads, landscape, waterways or other environment; 

(3) 
All engineering, planning, advertising, administrative and bidding costs.  


Township engineer means the staff engineer of the township or such professional engineer retained by the township board to review the engineering aspects of the township sewer and/or water system, or the authorized representative of such engineer.  
User charge means those charges imposed on a monthly or quarterly basis for the privilege of using the sanitary sewage disposal system of the township and shall be deemed to consist of a component for operation, maintenance and replacement charges only.  
Volume of sewer use, for the purpose of enforcement of this article, means and is hereby determined to be synonymous with the volume of township metered water serving the user and it shall be assumed that all metered water is entering the public sanitary system unless the customer can demonstrate to the contrary. Separate water meters serving users that do not use the sanitary sewer system for their disposal need not be considered for establishment of sewer capital charges that are not set by schedule.  
(Code 1992, § 18-291; Ord. No. 279.1, § 1, 12-3-1984; Ord. No. 93-6, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 97-2, § 41, 10-6-1997) 
Sec. 40-506. - Rates. 
(a) Metered rates. 
(1) 	
Inside the township. Rates to be charged for sanitary sewer service shall be computed based upon metered water consumption for those users connected to the township's water distribution system or other water supply source and whose premises are within the corporate limits of the township and are as set by resolution of the township board.  

(2) 	
Outside of the township. Rates to be charged for sanitary sewer service shall be as set by resolution of the township board.  


(b) 
Unmetered rates. 

(1) 
Inside the township rates. 

a. 	
Residential users shall be charged a flat rate based on residential averages multiplied by the sum of the inside of the township rates for operation and maintenance, debt service, capital and replacement costs.  

b. 	
Nonresidential users shall be charged a flat rate based on nonresidential averages multiplied by the sum of the inside of the township rates for operation and maintenance, debt service, capital and replacement costs.  



(2) 
Outside of the township rates. 

a. 	
Residential users shall be charged a flat rate based on residential averages multiplied by the sum of the outside of the township rates for operation by the sum of the outside of the township rates for operation and maintenance, debt service, capital and replacement costs. 

b. 	
Nonresidential users shall be charged a flat rate based on nonresidential averages multiplied by the sum of the outside of the township rates for operation and maintenance, debt service, capital and replacement costs.  



(c)  
Surcharge rates. 


(1) 	
Rates to be charged for surcharge shall be based on the samples taken from the user's wastewater discharge, which concentrations fall within the surcharge range for the pollutants that have been established by resolution of the township board. 

(2) 
The rates shall be reviewed annually by the director of the wastewater treatment plant.  

(3) 
The rates shall be approved and adopted by township board resolution.  


(d) Billings. 
(1) 
Bills shall be rendered to users no less often than on a monthly basis. 

(2) 	
The township board may require meter readings and/or billings to be made more often than on a monthly basis. Billings made more often than on a monthly basis may be estimated and 

prorated on a monthly basis with the balance due to be adjusted by a meter reading and billing at the end of each month. 

(3) 	
All bills rendered to users shall become due and payable 15 days after the billing date. Payments made by mail shall be postmarked no later than 15 days after the billing date. No utility department employee in the field shall be permitted to receive payments for billings or other charges.  

(e) 	
Special rates. Rates for miscellaneous or special services for which a special rate shall be established by resolution of the township board, provided that the operation and maintenance and replacement components be uniformly applied to users subject to the rate.  


(f) 	Past due bills. 
(1) 	
All bills not paid on or before the due date as herein established shall be subject to a penalty as shall be set by resolution of the township board.  

(2) 	
Sanitary sewer service shall be discontinued 35 days after the billing date, if all necessary payments have not been made as required by this article, except as follows by subsection (f)(3) of this section. The 35-day requirement notwithstanding, the service shall not be discontinued unless the accounting department is open to receive payment on the day of and the day following discontinuation of service.  

(3) 	
When a customer claims hardship, the controller, at his discretion, may allow the customer to make reduced payments at intervals more frequent than the usual billing interval. These payments shall equal in total the monthly bill. This method of payment shall not allow a customer to defer full payment of the bill beyond 35 days after the billing date.  

(4) 	
The procedure for notification of default in payment of bills prior to service discontinuation shall be by sending a past due notice 20 days after the billing date. The past due notice shall state the amount due, the service discontinuation date, the additional charge to reinstate discontinued service, and that payment made after the service discontinuation date must be for all charges.  

(5) 	
Where service to a customer in default of a bill has been discontinued, the service shall not be restored until authorized by the accounting department. The accounting department shall not authorize restoration of service until arrangements for payment of all charges as may be required by ordinance, have been made. 

(g) 	
Returned (NSF) checks. An administrative fee as set by resolution of the township board shall be charged for handling returned checks.  

(h) 
Sewer service deposits. Sewer service deposits shall not be required, except as follows:  

(1) 	
Where annual notice is given in writing as provided for in section 21, Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), that a tenant is responsible for such charges and services as provided for by this article, then a cash deposit as established by township board resolution shall be made as security for payment of such charges and services. The deposit shall be returned after two years, if no default in payment of bills has occurred and if the customer has not been past due more than two times within a two-year period.  

(2) 
As required by subsection (i) of this section, pertaining to enforcement.  

(i) 	
Enforcement. Charges for sewer services shall constitute a lien on the property served, pursuant to section 21, Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.121), unless annual notice is given that a tenant is responsible and whenever such charges shall be delinquent for two months or more, the township officer in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually before September 1 of each year, to the tax assessing officer of the township, the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be by him entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general township taxes against such premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced; provided, however, where annual notice is given in writing that a tenant is responsible for such charges and services as provided by section 21, Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.121), no further service shall be rendered to such premises until a 

cash deposit equal to six months sewer charges shall have been made as security for payment of such charges and service. In addition to other lawful enforcement methods, the payment of charges for service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing the sewer service to such premises.  

(j) 	
Winter averaging. Winter averaging, if any, shall be established by resolution of the township board, provided that the operation and maintenance and replacement components are uniformly applied to users subject to the rate.  

(k) 	
No free service. No user of the township's sanitary sewer system, public or private, shall receive free service.  


(Code 1992, § 18-292; Ord. No. 279.5, § 1, 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 93-6, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 98-9, § 2, 12-7-1998; Ord. No. 05-23, 11-7-2005) 
Sec. 40-507. - Sewer main and capital charges. 
(a) 	
Sewer main and capital charges hereinafter established shall apply to all properties located within the boundaries of the township served by the public sewer system owned by the township. Those properties within the township served by public sewer furnished by the City of Lansing, or any other municipal corporation or township, shall be subject to such charges as may be provided for by contract between the township and such other municipality.  

(b) 	
Sewer capital charges for properties located outside the boundaries of the township shall be as arranged by agreement between the township and the property owners requesting such service and the unit of government where such property is situated; however, no capital charge shall be less than those charges to properties located within the township.  


(Code 1992, § 18-294; Ord. No. 279, § 5, 12-20-1982) 
Sec. 40-508. - Times and conditions of collection of charges. 
(a) 	
Charges imposed by this article shall be paid in full or refunded under the following conditions and at the following times unless otherwise specifically provided elsewhere in this article:  

(1) 	
For each premises requesting to use or required to use the public sewage disposal system, unless previously paid, a sewer main charge will be collected as per section 40-509, and a sewer capital charge will be collected as per section 40-512.  

(2) 	
Upon application for a building permit for the purpose of erecting new buildings, main and/or benefit charges shall be collected. 

(3) 	
Upon application for a building permit to construct an addition to an existing premises, other than a single-family residence, all applicable sewer charges shall be paid at the same rate as though the addition were a new building. The sewer capital charge shall apply only to the addition being added, provided that the class of use of the premises is not being changed. 

(4) 	
Sewer capital charges, once paid for the first occupant's use, shall not be further adjusted for future changes in occupancy unless there is intensification of a use by a classification change, structural, plumbing addition, or other changes that would create a larger demand on the system. Charges for such added use shall be paid upon application for building permit; or if a building permit is not required by ordinance, then such additional charges shall be paid prior to a plumbing permit; or if neither a building or plumbing permit is required by ordinance, then the additional charge shall be paid prior to occupancy by the new occupant.  

(5) 	
If a sewer capital charge rate has not been established by township board resolution in regard to a particular use, then the time of collection shall be as described in section 40-512.  

(6) 	
Upon application for authorization to connect a new building, existing building, or lateral sewer main connection to the public sewer, all applicable charges shall be collected, except as provided in sections 40-513, 40-514 and 40-516.  

(7) 	
When the class of use of a proposed building, existing building or addition to an existing building is not set forth in the application for building permit, the sewer capital charge shall be the amount as established by township board resolution for unknown occupancies. This charge shall be adjusted at the time that the first total building occupancy or use class is known. 

(8) 	
Prior to start of construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings when a building permit is not required, all applicable charges shall be paid (for example, schools).  

(9) 	
If an application is withdrawn (in writing), then the charges due under this article shall be refunded, less an administrative charge.  

(b) 	
The requirements of this section shall not apply to those properties served by a sewer furnished by a municipal corporation or township other than the township, but rather the contracted terms, amounts and methods of payment shall apply.  


(Code 1992, § 18-295; Ord. No. 279, § 6, 12-20-1982; Ord. No. 93-6, 8-16-1993) 
Sec. 40-509. - Establishment of main charges. 
Main charges for sewer are hereby established for the privilege of connecting premises to the public sewer system as follows:  
(1) 	
When the public sewer mains available to such premises were constructed with public funds and the premises have not been specially assessed for any portion of the installing cost.  

(2) 	
When the public sewer mains available to such premises were financed by nonpublic funds and such premises did not participate in full in the financing of those services. 

(3) 	
It is the intent of this main charge to ensure that each premises connecting to the sewage disposal system of the township shall share its respective portion of the cost of installation of mains. 

(4) 	
Lateral sewer main connections to the public sewer system shall be subject to a benefit charge in lieu of a sewer main charge, as per section 40-510(3).  


(Code 1992, § 18-296; Ord. No. 279, § 7, 12-20-1982; Ord. No. 93-6, 8-16-1993) 
Sec. 40-510. - Computation of sewer main charges. 
The amount of sewer main charges shall be determined as follows:  
(1) 	
Sewer main charges for premises served by sewers installed as part of assessment districts, but not assessed thereunder, shall be charged to and payable by a premises on the same basis as originally determined by the township board for the assessment district with a deferral charge added as set by resolution of the township board.  

(2) 	
Sewer main charges for premises abutting a sewer for which no assessment district exists shall be either one-half of the average cost per linear foot of main according to pipe size in the project under which the sewer main being charged for was actually installed, times the length of the abutting property on each side of the sewer main, or shall be based upon any other method that the township board, by resolution, determines to be proper. A deferral charge shall be added, as set by resolution of the township board. In those cases where the sewer main abutting a premises is actually larger than eight inches and/or deeper than 20 feet, then the cost shall be proportioned as if it had been an eight-inch main no deeper than 20 feet, or shall be proportioned as the township board, by resolution, determines to be proper. 

(3) 	
Where a lateral sewer main is connected to the public sewer system or where premises do not directly abut a sewer main such as, but not limited to, premises beyond the end of a dead-end road, on a road or street turnaround, landlocked premises, or property served for the end of the public sewer system, the township board shall by resolution determine the benefit charge that shall be imposed in lieu of a sewer main charge. 

(4) 	
Where privately funded sewer mains (under contract with the township board) are installed and individual building sewer stubs are connected to such lateral mains, those mains may be connected into the public sewer system without paying a sewer main charge, however, the lateral sewer main is subject to the benefit charge, pursuant to subsection (3) of this section. This provision in no way exempts sewer main charges to those platted lots or other parcels which stub into a public main directly rather than via the privately funded lateral mains. 

(5) 	
Where a parcel lies at the intersection of two streets or roads and is abutted on both of those sides by sewer mains, the footage for which a sewer main charge is made shall be calculated as follows to grant a measure of relief to the property owner: 

a. 	
Where both property lines and mains abutting the intersecting streets are less than 200 feet long, only the shorter of the two property lines shall be used in calculating the sewer main charges. 

b. 	
If one or both property lines and mains abutting the intersecting streets are over 200 feet in length, 200 feet shall be subtracted from the total footage of abutting mains in calculating the sewer main charge. 




(Code 1992, § 18-297; Ord. No. 279, § 8, 12-20-1982; Ord. No. 93-6, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 95-6, § 1, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 40-511. - Stub charges. 
When no sewer stub exists, the property owner shall bear the expense of installation of such stub. Where a sewer stub has been provided but not otherwise reimbursed to the township, it shall be paid at the time the sewer main charges are due at the rate per stub of the actual installed cost and an interest charge prorated through the month of payment.  
(Code 1992, § 18-298; Ord. No. 279, § 9, 12-20-1982) 
Sec. 40-512. - Capital charges. 
(a) 	
A capital charge as set by resolution of the township board, per single-family residence or residential equivalent unit shall be charged as a condition of obtaining service from the system.  

(b) 	
The township board shall adopt and revise from time to time if necessary, a schedule of residential equivalent unit factors representing the ratio of average residential sewage use to volume of nonresidential uses. Such schedule shall be used in determining capital charges except as otherwise provided herein. When the charge is based upon building area, the outside perimeter of the walls shall be used. 

(c) 	
The township building official may require metering of private water supply systems to verify the accuracy of charges. 

(d) 	
If a sewer capital charge rate has not been established by resolution in regard to a particular use, then with approval of the township board, an estimated charge shall be made and such charge collected prior to connection to the township system, except where otherwise provided in this article. Where this procedure is used, the user shall, as a condition of connection, give written assurance to the township providing for a later adjustment of the connection fee. The adjustment shall be based 

upon the ratio of actual volume of sewer use by such customer to the average use of a single-family residence. 

(e) 	
Initial sewer capital charges for industrial users shall be determined by using the most current accumulated system value as established by resolution of the township board and expressed as a rate per 1,000 cubic feet, multiplied by the user's commitment to a projected annual sewage volume, divided by 1,000. The minimum charge shall be as set by resolution of the township board. The township will review the actual annual sewage volume of each industrial user. No additional capital charge will be made for actual annual sewage volumes in excess of the projected volume on which the current capital charge is based, if the excess is less than ten percent of the initial projected volume. Similarly, no additional capital charges will be made for any single year in which the excess exceeds ten percent, but is less than 20 percent. For any two consecutive years (eight billing quarters) that the user's sewage volume (on which the current capital charge is based) has been exceeded by ten percent of the current capital charge volume commitment or for any single year that the excess exceeds 20 percent, then an additional charge, calculated upon the last four quarters' use, shall be made to the user based on the most recent accumulated value of the sanitary sewer system and calculated by the same method as the initial charge. The total of such additional capital charge shall be due and payable upon receipt of an invoice unless deferral is permitted under section 40-513. With approval of the township board an industrial user may commit to a larger annual sewage volume and pay the appropriate capital charge increase therefor at any time. Each sewage volume commitment by an industrial user and any subsequent changes thereto shall be documented by a separate agreement with the township.  

(f) 	
There shall be no rebate of capital charges once paid.  

(g) 	
Sewer capital charges once paid shall not be transferred to other parcels of land, other buildings, or other portions of buildings. However, if a building is removed, then such charge, if paid or assumed to have been paid, can be credited towards another building to be located on the same parcel of property.  


(Code 1992, § 18-299; Ord. No. 279.4, § 1, 4-2-1990; Ord. No. 94-2, § 1, 2-21-1994) 
Sec. 40-513. - Additions and connections to the public sewer. 
(a) 	
No additions by other than the township shall be allowed to the public sewer system except by prior contract with the township board.  

(b) 	
Where the township board contracts with the first party to extend the sewer system with private funds, then the first party shall not be levied main charges on the privately funded sewer mains specifically covered by the contract. The foregoing also applies to sewer stub installation charges if the first party also installs same under a contract with the township board. The exemption on main charges and sewer stub charges in this subsection shall not extend either to sewer mains abutting the first party's property which were funded publicly or by persons other than the first party or the benefit charge for lateral main connections to the public sewer system.  

(c) 	
The township, by contract with the first party, may agree to collect main and stub charges from third parties and rebate such charges to the first party. The contract shall specify that total rebates shall not exceed the actual cost of construction abutting a third party's properties or the amount of main and stub charges to be collected from a third party, whichever is the lesser amount. The township shall have the sole authority to determine what future connections are subject to rebate of main charges to the first party. The first party shall not contract with, or otherwise exact any fee from, any third party who desires to connect to and/or use any addition to the public sewer system. 

(d) 
No persons shall be exempted from capital charges.  

(e) 	
All plans and specifications for additions and connections to the public sewer system, including lateral connections, shall be submitted to and approved in writing by the township engineer.  

(f) 	
Except as provided herein, no permits for use of the public sewer system shall be requested or issued until after the addition to the public sewer system has been certified in writing as being satisfactorily complete by the township engineer and the proper deeds of grant, waivers of lien and easement agreements are provided to the township. The township manager may grant temporary use permits for periods not to exceed 60 days. In the event of a violation of this section, the township may, without notice or any liability to the first party, disconnect the addition to the public sewer system, shutoff or disconnect the public water supply and/or take any other action necessary to prevent the flow of sewage into the addition to the public sewer system. The first party shall pay all costs, including actual attorney's fees, which the township incurs in enforcing the provisions of this section. 


(Code 1992, § 18-300; Ord. No. 251, § 17, 12-1-1975; Ord. No. 93-6, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 95-6, § 1, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 40-514. - Deposits and time deferred payments. 
Main and stub charges are costs which customarily are spread over a period of years. In order to avail more township customers within the township's boundaries of the advantages of long-term financing, such charges may be deferred and paid in installments as permitted herein:  
(1) 	
Main and stub charges. Main and stub charges established herein may be paid in 15 equal annual installments bearing interest at a rate as determined by resolution of the township board on the unpaid principal balance as computed at the time of connection. This deferral of main and stub charges shall apply only to those properties situated within the boundaries of the township. 

(2) 	
Lateral benefit charges. The township board by resolution may permit lateral benefit charges established under section 40-510(3) to be paid at such times and upon such other terms and conditions as the township board determines, in its discretion, to be proper. 

(3) 	
Sanitary sewer capital charges. Sewer capital charges with total amounts, or estimated amounts in cases of unestablished charges as per section 40-512, equal to or greater than $10,000.00 may be deferred and paid in equal periodic payments not less than annually over a period not exceeding 15 years in duration at the rate as determined by resolution of the township board for those building sewer hookups made to the sanitary sewer system prior to January 1, 1983. As a prerequisite to deferring capital charge payments, ten percent of the total capital charge or estimated capital charge shall be paid prior to hooking up to the sewer system. Unestablished capital rates for the above shall be as per section 40-512. If an estimated charge has been deferred and it is determined at a later date that the total charge is to be less than $10,000.00, then the difference between the initial payment of the total charge shall be due and payable upon receipt of an invoice. If in fact, it is determined that the total charge is $10,000.00 or more, but is less or greater than the estimated initial charge, then such initial charge and future payments shall be adjusted to reflect such difference. If it is determined that additional sanitary sewer capital charges are due for industrial users because of increased volumes, projections, or commitments, then these additional charges may be deferred, provided that these additional charges are equal to or greater than $10,000.00, and also provided that at least ten percent of the total additional charge is paid upon receipt of an invoice and with the balance paid in equal periodic payments not less than annually over a period of 15 years at the maximum interest rate permitted hereunder. This deferral of capital sewer charges shall apply only to those properties situated within the boundaries of the township. 


(Code 1992, § 18-301; Ord. No. 279, § 11, 12-20-1982; Ord. No. 95-6, § 1, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 40-515. - Interest charges. 
Whenever an interest charge is computed hereunder it shall be computed at a rate to be set by the township board by resolution per annum on the principal amount of the charge for the unpaid principal balance, unless the township shall have issued bonds to finance the cost of the facility or improvement for which a charge is made, in which event the interest rate shall be at a rate to be set by the township board by resolution per annum or such greater rate, but not exceeding one percent in excess of the rate at which bonds are sold as may be determined by the township board. 
(Code 1992, § 18-302; Ord. No. 279, § 12, 12-20-1982) 
Sec. 40-516. - Hardship. 
(a) 	
Persons owning property with buildings located thereon and residing thereon who are required by state law, the Barry-Eaton District Health Department or by ordinance to connect to a public sewer system or who desire to connect to same may apply to the township board for hardship consideration in regard to payment of the various charges required by this article. 

(b) 	
The board shall determine in its discretion for each application if a hardship exists. The board may require such proofs as it deems necessary to determine if a hardship actually exists and the degree thereof. 

(c) 	
If the township board determines that a hardship exists, a lien shall be placed against the property. All charges (including capital charges) required under this article may be deferred by use of the methods listed in subsection (d) of this section, chosen at the discretion of the board. In no event shall the property change ownership without payment in full of the charges due. (Survivorship of part owners shall not be considered an ownership change.)  

(d) 	
At its discretion, the board may require one or more of the following hardship payment methods, in full, in part, or in combination:  

(1) 
Use of the method allowed in section 40-514(1), for all charges (including capital charges). 

(2) 	
Deferral of all charges (including capital charges) until the property changes ownership. Charges shall bear interest at the rate determined by resolution of the township board. The property owner may pay off any and all charges with interest due at any time. The township board may at its discretion determine that the hardship is ending and require immediate payment of all charges due (the property owner may still elect to use section 40-514(1), to the extent allowed therein to nonhardship cases.) If, at its discretion, the board determines that the hardship is reduced, it may require payment by use of section 40-514(1).  


(Code 1992, § 18-303; Ord. No. 93-6, 8-16-1993; Ord. No. 95-6, § 1, 10-2-1995) 
Sec. 40-517. - Costs of special or miscellaneous services and facilities. 
(a) 	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Facilities means utility equipment which is owned and/or operated by the township, including but not limited to booster pumping stations and/or sewage lift stations, which serve only a single customer. 
Special, miscellaneous or additional services means services requested by a township utility customer or required to be provided to a township utility customer which exceed services provided under this chapter to a similar customer in the ordinary course, including but not limited to, electrical services, operational and maintenance services, installation, replacement, and laboratory services.  
(b) 	
Purpose. This section shall serve to provide a method for the township to recover costs associated with special, miscellaneous or additional services rendered to customers who have specifically requested such services from the township, under circumstances where the township is required to 

provide such services due to customer operation, and/or to recover costs from a customer who has facilities. 

(c) 	
Costs. Any authorized person, firm, corporation, or similar entity who shall request special, miscellaneous or additional services shall be liable for any and all cost or expense incurred by the township in connection with the provision of said services as applicable.  

(d) 	
Billing. Costs imposed under this section shall appear as a separate line item upon a customer billing, being due and collected as set forth herein. Township personnel shall reserve the right to refuse or delay any services under this section to any person or similar entity that has not paid for those services or that owes for previous services. 


(Code 1992, § 18-304; Ord. No. 07-37, 7-16-2007) 
Secs. 40-518—40-542. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DRAINS 
Sec. 40-543. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Storm drain connection means drainage pipe installed between the storm drain outlet, which typically ends at the front lot line, and a building. The connections are installed by the builder, inspected by the township and maintained by the property owner.  
Storm drain main means a storm drain, typically located in road rights-of-way under the jurisdiction of the county drain commissioner, which is installed by the developer and which receives runoff from storm drain outlets.  
Storm drain outlet means an open or enclosed conduit that collects and transports runoff. The outlet is installed by the developer and turned over to the jurisdiction of the county drain commissioner and is typically located in a road right-of-way.  
Yard drain means an enclosed drain, typically with a catchbasin attached, whose primary purpose is to drain lawn areas.  
(Code 1992, § 18-327; Ord. No. 300, § III, 4-17-1989) 
Sec. 40-544. - Violations and penalties. 
(a) 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  

(b) 	
The township engineer shall be authorized to cause the issuance and the serving of appearance tickets with respect to any violations of this article, pursuant to Public Act No. 147 of 1968 (MCL 764.9a et seq.).  

(c) 	
The township engineer may cause adjudged violations of this article to be recorded at the county register of deeds office for the purpose of giving constructive notice to buyers of property that have known violations. 

(d) 	
The township engineer shall cause a notice of compliance to be recorded at such time as the property is brought into compliance with this article, on such properties where there had in fact been an adjudged violation recorded. 

(e) 	
If the developer shall fail to complete the installation, construction and/or repair of storm drain facilities as required herein within a reasonable period of time, it shall be the responsibility of the 


township board to have such work completed. In order to accomplish this, the township board shall reimburse itself for the cost thereof by taking such steps as necessary.  
(Code 1992, § 18-331; Ord. No. 300, § VII, 4-17-1989) 
Sec. 40-545. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide storm drainage for all new construction including, but not limited to, single-family homes, duplexes, triplexes and condominium units not requiring engineered site plans. Standards contained herein are intended to ensure that such drainage is properly installed.  
(Code 1992, § 18-326; Ord. No. 300, § II, 4-17-1989) 
Sec. 40-546. - Installation standards for storm drain connections. 
(a) 	
Underground pipe. Installation of a storm drain connection shall be made at the time of building construction. The following standards shall apply to storm drain connections: 

(1) 	
A drainage plan for each condominium unit shall be submitted at the time a building permit is requested.  

(2) 	
The connection pipe for new construction shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter if it is a gravity pipe, and minimum of 1½-inch if it is a pressure pipe. It may consist of solid PVC material, flexible plastic pipe or other material approved by the township engineer.  

(3) 	
The connection pipe must be buried a minimum of 42 inches below surface grade when permitted by the grade of the outlet pipe. 

(4) 
The slope of the gravity connection pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot.  

(5) 	
An outlet pipe may be shared by several property owners, as per the county drain commissioner.  

(6) 	
The connection pipe shall be laid at a uniform grade and in a straight alignment insofar as possible.  

(7) 	
All excavations required for the installation shall be open trench, unless otherwise approved. The site of the installation shall at all times be barricaded and lighted so as to protect the public.  

(8) 	
If the owner wishes to make connection to the storm drain outlet at a point other than the outlet location, then such connection shall be approved by the agency having jurisdiction over the drain. An indirect connection will be required between the stub connection and sump pump pipe to protect against backflows.  

(9) 	
If permitted by the township engineer, the storm drain connection may be placed in the same trench as the sanitary sewer lead.  

(10) 	
All new construction not requiring engineered site plans, whether or not the property has a storm drain outlet, must obtain a storm drain connection permit from the township building department at the time of construction. The permit fee shall be used to defray costs of the inspection of the connection and shall be as set by resolution of the township board. 

(11) 	
After the storm drain connection has been installed, but prior to backfilling, the applicant for the storm drain connection permit shall request and receive an inspection of the work by an authorized township inspector. Approval of this township inspector shall be obtained before backfilling. 

(b) 
Open ditch. Open ditch installation is the construction/improvement of an open ditch which shall outlet into a designated drain. The following standards shall apply to the open ditch method: 

(1) 	
The ditch shall be properly graded, maintained and legally described and recorded so as to provide a storm drain outlet in perpetuity.  

(2) 
An agency shall be designated with responsibility for continued maintenance of the ditch.  

(3) 	
An easement, at a width designated by the township engineer, shall be recorded at the county register of deeds. The easement document shall include a statement prohibiting filling of the ditch or any other activities which would impair the water-carrying capacity of the ditch.  

(4) 	
Where footing drain discharge is deposited upon the surface of the ground, the place of deposit shall be in that yard area that drains directly to the planned route and course of drainage.  

(c) 	
Yard drains. Installation of a series of underground yard drains should be arranged such that they are accessible to the various properties proposed for development. An inspection fee shall be charged. The following standards shall apply to yard drains:  

(1) 
An agency shall be designated with responsibility for continued maintenance of the drain. 

(2) 	
An easement, at a width designated by the township engineer, shall be recorded at the county register of deeds office.  

(d) 	
Alternative storm drain connection. A developer/property owner shall have the option of designing and installing a unique method of providing a storm drain connection. Such method shall be certified by a civil engineer registered in the state and shall be subject to the approval of the township engineer. 


(Code 1992, § 18-328; Ord. No. 300, § IV, 4-17-1989) 
Sec. 40-547. - General requirements. 
(a) 	
The primary purpose of the storm drain connection is to provide an outlet for sump pumps. However, roof drains, yard drains and other sources of clean water runoff may be connected to the storm drain connection if adequate capacity is available.  

(b) 
All costs of construction of a storm drain connection shall be borne by the owner.  

(c) 	
It shall generally be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the storm drain connection unless such responsibility has been officially delegated to a specific public or private agency.  

(d) 	
The township and its duly authorized representative shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article at any time during usual business hours. 

(e) 	
Stormwater detention may be used in conjunction with the provision of the storm drain outlets mandated herein.  

(f) 	
The county drain commissioner shall review and approve the proposed connection of a storm drain outlet to a designated county drain. In designing the storm drain outlet system, the capacity and condition of the drain into which the outlet will be directed shall be reviewed and found to be adequate.  

(g) 
Footing drain discharge shall not be directed to, over or through a road curb.  

(h) 
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the township engineer.  

(a) 	
The township engineer may, upon application and payment of an application fee set by resolution of the township board, grant a specific variance to a substantive requirement of this article, subject to the standards set herein.  

(b) 
A variance may be granted when all of the following conditions are satisfied:  

(1) 	
Literal application of the substantive requirement would result in exceptional, practical difficulty to the applicant; 

(2) 	
The alternative proposed by the applicant shall be adequate for the intended use and shall not substantially deviate from the performance that would be obtained by strict enforcement of the article; and  

(3) 	
The granting of the variance shall not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, nor injurious to adjoining or neighboring property.  


(Code 1992, § 18-329; Ord. No. 300, § V, 4-17-1989) 
Sec. 40-548. - Variances. 
(Code 1992, § 18-330; Ord. No. 300, § VI, 4-17-1989) 
Sec. 40-549. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any action of the township board in the administration of this article shall appeal to the county circuit court.  
(Code 1992, § 18-332; Ord. No. 300, § VIII, 4-17-1989) 
Secs. 40-550—40-576. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SANITARY BUILDING SEWERS 
Sec. 40-577. - Definitions. 
(a) 	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer.  
Building sewer means that part of the drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain and conveys its discharge to a public sewer, private sewer, individual sewage-disposal system or other point of disposal.  
Building sewer, sanitary, means a building sewer which conveys sewage only.  
Public sewer means a common sewer directly controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary building sewer installer means a person who engages in the business of installing sanitary building sewers and are not licensed by the state as master plumbers.  
(b) All other term definitions shall be those as contained in the state plumbing code. 
(Code 1992, § 4-203; Ord. No. 269, § III, 5-5-1980) 
Sec. 40-578. - Purpose. 
The ordinance from which this article is derived is hereby adopted by the township for the purpose of regulating standards for the installation of sanitary building sewers, establishment of licensing 
requirements for sanitary sewer installers, establishment of sanitary building sewer permits and fees for such permits and licenses, and providing for penalties for violations of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 4-202; Ord. No. 269, § II, 5-5-1980; Ord. No. 269.1, art. 2, 12-7-1992) 
Sec. 40-579. - Licensing requirements. 
An application for a license under this article shall be made to the township and after the application has been submitted the license shall be issued to the applicant, providing that the following requirements and conditions are complied with:  
(1) 	
The applicant shall pay a fee as set by resolution by the township board which fee will be presented with the application at the time it is submitted to the township building department.  

(2) 	
The applicant shall furnish proof that he has obtained a public liability and property damage insurance policy in the minimum amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the township board from time to time.  

(3) 	
The license, if granted, shall be effective for a period of one year and shall be renewable from year to year on the date of July 1 of each year.  

(4) 	
The license, when granted, may be revoked by the township board at the discretion of the township board if the licensee fails to comply with the requirements of any of the township's ordinances, rules or regulations.  


(Code 1992, § 4-204; Ord. No. 269, § IV, 5-5-1980) 
Sec. 40-580. - Permit requirements. 
(a) 	
No building sewer shall be installed or repaired in the township until a permit for the installation or repair of such sewer has been obtained from the township. Application for this permit shall be submitted to the township. Application for the permit shall be made on a form to be approved by the township and a fee shall be paid at the time the application is made for such permit. 

(b) 	
The permit issued by the township on a form to be approved by the township shall be dated and shall expire 30 days from the date of its issuance but shall be renewable at the discretion of the township. 

(c) 	
Permits for the installation of sanitary building sewers or repair to such sewers shall be issued only to those that conform to the following:  

(1) 
Persons who are currently licensed under section 40-579. 

(2) 
Master plumbers licensed by the state.  

(3) 	
Homeowners doing their own installation of sewers serving single-family dwellings that they occupy or intend to occupy. 


(Code 1992, § 4-205; Ord. No. 269, § V, 5-5-1980) 
Sec. 40-581. - Fees. 
The sewer permit fees shall be set by resolution of the township board. 
(Code 1992, § 4-206; Ord. No. 269, § VI, 5-5-1980; Ord. No. 269.1, art. 3, 12-7-1992) 
Sec. 40-582. - Installation regulations. 
(a) 	
All costs and expense incidental to the construction of a sanitary building sewer shall be borne by the owner. A separate sanitary building sewer shall be provided for each building.  

(b) 	
The sanitary building sewer shall be constructed of materials and methods as regulated by this article and the state plumbing code.  

(c) 	
That portion of the sanitary building sewer lying in the area of a public street, alley or right-of-way shall be not less than six inches in diameter. The part of the sanitary building sewer between the street boundary and the building shall be not less than four inches in diameter. 

(d) 
The slope of the pipe shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot.  

(e) 	
Sanitary building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade and in a straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings.  

(f) 	
All excavations required for the installation shall be open trench, unless otherwise approved. The site of the construction shall at all times be barricaded and lighted in such a manner as to protect the owner and the public.  

(g) 	
Connection to the public sewer shall be through a wye or tee fitting in the sewer line. If the owner wishes to make connection to the public sewer at a point other than the location of a wye or tee, such connection must be approved by the township engineering department.  

(h) 	
When the pipe has been installed, but before backfilling, the applicant for the sewer permit shall request and receive an inspection of the work by an authorized representative of the township. Approval of this township inspector must be obtained before backfilling.  

(i) 	
The township and its duly authorized representative shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article at any time during the reasonable or usual business hours.  


(Code 1992, § 4-207; Ord. No. 269, § VII, 5-5-1980) 
Sec. 40-583. - Notice of violations. 
The building official may cause adjudged violations of this article to be recorded at the county register of deeds office for the purpose of giving construction notice to buyers of property that have known violations. 
(Code 1992, § 4-210; Ord. No. 269, § VIII, 5-5-1980) 
Sec. 40-584. - Notice of compliance. 
The building official shall cause a notice of compliance to be recorded at such time as such property is brought into compliance with this article, on such properties where there had in fact been an adjudged violation recorded. 
(Code 1992, § 4-211; Ord. No. 269, § VIII, 5-5-1980) 
Chapter 42 - VENDORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) ---  
State Law reference— Home solicitation sales, MCL 445.111 et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.; charitable organizations and solicitations act, MCL 400.271 et seq.; public safety solicitation act, MCL 14.301 et seq.; veteran's license for peddlers, MCL 35.441 et seq.  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:  
Sales activity means the act of offering merchandise for immediate sale, or for sale by sample, description or otherwise for delivery or sale at a future time, by going door to door, house to house, person to person, or car to car, or the exchange of goods or services in any other manner related to the vending activity.  
Vending means the act of offering merchandise for sale from a fixed place not within a building, from a vehicle or from a fixed place in a tent, canopy or similar shelter, not including merchants offering merchandise for sale upon commercial premises permanently occupied by them; and the act of offering merchandise for immediate sale by sample, description or otherwise for delivery or sale at a future time, by going from door to door, house to house, person to person, or car to car; not including the act of offering merchandise for wholesale to retailers or for resale to manufacturers for use in their processes; not including regular route delivery persons delivering products; also not including special transitory food units as defined within this Code.  
Vending license or license means a license which allows a person to conduct an approved vending activity within the township, as permitted under this article. 
Vendor means any person, including, but not limited to, the vending proprietor, agent, and employee, engaged in the act of vending as defined herein. For the purposes of this article, the terms "canvasser", "drummer", "hawker", "huckster", "itinerant merchant", "itinerant vendor", "peddler", "solicitor" and "transient merchant" shall be included as persons herein defined as vendors. 
(Code 1992, § 8-118; Ord. No. 303, § 3, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 07­39, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 13-75, 5-6-2013; Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 42-2. - Violations and penalties. 
(a) 	
Violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction as prescribed within this Code of Ordinances.  

(b) 	
The township shall hold the legal property owner responsible for the cleanup and/or repair of any property within the township due to debris or damage caused by the vending activity. The property owner shall be notified by certified mail of the township's concerns regarding the cleanup and/or repair of any property due to a vending activity, and shall be given seven days to clean up and/or repair the property to its original condition. If the code enforcement officer or his/her designee determines that sufficient cleanup and/or repair has not commenced within the allotted time, the code enforcement officer or his/her designee shall cause the cleanup and/or repair of the property to commence. The property owner shall reimburse the township for the cost of the cleanup and/or repair and any other out of pocket costs incurred by the township, including any attorney fees and/or court costs incurred to enforce this article. The township may use any lawful means available to recover from the property owner the costs of the cleanup and/or repair of the property, including without limitation, any court costs and attorney fees to enforce this article. 

(c) 
The property owner and vendor shall be responsible for violations of the provisions of this article.  


(Code 1992, § 8-123; Ord. No. 303, § 18, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 13­75, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 42-3. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate vendors, peddlers, solicitors, etc., as defined herein; to require and provide licensing for same; and to provide a penalty for violations in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.  
(Code 1992, § 8-117; Ord. No. 303, § 2, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 42-4. - Rules of conduct. 
(a) 	
Identification shall be presented by the vendor upon request of any citizen, law enforcement officer, representative of the township or the county.  

(b) 	
The vendor's township vending license and state sales tax license shall be displayed at all times by the vendor so as to be conspicuous during the time of the vending operation.  

(c) 
Vending, soliciting or peddling, as defined herein, is prohibited at a private residence prior to 9:00 


a.m. and after 9:00 p.m., and shall not be conducted on property zoned commercial, office or industrial under township ordinance after 9:00 p.m. and prior to 9:00 a.m.  
(d) 	
Vending is not permitted on property where the owner or occupant thereof has displayed a "no soliciting" or similar sign on such premises.  

(e) 	
The proposed vending activity shall not create a fire hazard and may be subject to approval by the township fire marshal. 

(f) 	
The proposed vending activity shall not create a structural safety hazard and may be subject to approval by the township building official.  

(g) 	
The proposed vending activity shall not create traffic circulation and/or parking problems, and may be subject to approval by the township zoning administrator.  

(h) 	
Upon termination of the vending activity, which shall mean the cessation of sales activity or expiration of vendor permit, whichever shall come first, all items generated or used by the vending activity shall be removed from the site, including any and all litter, debris, refuse, signs, display tables, etc., which were related to the vending activity on the site.  

(i) 	
The vendor shall comply with any special conditions which may be imposed upon the license by the township board pursuant to section 42-39(d).  

(j) 	
The use of any sign, banner, flag, or similar device intended to attract attention to the vending activity shall be prohibited within the road right-of-way, and shall be in compliance with the township sign ordinance.  

(k) 	
The display of goods, merchandise, vehicles, services or any other items permitted by this article shall be conducted at a minimum of 20 feet set back from the edge of any road right-of-way or from the edge of the property line if said property does not border a roadway. This section shall also apply to tents, canopies or similar shelters, or any manner whatsoever of display relating to vending activity. 

(l) 	
If the proposed vending activity intends to use a tent, canopy or similar shelter, vendors shall be in compliance with all applicable laws, township ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to article II, chapter 16, pertaining to the township fire code. The vendor may be required to obtain a permit for said tent, canopy or similar shelter and allow for an inspection by the township fire department official. Any permit fee associated with this section shall be in addition to the vending permit fee of this article.  

(m) 	
The use of any temporary structure, building, stand, booth, trailer or similar structure shall be in compliance with the township zoning ordinance. 

(n) 	
A vendor while conducting vending activity shall remain a minimum distance of 1,320 feet measured in a straight line apart from any other vendor on the same side of any roadway.  

(o) 	
The use of any portable or vehicle mounted generator, or any similar portable energy producing device shall comply with all applicable township ordinances. 

(p) 	
Anyone participating in a licensed vending activity shall at all times wear the photo ID issued by the township clerk.  


(Code 1992, § 8-119; Ord. No. 303, § 15, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 03-01, §§ 2—4, 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 13-75, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 42-5. - Administration. 
It shall be the responsibility of the township clerk to administer the terms of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 8-121; Ord. No. 303, § 8, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 14-81, 5-5-2014 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-81, adopted May 5, 2014 , repealed § 42-5 and renumbered §§ 42-6, 42-7 as §§ 42-5, 42-6. Former § 42-5 pertained to vending in township parks and was derived from Code 1992, § 8-120; Ord. No. 303, § 17, adopted October 7, 1991 and Ord. No. 07-39, adopted November 5, 2007. 
Sec. 42-6. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the county sheriff's department, the township manager, or a township official appointed by the township manager, to enforce the terms of this article. The sheriff's department, township manager, or township official appointed by the township manager, shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders immediately upon evidence that a vending activity is being conducted within the township prior to the issuance of a vending license by the township clerk or that licensed vending activities are occurring in violation of any of the terms of this article. In all prosecutions for violation of this article, appearance tickets and the appropriate procedures set forth in Act No. 147, Michigan Public Acts of 1968, may be used. 
(Code 1992, § 8-122; Ord. No. 303, § 9, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 03-01, § 5, 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 07­39, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 14-81, 5-5-2014 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-81, adopted May 5, 2014 , renumbered § 42-7 as § 42-6. See the editor's note at § 42-5 for more information. 
Secs. 42-7—42-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
Sec. 42-33. - Required. 
No person, either as principal, agent or representative, shall engage in vending as defined in this article within the township without first having obtained a vending license in compliance with the provisions of this article, except those persons identified under section 42-34.  
(Code 1992, § 8-131; Ord. No. 303, § 4, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 42-34. - Exceptions from license requirement. 
Persons identified under this section shall not be required to obtain a vending license. Persons excepted below shall otherwise comply with the applicable regulations. 
(1) 	
Persons operating yard sales, garage sales, bake sales or other similar types of activities from their own residentially zoned property, or from property on which they currently legally reside. These activities are intended to be temporary in nature and must comply with all applicable township ordinances.  

(2) 	
Persons selling produce on the same property on which it was grown. An activity permitted by this subsection must comply with all other applicable township ordinances.  

(3) 	
Persons involved in a vending activity representing a school, religious organization or charitable organization which is so classified for federal internal revenue purposes.  

(4) 	
Persons operating a regular delivery route, not including ice cream peddlers and similar vendors. 

(5) 
Persons engaged in operating a special transitory food unit as defined in this Code.  

(6) 
Persons under the age of 17.  

(7) 	
Persons involved in a vending activity on property leased or owned by the township are subject to the following: 

a. 	
Each person shall submit an application on a form provided by the township clerk. 

b. 	
Each person shall be responsible for the township's costs of verifying the person's identification, driving record and criminal history. 




(Code 1992, § 8-132; Ord. No. 303, § 5, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 03-19, 10-18-2004; Ord. No. 07­39, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 13-75, 5-6-2013; Ord. No. 14-81, 5-5-2014 ; Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 42-35. - Application. 
Applicants for a license under this article shall submit a verified written application on a form to be provided by the township clerk containing the following information:  
(1) 	
The applicant's name, date of birth, driver's license number, address, a legible photocopy of their driver's license or a state ID card, vehicle description, license plate number, and phone numbers for home, work and cell phones.  

(2) 	
If the applicant intends to have persons other than himself/herself participate in the proposed vending activity, a list of such persons, including the information listed in subsection (1), shall also be submitted to the township clerk prior to the approval of the vending license.  

(3) 	
The name of the business represented, if different than the applicant, together with the address of the business, phone number and name of the owner or representative for the service of legal process. 

(4) 	
A description of the nature of the business represented, indicating the goods to be sold, method of delivery, date the permit is desired, hours of operation, location and the name and phone number of the property owner.  

(5) 	
If a lot, tent, canopy or similar shelter is to be used, or if a vehicle is to be placed upon property that is not owned by the applicant, the name, phone number and signature of the legal owner of the property shall be provided on the application. 

(6) 	
The names, addresses and phone numbers of three local references. If the applicant has never lived or done business within the township, then references from where the applicant lives or has done business may be used. 

(7) 	
A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever had any occupational license revoked by any other municipal authority. If so, the name of the municipality and the circumstances of the revocation shall be submitted.  

(8) 	
The signature of the applicant acknowledging his understanding of the regulations contained within this article, and acknowledging that failure by the applicant to comply with any of these regulations may result in revocation of the vending license. 

(9) 	
The signature of the property owner granting permission for the proposed vending activity and acknowledging his understanding that the township shall hold the property owner responsible for the clean up and/or repair of the site to its original condition prior to commencement of the vending activity, as established in section 42-2(b).  

(10) 	
The applicant shall also submit a copy of his valid current state sales tax license or, if exempt, a copy of a current exemption certificate, for all goods or services sold other than nonprepared food for human consumption.  

(11) 
Reserved. 

(12) 	
A passport quality photograph shall be provided for each person participating in the vending activity. 


(Code 1992, § 8-133; Ord. No. 303, § 10, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 13­75, 5-6-2013; Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 42-36. - Investigation of applicant. 
(a) 	
Upon receipt of an application, the township clerk shall cause an investigation of the applicant to be made, which is intended to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.  

(b) 
The investigation of the applicant may include the following:  

(1) 	
Verification of the applicant's identification, driving record and criminal history by the sheriff's department. 

(2) 	
Contact with the references listed on the application for background information regarding the applicant.  

(3) 	
Review of the proposed vending activity by the township fire marshal, building official and zoning administrator.  

(4) 	
Verification of the property owner's consent for the applicant to operate the proposed vending activity. 

(c) 	
The township clerk may contact any other source deemed necessary by the clerk to help determine the applicant's business responsibility and/or criminal history.  


(Code 1992, § 8-134; Ord. No. 303, § 11, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 13­75, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 42-37. - Nonrefundable application fee; renewal fee. 
Before considering any application submitted in accordance with the requirements of this article, a nonrefundable fee shall be collected by the township clerk, except from those persons exempt from the license fee as identified by sections 42-34 and 42-38, in order to defray the cost of the investigation of the applicant as mandated by section 42-36. The application fee shall be set from time to time by the township board by resolution. There shall be two fees established, one being an application fee and the other being a renewal fee. The renewal fee shall be charged to renew any vending license for the same applicant to conduct the same activity at the same site within six months of the issuance of the original license. In all other instances, the full application fee shall be charged for the investigation of the applicant as mandated by section 42-36. 
(Code 1992, § 8-135; Ord. No. 303, § 6, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 42-38. - Exemptions from license fee requirements. 
Persons identified under this section shall be required to obtain a vending license under the terms of this article. However, all fees associated with the granting of such license shall be waived. 
(1) 	
Any persons operating a vending activity, as defined herein, by attempting to solicit sales of goods, wares or merchandise thereafter to be transported to the customer in interstate commerce. 

(2) 
Veterans who have been issued a vending license under Public Act No. 359 of 1921 (MCL 


35.441 et seq.).  
(Code 1992, § 8-136; Ord. No. 303, § 7.0, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007; Ord. No. 13­75, 5-6-2013) 
Sec. 42-39. - Issuance; display; denial; appeal process. 
(a) 	
If, as a result of the clerk's investigation, the business responsibility and/or criminal history of the applicant are satisfactory, the clerk shall approve the license and issue a certificate bearing the words "licensed vendor" having the signature of the township clerk or deputy township clerk. The license and certificate shall be issued within ten business days from the day the application was originally filed. The certificate shall also stipulate the period for which the license is valid and the license number. The certificate shall be displayed by the vendor so as to be conspicuous during the time of the vending operation.  

(b) 	
If, as a result of the clerk's investigation, the business responsibility and/or criminal history of the applicant are unsatisfactory, the clerk shall deny the application within ten business days from the day the application was originally filed. The clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of the specific reasons why the application was denied. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, to the address as stated on the application.  

(c) 	
The denial of the license by the clerk may be appealed to the township board if so desired by the applicant provided that a written request to appeal is filed with the clerk within 20 days of the receipt of license denial. A failure to file a request for appeal within 20 days shall be deemed to constitute a waiver of appeal. Upon proper filing of a timely request for appeal by the applicant, the clerk shall take the appropriate steps necessary to place the applicant's appeal on the next township board agenda. The township board shall deny, approve, or approve with conditions the application as determined by the board to be in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare.  

(d) 	
If after an appeal to the township board the application is approved, the clerk shall issue a certificate bearing the words "licensed vendor" and the signature of the township clerk or deputy township clerk. The license and certificate shall be issued on the next business day following the township board meeting. The certificate shall stipulate the period for which the license is valid and the license number, and shall note any special conditions the board may have attached to the issuance of the 

license. The certificate shall be displayed by the vendor so as to be conspicuous during the time of the vending operation.  

(e) 	
If the township board denies the application, the township clerk shall notify the applicant thereof in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, sent to the address as stated on the application with a statement of the specific reasons for denial. Any decision made by the township board shall be final.  


(Code 1992, § 8-137; Ord. No. 303, § 12, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 03-01, § 6, 2-3-2003; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 42-40. - Transferability. 
No vending license issued to any person under the provisions of this article shall be used by any person other than the person to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1992, § 8-138; Ord. No. 303, § 13, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 42-41. - General conditions. 
(a) 	
Term. Vending licenses shall be valid for a maximum of 15 consecutive days from the day the license was originally issued, except as provided by section 42-42(g).  

(b) 	
Number per person and property. No more than two 15-day vending licenses shall be issued to the same person, firm, corporation or other entity including any agent or representative thereof, and vending shall not be allowed to be conducted upon property zoned commercial, office, or industrial under township ordinance for longer than the terms of two 15-day vending licenses, within a one-year time period. The prescribed fee shall be required to be paid for each license, as determined by section 42-37. 

(c) 	
Number per site. No more than one license may be issued for the same site for the same time period by the township clerk. The issuance of more than one license for a site shall be as determined by the township board. The following criteria shall be used by the township board to reach its decision:  

(1) 
Size and location of site.  

(2) 
Availability of parking.  

(3) 
Type of vending activity.  

(4) 
Hours of operation of the vending activity.  

(d) 	
Copies to be filed. A copy of the vending license application and a copy of the state sales tax license issued by the county treasurer shall be mailed to the registration section of the state department of treasury by the township clerk within ten days of the issuance of the vending license. 


(Code 1992, § 8-139; Ord. No. 303, § 14, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007) 
Sec. 42-42. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a) 	
The township clerk may suspend any license issued under the provisions of this article upon evidence being presented to the clerk alleging any of the following:  

(1) 
A violation of any of the regulations or provisions outlined within this article. 

(2) 
Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the license.  

(3) 	
Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the vending activity. 

(4) 
Conviction of a felony. 

(5) 	
Operation of the vending activity in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health, safety and welfare.  

(b) 	
The township clerk shall notify the sheriff's department of the suspension and request that a certified letter drafted by the clerk notifying the licensee of his license suspension with a statement of the specific reasons for same are immediately hand delivered to the licensee by the sheriff's department.  

(c) 	
Upon notice of license suspension by the township clerk, all vending activity on the site must cease immediately. If the person aggrieved by such action fails to contact the township clerk within five days from the day of the license suspension, the vending license shall be revoked.  

(d) 	
The person aggrieved by the suspension of the license shall have the right to a hearing before the township board, provided that a written request thereof is filed with the township clerk within five days of the receipt of the notice of license suspension. The hearing shall be conducted at the next township board meeting.  

(e) 	
The township board shall, after the holding of a hearing, reinstate, reinstate with conditions or revoke the vending license. Any decision made by the township board shall be final.  

(f) 	
Upon revocation of the license, the fee therefor shall not be refunded.  

(g) 	
If the license is reinstated by the township board, the aggrieved licensee shall be credited with the number of days during which the license was suspended, such that the licensee will not lose any business days permitted by the issuance of the original license. 

(h) 	
No person whose vending license has been revoked shall be eligible to receive another vending license to do business within the township for two years from the date of license revocation.  


(Code 1992, § 8-140; Ord. No. 303, § 16, 10-7-1991; Ord. No. 07-39, 11-5-2007) 
Chapter 43 - TENT DISPLAYS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 43-1. - Definitions. 
Tent means a structure, enclosure or shelter, with or without sidewalls or drops, constructed of fabric or pliable material supported by any manner except by air or the contents that it protects. 
Tent display means the erection of a tent on the ground displaying goods or services for promotion or sale on church and school properties and parcels zoned office (O), commercial (C) and industrial (I).  
( Ord. No. 14-82, 5-5-2014 ; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 43-2. - General regulations. 
(a) 	
A maximum of five permits authorizing a tent display for nine consecutive days shall be issued in any calendar year for any property. Permits may be issued back to back.  

(b) 	
Tent displays shall not be erected in a road right of way, over a sidewalk, or obstruct a barrier free parking space.  

(c) 	
Signs attached to a tent display or within the interior of a tent which are in view of the general public shall comply with the requirements of the sign ordinance. 

(d) 	
Tent displays shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and all litter and debris removed at the cessation of the tent display.  


( Ord. No. 14-82, 5-5-2014 ) 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 
Sec. 43-3. - Permit required. 
(a) 	
No person shall erect a tent display without first obtaining a permit as provided for herein with the following exceptions:  

(1) 
Tent displays associated with the sale of produce on the same property on which it was grown.  

(2) 	
Tent displays maintained by the United States of America, the State of Michigan, any agencies thereof, as well as local municipalities. 

(3) 	
Parcels developed for church and school uses shall not be regulated for tents under 200 square feet. 

(b) 	
Application for a permit to erect a tent display shall be made to the township zoning administrator or his/her designee by submission of the required forms and information. The 28/196 application shall be accompanied by payment of a fee in an amount established by the township board. A sketch shall be submitted with the application depicting the proposed location of the tent display on the property.  

(c) 
The tent display permit shall be attached to the tent and in public view at all times.  

(d) 	
The granting of a permit for a tent display shall not relieve the applicant from compliance with other applicable ordinances including but not limited to the township fire code, noise ordinance and vending ordinance.  

(e) 	
The zoning administrator or his/her designee may revoke any tent display permit upon a finding that provisions of this chapter have been violated. The zoning administrator or his/her designee may impound any tent display which has been erected in violation of this chapter.  


( Ord. No. 14-82, 5-5-2014 ) 
Chapter 44 - SPECIAL TRANSITORY FOOD UNITS 
Sec. 44-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Delta Township Special Transitory Food Unit Ordinance."  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-2. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the operation of special transitory food units, to provide licensing requirements for same; and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-3. - Validity and severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are severable and the invalidity of any phrase, clause or part of this chapter shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remainder of the chapter.  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-4. - Repealer clause. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict therewith are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect.  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-5. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall be effective seven days from the date of final publication.  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-6. - Definitions. 
Administrator means the zoning administrator or his/her designee. 
Operate shall mean the actual hours when the special transitory food unit is open for business, not including the hours to set up and take down.  
Operator shall mean any person engaged in the business of sales from a special transitory food unit; if more than one individual is operating a motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, stand, cart, or other device designed to be portable, then operator shall mean all individuals operating such motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, stand, cart, or other device designed to be portable.  
Operating a special transitory food unit means serving or offering for sale food and/or beverages from a special transitory food unit.  
Special transitory food unit shall mean any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, stand, cart, or other device designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food is served or offered for sale. 
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-7. - Permitted locations. 
Operating a special transitory food unit shall be permitted on office, commercial and industrially zoned properties with the exception that operating a special transitory food unit shall be permitted on church, school and township owned properties regardless of the zoning classification subject to the regulations herein. 
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-8. - Permitted hours. 
Operating a special transitory food unit shall be only be permitted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and midnight.  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-9. - License required. 
No person shall operate a special transitory food unit without a license issued by the administrator. The serving or sales of food and/or other consumables shall not be permitted unless the operation meets the definition of special transitory food unit herein and complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-10. - Exceptions to license requirement. 
The following operations are exempt from the license requirement and the corresponding fee, provided they comply with all applicable requirements of section 44-16:  
(1) 	
Operating a special transitory food unit for a period of two days or less on township owned properties, including township parks, subject to the approval of the township manager.  

(2) 	
Operating a special transitory food unit for a period of two days or less on church and school properties conducted in conjunction with a special event at the church or school. The exemption shall only apply to three special events or less per year.  

(3) 	
Veterans who have been issued a license by the county clerk pursuant to Public Act 359 of 1921. 


( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-11. - Duration; non-transferability. 
Licenses may be issued by the administrator for a period of 30 or 120 days from the date of issuance. The license may be renewed by an operator in good standing. Any license issued under this chapter is non-transferrable between operators, properties, and special transitory food units. 
Sec. 44-12. - License application. 
A person or individual desiring to operate a special transitory food unit shall submit a license application to the administrator's office. No application shall be processed until it is complete. The application shall contain the following information:  
(1) 
The applicant's name, address, phone number, and email.  

(2) 	
The address and/or parcel number of the property where the special transitory food unit will be located.  

(3) 	
The name, address, phone number, driver's license or photo identification and email of the party responsible for operating the special transitory food unit, if different from the applicant. If more than one individual is employed at the special transitory food unit, the names, addresses, phone numbers, driver's license or photo identification, and emails for all employees shall be provided.  

(4) 
If applicable, the license plate number of the special transitory food unit.  

(5) 
The proposed days and hours of operation and estimated staffing level.  

(6) 	
Written permission from the owner of the property on which the special transitory food unit will operate. 

(7) 	
A sketch depicting the location of the special transitory food unit, existing buildings, parking, streets, driveways, and sidewalks.  

(8) 	
Any license, permit, or authorization required by any other ordinance, statute, or administrative rule. 


( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-13. - Processing of license application. 
A special transitory food unit license shall be issued or denied within ten business days from the day the application was originally filed. If the application is denied, the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the specific reason(s) why the application was denied.  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-14. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the administrator to enforce the terms of this chapter.  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-15. - Fees. 
An application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established in the schedule of fees adopted by the township board. There shall be no proration of fees. Fees are non-refundable once a license is issued by the administrator.  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-16. - Requirements. 
Persons operating a special transitory food unit shall comply with the following requirements:  
(1) 	
Special transitory food units shall not be located within any street right of way and shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from any property line, street right of way line, or structure. 

(2) 	
Signage related to special transitory food units shall be in compliance with the regulations of the township sign ordinance.  

(3) 	
Special transitory food units shall be broken down and removed entirely from the site every day, no overnight storage of any kind shall be permitted. The operator shall remove all litter and debris attributable to the operation on at least a daily basis. 

(4) 	
Outdoor seating, including but not limited to tables, chairs, benches, or stand up counters shall be subject to the approval of the Administrator.  

(5) 	
An operator shall not extend power cables, extension cords or similar devices across any street, sidewalk or pathway. 

(6) 	
Special transitory food units shall be completely self-contained, and are prohibited from using water from public hydrants and disposing of liquid wastes, including but not limited to grease, into storm drains or sanitary sewers. 

(7) 	
The special transitory food unit shall not be located so as to block a public sidewalk or pathway, designated fire lane, or otherwise impede pedestrian or vehicular movement.  

(8) 	
No banners streamers, flags, flashing or blinking lights shall be permitted on any portion of the site where a special transitory food unit is parked. A special transitory food unit shall not make 

or cause to be made any excessive noise. The operation of all special transitory food units shall be in compliance with the township noise ordinance, including generators. 

(9) 	
Fire and electrical inspections of the special transitory food unit shall be conducted by the appropriate township personnel. 

(10) 	
All operators shall provide a copy of their vehicle insurance. Operators who conduct business on township owned properties shall provide a copy of their certificate of general liability insurance which names the township as an additionally insured. 

(11) 	
The special transitory food unit license from delta township, state sales tax license and special transitory food unit permit from the county health department shall be displayed at all times by the operator in a conspicuous location.  


( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-17. - Sales tax license. 
If an operator does not have a state sales tax license, the administrator shall send a notification to the registration section of the state department of treasury at the time the administrator issues the license.  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-18. - Revocation. 
The administrator shall revoke the license of any operator of a special transitory food unit who ceases to meet the requirements of this chapter; who commits fraud, misrepresentation or makes a false statement on their application or in the course of operating the special transitory food unit; who is convicted of a felony; or who creates a public nuisance or constitutes a danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. Immediately upon such revocation the license shall become null and void and the administrator shall provide written notice to the licensee and property owner by certified mail to the address provided on the application. No person whose special transitory food unit license has been revoked shall be eligible to receive another license within the township for two years from the date of license revocation.  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Sec. 44-19. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by an order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrator as it relates to this chapter may appeal to the township board in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1) 	
A written statement containing the specific reason(s) for the appeal must be filed with the township clerk within 15 calendar days of the date of the decision sought to be appealed.  

(2) 	
The township board shall hold a hearing on the appeal, which shall be open to public comment and shall include an opportunity for the appealing party to present their appeal. 

(3) 	
Notice of the time and place for consideration of an appeal shall be sent by the township clerk by mail or personal delivery not less than ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing to the parties making the appeal.  

(4) 	
The township board shall issue its decision on the appeal within a reasonable time. In its determination of the appeal, the township board may take, but is not limited to, any of the following actions: 


a.  Affirm the decision of the administrator with or without modification and with or without such conditions as the board deems necessary or appropriate to further the intent and purposes of this chapter.   
b.  Reverse the decision of the administrator and state its reasons for reversal.  
c.  Make any other decision, determination, order, or requirement that the administrator could have made with respect to the subject matter of the appeal.  

The township clerk shall notify the parties making the request in writing of the township board's decision regarding the appeal.  
( Ord. No. 16-91, 6-6-2016 ) 
Chapter 45 - CHICKEN RAISING AND BEEKEEPING Sec. 45-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Delta Township Chicken Raising and Beekeeping Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 17-96 , 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 45-2. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the raising of chickens and beekeeping on residentially zoned properties and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.  
(Ord. No. 17-96 , 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 45-3. - Validity and severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are severable and the invalidity of any phrase, clause or part of this chapter shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remainder of the chapter.  
(Ord. No. 17-96 , 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 45-4. - Repealer clause. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict therewith are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect.  
(Ord. No. 17-96 , 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 45-5. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall be effective seven days from the date of final publication of the ordinance from which it was derived. 
(Ord. No. 17-96 , 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 45-6. - Definitions. 
Backyard means that portion of a lot enclosed by the property's rear lot line and the side lot lines to the points where the side lot lines intersect with an imaginary line established by the rear of the single family dwelling and extending to the side lot lines.  
Beekeeping means the management of beehives.  
Colony/hive means an aggregate of bees consisting principally of workers, but having, when perfect, one queen and at times many drones, including brood, combs, honey and the receptacle inhabited by the bees.  
GAAMPS means generally accepted agricultural and management practices promulgated under the Michigan Right to Farm Act. 
Poultry means domestic fowls raised for eggs including chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, etc. collectively. 
Private restrictions means regulations including, but not limited to, deed restrictions, condominium master deed restrictions, neighborhood association by-laws, and covenant deeds.  
(Ord. No. 17-96 , 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 45-7. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to enforce the terms of the chapter.  
(Ord. No. 17-96 , 6-19-2017) 
Sec. 45-8. - Chicken raising. 
(a) Applicability. 
(1) 	
The raising of poultry, with the exception of chickens, is prohibited in any residential zoning district.  

(2) 	
The raising of chickens as a non-agricultural, accessory use to single family detached dwellings is permitted only in the RA, RB, and RC zoning districts. 

(3) 	
Chickens may be raised only by an occupant of a dwelling unit located on the real property on which the chickens are kept. 

(4) 	
This section shall not apply to the raising of chickens in the NR, AG1, and AG2 zoning districts where the raising of poultry is a permitted use when conducted in compliance with the state Right to Farm Act and the generally accepted agricultural and management practices (GAAMPS) promulgated thereunder.  


(b) General regulations for the raising of chickens. 
(1) 
No rooster chickens shall be kept on the premises.  

(2) 
No more than four chickens shall be kept on a single parcel.  

(3) 
No person shall slaughter any chickens.  

(4) 
Chickens shall be kept only in the backyard. 

(5) 	
Chickens must be provided with a covered enclosure and must be kept in the covered enclosure or in a fenced enclosure at all times. The covered enclosure must be at least ten feet from any property line. All enclosures shall be constructed and maintained in a manner so as to prevent rodents from being harbored underneath or within the enclosure. The enclosure shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times.  

(6) 	
All feed and other items associated with the raising of chickens that are likely to attract rodents shall be stored and protected so as to prevent rodents from coming into contact with them.  

(7) 	
Private restrictions on the use of property remain enforceable and take precedence over the regulations herein. Interpretation and enforcement of private restrictions is the sole responsibility of the private parties involved.  


(Ord. No. 17-96 , 6-19-2017; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 45-9. - Beekeeping. 
(a) Applicability. 
(1) 	
Beekeeping as an accessory use to a single family detached dwelling is permitted only in the RA, RB, and RC zoning districts.  

(2) 	
Beekeeping is permitted only by an occupant of a dwelling unit located on the real property on which the hives are located.  

(3) 	
This section shall not apply to beekeeping in the NR, AG1, and AG2 zoning districts where the raising of poultry is a permitted use when conducted in compliance with the state Right to Farm Act and the generally accepted agricultural and management practices (GAAMPS) promulgated thereunder.  


(b) General regulations for the keeping of bees. 
(1) 
The maximum number of hives permitted per property shall be as follows: 

a. 	
Two hives for properties with a lot area that is not greater than 11,000 square feet.  

b. 	
Four hives for properties with a lot area of greater than 11,000 square feet and not greater than 22,000 square feet. 

c. 	
Six hives for properties with a lot area of greater than 22,000 square feet and not greater than 43,560 square feet. 

d. 	
Eight hives for properties with a lot area of greater than 43,560 square feet (one acre) in area. 



(2) 
Hives shall be located only in the backyard.  

(3) 	
A flyway barrier, at least six feet in height, shall shield any part of a property line that is within 25 feet of a hive. The flyway barrier shall consist of a solid wall, solid fence, dense vegetation or a combination thereof. 

(4) 
A constant and convenient supply of water shall be provided for all hives.  

(5) 	
All hives shall be located at least 25 feet from any dwelling on a neighboring property, at least five feet from any property line, and at least ten feet from a public sidewalk. 


(Ord. No. 17-96 , 6-19-2017; Ord. No. 18-104 , § I, 3-19-2018) 
Sec. 45-10. - Violations. 
Violations of this chapter shall constitute a civil infraction and be enforced as per section 1-7(c) of this Code.  
(Ord. No. 17-96 , 6-19-2017) 
Chapter 46 - COLLECTION BINS Sec. 46-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Delta Township Collection Bin Ordinance.  
(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 46-2. - Intent. 
This chapter is intended to regulate the size, placement, operation and maintenance of collection bins. 
(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 46-3. - Definitions. 
Administrator means the zoning administrator or his/her designee. 
Collection bin means any container, receptacle, or similar device that is located on any parcel or lot of record within the township and that is used for soliciting and/or collecting clothing, household items, or other personal property. This term does not include recycling bins for the collection of recyclable material, any rubbish or garbage receptacle or any collection bin located within an enclosed building. 
Operator means a person who owns, operates, supervises or otherwise is in control of a collection bin(s). 
Property owner means a person or entity that is an owner of real property where the collection bin(s) is located or an authorized agent of the property.  
Real property means a lot, parcel or lot of record located in Delta Charter Township.  
Unimproved parcel means a property not occupied by buildings or structures.  
(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 46-4. - Collection bin permit. 
No later than 30 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, no person shall place, operate, maintain or allow any collection bin on any real property in the township without first obtaining an annual permit issued by the administrator to locate a collection bin.  
(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 46-5. - Application for a permit. 
(a) 	
Any person desiring to secure a permit for a collection bin shall file an application with the administrator.  

(b) 	
A permit shall be obtained for each collection bin proposed. A separate fee shall be paid for each collection bin. A permit is non-transferrable among operators or properties.  

(c) 
Applications for a collection bin permit shall consist of the following: 

(1) 
An application form supplied provided by the administrator providing:  

a. 	
Name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the applicant, property owner and collection bin operator. Bins owned and/or operated by one entity for benefit of another entity shall provide the contact information for both entities on the application. 

b. 	
Name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the agent or person who will be available during regular business hours and will be responsible for compliance.  

c. 	
The physical address of the real property where the collection bin is proposed to be located.  

d. 	
Written permission from the property owner to place a collection bin on the subject parcel.  



(2) 	
A copy of the license and registration from the state under the Michigan Consumer Protection Act and the Charitable Organizations and Solicitations Act if statutorily required.  

(3) 
A photograph of the proposed collection bin.  

(4) 	
An aerial photo depicting the proposed location of the collection bin on the real property, specifically setbacks from property lines and the dimensions of the proposed collection bin.  

(5) 	
Submittal of a nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by resolution of the township board.  


(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 46-6. - Standards for collection bins. 
(a) 	
An operator shall operate and maintain, or cause to be operated and maintained, all collection bins located in the township for which the operator has been granted a permit as follows:  

(1) 
Bins shall be metal, hard plastic or fiberglass.  

(2) 	
Bins shall be maintained in good condition and appearance with no structural damage, holes or visible rust and shall be free of graffiti. 

(3) 	
Bins shall be locked or otherwise secured in such a manner that the contents cannot be accessed by anyone other than those responsible for the retrieval of the contents.  

(4) 	
Bins shall have, at a minimum, one-half inch lettering visible from the front of each bin displaying the name, address, e-mail, website and phone number of the operator, as well as whether the bin is owned and operated by a for profit company or a not for profit company.  

(5) 	
Bins shall be emptied with such frequency as to ensure that they do not overflow and materials do not accumulate outside the bin with a minimum of a once a week servicing.  

(6) 	
The operator and property owner shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, the area immediately surrounding the collection bin, free from any junk, debris, overflow items or other material. 

(7) 	
Bins shall not be permitted on any unimproved parcel, nor where the principal use of the land has been closed or unoccupied for more than 30 days.  

(8) 
Bins shall not exceed seven feet in height, six feet in width, and six feet in depth.  

(9) 	
A maximum of two bins shall be located on a single real property and all of the bins shall be owned and maintained by the same operator.  

(10) 
Bins shall not cause a visual obstruction to vehicular or non-motorized traffic.  

(11) 
Bins shall not be placed closer than ten feet from:  

a. 	
A public or private sidewalk except that this provision does not apply to a private sidewalk as long as the private sidewalk maintains a five foot minimum clearance from any bin;  

b. 	
A public right of way;  

c. 	
A driveway; or 

d. 	
A side or rear property line of adjacent property used for residential purposes.  



(12) 	
Bins shall not be placed in a designated fire lane, in or adjacent to a handicap parking space, or block a building entrance or exit.  

(13) 	
Vehicular access to bins shall be by an asphalt or concrete surface and the bins shall be placed on an asphalt or concrete surface which is level.  


(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 46-7. - Term of permit. 
(a) 	
The permit year shall begin on July 1 of each year and terminate on June 30 of the next calendar year. An annual permit issued between July 1 and June 30 of a calendar year shall expire on June 30 of the next calendar year next following issuance of the permit.  

(b) 	
The administrator shall either approve or deny the issuance of a permit within ten days of receipt of the complete application and payment of the required filing fee. An application may be denied for failure to provide the information or meet any requirement in section 46-5 or any standard in section 46-6. If the application is denied, the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing stating the specific reason(s) for denial.  

(c) 	
Upon approval by the administrator, the operator shall be provided with one permit sticker for each approved permit. The operator shall affix the sticker in a conspicuous place on the front panel of the collection bin. Upon the request of the operator, the administrator shall provide a replacement sticker if the original sticker is damaged or lost and the operator shall provide a fee, as set by resolution of the township board.  

(d) 	
If the permit expires and is not renewed, the collection bin(s) must be removed from the real property within ten days after expiration of the permit.  


(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 46-8. - Renewal of permit. 
(a) 	
A collection bin permit shall be renewed annually. The application for renewal must be filed not less than 30 days before the permit expires. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the administrator.  

(b) 	
The administrator shall approve the renewal of a permit within ten days if they find the collection bin conforms to the standards of section 46-6 and the collection bin would meet the standards for issuance of a permit under section 46-5.  

(c) 	
A permit sticker shall be issued by the administrator for each approved renewal permit and be affixed to the bin in the same manner as the initial permit.  

(d) 	
A permit renewal fee, set by resolution of the township board, shall be submitted with the application for renewal of a permit. 


(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 46-9. - Revocation of permit, removal of collection bins and liability. 
(a) 	
The administrator shall have the right to revoke any permit issued hereunder for a violation of this chapter. Any of the grounds upon which the administrator may refuse to issue an initial permit shall also constitute grounds for such revocation. In addition, the failure of the operator to comply with the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of this Code or other law shall also constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. The administrator shall provide a written notification to the operator and the property owner stating the specific grounds for a revocation and a demand for correction and 

abatement. The notice shall allow a maximum of 14 days from mailing of the notice to correct or abate the violation. Upon failure to make the correction or abatement, the permit shall be revoked by the administrator and, thereafter, the operator shall not be eligible for a collection bin permit on the property for the subsequent calendar year. 

(b) 	
Upon revocation of the permit, the collection bin shall be removed from the real property within ten days. Failure to remove the collection bin within the time period, shall result in the administrator being authorized to issue and serve a civil infraction citation on the operator in accordance with subsections 1-7(c)—(h) of this Code. 

(c) 	
A permit for a collection bin may be revoked if any governmental authority or agency determines that the collection bin has violated the Michigan Consumer Protection Act and/or the Charitable Organizations and Solicitations Act.  


(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 46-10. - Appeal to township board. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision rendered by the administrator in granting or denying an application for a collection bin permit under this chapter or in revoking a permit issued under this chapter may appeal that decision to the township board. The administrator shall make written findings of fact in support of any license approval or denial or pertaining to a revocation. The appeal shall be made by filing a written request with the township clerk setting forth the grounds for the appeal not more than ten days after receiving notice of the revocation by the administrator. In the event that the written requested is filed with the township clerk, the township board shall hold a public hearing on the granting or denial of the permit or the revocation of a permit and shall have the power to reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the administrator. The township board shall, in its determination, make written findings of fact supporting its decision. The determination by the township board shall be final, subject to appeal to Eaton County Circuit Court.  
(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Sec. 46-11. -Penalty and remedies. 
(a) 	
In addition to the revocation of a permit pursuant to section 46-9, any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a civil infraction.  

(b) 	
The real property owner and operator shall be jointly and severally liable for each violation and for payment of any fine and costs of abatement. 

(c) 	
No fines shall be imposed for a violation of this chapter until 90 days after its effective date. All collection bins existing at the effective date of this chapter shall apply for a permit as required by section 46-4 within 30 days of the effective date. Any collection bins not in compliance with this chapter after 90 days of the effective date shall be subject to all remedies for violation as provided herein.  


(Ord. No. 17-97 , 8-7-2017) 
Chapter 47 - PROHIBITION OF MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sec. 47-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Delta Township Prohibition of Marihuana Establishments Ordinance."  
(Ord. No. 19-105 , 1-7-2019) 
Sec. 47-2. - Purpose. 
An ordinance to provide a title for the chapter; to define words; to prohibit marihuana establishments within the boundaries of the township pursuant to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, 2018, Initiated Law 1, as may be amended; to provide penalties for violation of this chapter; to provide for severability; to repeal all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict therewith; and to provide an effective date.  
(Ord. No. 19-105 , 1-7-2019) 
Sec. 47-3. - Definitions. 
Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, 2018, Initiated Law 1, as may be amended, which defines the following noteworthy and applicable terms:  
Marihuana establishment means a marihuana grower, marihuana safety compliance facility, marihuana processor, marihuana microbusiness, marihuana retailer, marihuana secure transporter, or any other type of marihuana-related business.  
Marihuana grower means a person licensed to cultivate marihuana and sell or otherwise transfer marihuana to marihuana establishments. 
Marihuana microbusiness means a person licensed to cultivate not more than 150 marihuana plants; process and package marihuana; and sell or otherwise transfer marihuana to individuals who are 21 years of age or older or to a marihuana safety compliance facility, but not to other marihuana establishments.  
Marihuana processor means a person licensed to obtain marihuana from marihuana establishments; process and package marihuana; and sell or otherwise transfer marihuana to marihuana establishments. 
Marihuana retailer means a person licensed to obtain marihuana from marihuana establishments and to sell or otherwise transfer marihuana to marihuana establishments and to individuals who are 21 years of age or older.  
Marihuana safety compliance facility means a person licensed to test marihuana, including certification for potency and the presence of contaminants.  
Marihuana secure transporter means a person licensed to obtain marihuana from marihuana establishments in order to transport marihuana to marihuana establishments. 
(Ord. No. 19-105 , 1-7-2019) 
Sec. 47-4. - Marihuana establishments prohibited. 
(a) 	
The township hereby prohibits all marihuana establishments within the boundaries of the township as defined by, and pursuant to, the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, 2018, Initiated Law 1, as may be amended.  

(b) 	
This chapter shall not have the effect of authorizing the establishment within the boundaries of the township any of the marihuana facilities that are considered eligible for a state operating license under the provisions of the State of Michigan's Medical Marihuana Facilities Act, Act 281 of 2016, MCL 333.2701 et seq., as may be amended.  

(c) 	
This chapter does not limit the privileges or rights of a person or persons as provided for in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, 2008, Initiated Law 1, MCL 333.26421 et seq., as may be amended, and as regulated herein by the provisions of chapter 26. 


(Ord. No. 19-105 , 1-7-2019) 
Sec. 47-5. - Violations and penalties. 
(a) 	
Any person who disobeys, neglects, or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter or who causes allows or consents to any of the same shall be deemed to be responsible for the violation of this chapter. A violation of this chapter is deemed to be a nuisance per se.  

(b) 	
The township may seek injunctive relief against persons alleged to be in violation of this chapter, and such other relief as may be provided by law to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this chapter. 

(c) 
Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.  

(d) 	
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by authorized township officials as provided for in chapter 20, article II, herein, or by such other person(s) that from time to time may be designated by the township board and/or township manager. Nothing in chapter 20 shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the township in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter.  


(Ord. No. 19-105 , 1-7-2019) 

Zoning Ordinance 
Adopted by the Delta Township Board on August 21, 2017Effective Date: September 3, 2017
June 2017 
Prepared by: 

DELTA CHARTER TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
CHAPTER 1 TITLE, PURPOSE, AND LEGAL CLAUSES 
SECTION 1.01 
SECTION 1.02 

SECTION 1.03 
SECTION 1.04 
SECTION 1.05 SECTION 1.06 SECTION 1.07 

CHAPTER 2 
Title............................................................................................. 1-1 

Authority, Findings, and Purposes................................................ 1-1 

Scope and Construction of Regulations ........................................ 1-2 

Validity and Severability .............................................................. 1-2 

Conflict with Other Laws.............................................................. 1-2 

Effective Date............................................................................... 1-3 

Repeal of Prior Ordinance............................................................ 1-3 



DEFINITIONS 
SECTION 2.01  Rules of Construction................................................................... 2-1  
SECTION 2.02  General Definitions...................................................................... 2-2  
CHAPTER 3  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
SECTION 3.01 
SECTION 3.02 



SECTION 3.03 SECTION 3.04 SECTION 3.05 SECTION 3.06 SECTION 3.07 SECTION 3.08 

CHAPTER 4 
Authority..................................................................................... 3-1 

Zoning Administrator................................................................... 3-1 

Certificates of Zoning Compliance ................................................ 3-1 

Notices ........................................................................................ 3-1 

Performance Guarantee............................................................... 3-2 

Application Fees .......................................................................... 3-3 

Violations and Penalties............................................................... 3-3 

Compliance with Permits and Certificates .................................... 3-3 



DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
SECTION 4.01 Establishment of Districts ............................................................ 4-1 


SECTION 4.02 Official Zoning Map...................................................................... 4-1 






SECTION 4.03 SECTION 4.04 SECTION 4.05 
SECTION 4.06 SECTION 4.07 
SECTION 4.08 SECTION 4.09 SECTION 4.10 SECTION 4.11 SECTION 4.12 SECTION 4.13 
SECTION 4.14 SECTION 4.15 
SECTION 4.16 SECTION 4.17 
SECTION 4.18 


CHAPTER 5 
Rules for Interpretation of the Official Zoning Map ...................... 4-2 

Application of Regulations ........................................................... 4-3 

Scope of Provisions...................................................................... 4-3 

Natural Resources District (NR).................................................... 4-3 

Agricultural District (AG1) ............................................................ 4-5 

Agricultural / Residential District (AG2)........................................ 4-7 

Very Low Density Residential District (RA) ................................... 4-9 

Low Density Residential District (RB) ........................................... 4-11 

Moderate Density Residential District (RC)................................... 4-13 

Multiple Family Residential District (RM) ..................................... 4-17 

Office District (O) ......................................................................... 4-20 

Commercial District (C) ................................................................ 4-22 

Industrial District (I)..................................................................... 4-24 

West Saginaw Overlay District (WSOD) ........................................ 4-26 

Supplemental Dimensional Regulations ....................................... 4-30 

District Use Table......................................................................... 4-32 


PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 
SECTION 5.01 
SECTION 5.02 SECTION 5.03 SECTION 5.04 SECTION 5.05 
SECTION 5.06 
SECTION 5.07 


CHAPTER 6 
Purpose ....................................................................................... 5-1 

Authorization............................................................................... 5-1 

General Standards for Review...................................................... 5-1 

Site Development Standards for PUDs ......................................... 5-2 

Project Densities.......................................................................... 5-8 

Open Space Agreement ............................................................... 5-9 


Status of Prior Approved Planned Unit Developments (PUD) or Planned Unit Residential Developments (PURD) .......................... 5-9 

SITE PLAN REVIEW 
SECTION 6.01 Purpose ....................................................................................... 6-1 

SECTION 6.02 Buildings, Structures, and Uses Subject to Site Plan Review ......... 6-1 


SECTION 6.03 Pre-Application Conference ......................................................... 6-2 






SECTION 6.04 SECTION 6.05 SECTION 6.06 SECTION 6.07 SECTION 6.08 SECTION 6.09 
SECTION 6.10 
SECTION 6.11 

CHAPTER 7 
Site Plan Review .......................................................................... 6-2 

Administrative Site Plan Review................................................... 6-3 

Data Required for Site Plans......................................................... 6-4 

Standards for Site Plan Review..................................................... 6-8 

Conditions of Approval ................................................................ 6-10 

Certification of Compliance.......................................................... 6-11 

Amendments, Revisions to Approved Site Plans........................... 6-11 

Appeals of Site Plan Approval ...................................................... 6-12 



SPECIAL LAND USES 
SECTION 7.01 
SECTION 7.02 

SECTION 7.03 SECTION 7.04 SECTION 7.05 
SECTION 7.06 


CHAPTER 8 
Purpose ....................................................................................... 7-1 

Procedure.................................................................................... 7-1 

Required Standards and Findings for Making Determinations ...... 7-2 

Conditions of Approval ................................................................ 7-3 

Effectiveness................................................................................ 7-4 

Special Land Use Amendments .................................................... 7-4 



SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS 
SECTION 8.01 
SECTION 8.02 
SECTION 8.03 
SECTION 8.04 
SECTION 8.05 
SECTION 8.06 
SECTION 8.07 SECTION 8.08 SECTION 8.09 

SECTION 8.10 SECTION 8.11 SECTION 8.12 
Purpose ....................................................................................... 8-1 

Accessory Dwelling Units ............................................................. 8-1 

Adult Day Care Center.................................................................. 8-1 

Adult Foster Care Facilities........................................................... 8-2 

Adult Group Day Care Home ........................................................ 8-3 

Adult Use Businesses ................................................................... 8-3 

Agricultural Processing and Food Storage..................................... 8-5 

Agricultural/Commercial Tourism ................................................ 8-5 

Animal or Rescue Shelter ............................................................. 8-7 

Bed and Breakfast........................................................................ 8-7 

Blood Plasma Centers .................................................................. 8-8 

Building Material Sales, Garden Centers, and Similar Uses ........... 8-8 







SECTION 8.13 SECTION 8.14 SECTION 8.15 
SECTION 8.16 
SECTION 8.17 
SECTION 8.18 

SECTION 8.19 
SECTION 8.20 SECTION 8.21 SECTION 8.22 
SECTION 8.23 SECTION 8.24 SECTION 8.25 

SECTION 8.26 
SECTION 8.27 SECTION 8.28 SECTION 8.29 SECTION 8.30 SECTION 8.31 SECTION 8.32 
SECTION 8.33 

SECTION 8.34 
SECTION 8.35 SECTION 8.36 
SECTION 8.37 SECTION 8.38 SECTION 8.39 SECTION 8.40 
SECTION 8.41 

SECTION 8.42 
Cemeteries .................................................................................. 8-9 

Child Care Center/Preschool ........................................................ 8-9 

Child Group Day Care Homes ....................................................... 8-9 

Commercial Fueling Stations........................................................ 8-10 

Condominium Subdivisions.......................................................... 8-10 


Commercial Marinas, Boat Launching Facilities, and Similar Water 
Related Uses................................................................................ 8-13 

Commercial Recreation Facilities.................................................. 8-13 

Convalescent Centers................................................................... 8-14 

Country Clubs .............................................................................. 8-14 

Crematorium ............................................................................... 8-15 

Drive-Up/Drive-Through Facilities................................................ 8-15 
Essential Services, Major ............................................................. 8-16 

Extractive Uses ............................................................................ 8-16 
Farm Equipment Sales/Leasing and Repair................................... 8-18 

Farm Markets and U-Pick Operations........................................... 8-18 
Fraternities and Sororities............................................................ 8-19 

Functional Family......................................................................... 8-19 

Golf Course.................................................................................. 8-19 

High Rise Buildings....................................................................... 8-20 

Home Occupations ...................................................................... 8-20 

Hospital ....................................................................................... 8-22 

Hotels/Motels in Office Districts .................................................. 8-22 

Kennels/Veterinary Care/Pet Day Care......................................... 8-22 

Large-Scale Retail Establishment.................................................. 8-23 

Livestock Production Facilities ..................................................... 8-24 

Manufactured Housing Communities........................................... 8-24 

Mixed Use Buildings .................................................................... 8-26 

Open Air Business........................................................................ 8-27 

Outdoor Displays and Sales.......................................................... 8-27 

Outdoor Seating and Service........................................................ 8-28 









SECTION 8.43 
SECTION 8.44 
SECTION 8.45 

SECTION 8.46 SECTION 8.47 SECTION 8.48 
SECTION 8.49 SECTION 8.50 SECTION 8.51 SECTION 8.52 

SECTION 8.53 
SECTION 8.54 SECTION 8.55 SECTION 8.56 
SECTION 8.57 
SECTION 8.58 
SECTION 8.59 
SECTION 8.60 
SECTION 8.61 

SECTION 8.62 
SECTION 8.63 SECTION 8.64 SECTION 8.65 SECTION 8.66 
SECTION 8.67 


CHAPTER 9 
Outdoor Storage .......................................................................... 8-28 

Places of Assembly ...................................................................... 8-28 

Places of Worship ........................................................................ 8-29 

Post-Secondary Schools ............................................................... 8-29 

Primary/Secondary Schools ......................................................... 8-30 

Public and Private Campgrounds.................................................. 8-30 

Radio and Television Broadcast Towers ........................................ 8-30 

Recycling Center – Large Collection Facility .................................. 8-31 

Recycling Center – Small Collection Facility .................................. 8-32 

Refuse and Garbage Incinerators ................................................. 8-33 

Salvage Yards............................................................................... 8-34 

Scrap Tire Collection/Processing .................................................. 8-34 

Self-Storage Facilities ................................................................... 8-35 

Sit-Down Restaurants in Office Districts ....................................... 8-36 

Solar Energy Systems (SES) .......................................................... 8-36 

Two-Family Dwellings in the RC District ....................................... 8-40 

Trade Contractor’s Yard and Home Service Repair ........................ 8-40 

Vehicle Fueling Stations ............................................................... 8-41 

Vehicle Repair.............................................................................. 8-41 

Vehicle Sales, Leasing and Service Facilities.................................. 8-42 

Vehicle/Equipment Storage Yards ................................................ 8-43 
Vehicle Wash ............................................................................... 8-43 

Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) - Large ......................... 8-44 

Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) - Small ......................... 8-47 

Wireless Communications Facilities ............................................. 8-48 


General Provisions 
SECTION 9.01 Purpose ....................................................................................... 9-1 

SECTION 9.02 Accessory Buildings ..................................................................... 9-1 

SECTION 9.03 Water and Sanitary Sewer Service ............................................... 9-3 

SECTION 9.04 Excavations or Holes .................................................................... 9-3 







SECTION 9.05 SECTION 9.06 SECTION 9.07 
SECTION 9.08 SECTION 9.09 SECTION 9.10 
SECTION 9.11 SECTION 9.12 
SECTION 9.13 
CHAPTER 10 
SECTION 10.01 
SECTION 10.02 
SECTION 10.03 
SECTION 10.04 


CHAPTER 11 
SECTION 11.01 
SECTION 11.02 SECTION 11.03 SECTION 11.04 SECTION 11.05 



CHAPTER 12 
SECTION 12.01 
SECTION 12.02 

SECTION 12.03 
SECTION 12.04 
SECTION 12.05 
Fences, Walls, and Screens........................................................... 9-3 

Clear Vision Area ......................................................................... 9-3 

Satellite Dish Antennas ................................................................ 9-5 

Temporary Buildings and Structures............................................. 9-6 

Essential Service .......................................................................... 9-7 

Keeping of Animals ...................................................................... 9-7 

Portable Storage Units ................................................................. 9-7 
Storage Containers....................................................................... 9-8 

Temporary Dumpsters Serving Single- and Two-Family Dwellings. 9-9 

Roads, Traffic & Sidewalks 
West Saginaw Highway (M-43) Access Management Regulations. 10-1 

Private Roads............................................................................... 10-15 

Traffic Impact Studies................................................................... 10-17 

Sidewalks .................................................................................... 10-21 



Off-Street Parking 
General Provisions....................................................................... 11-1 

Mixed Use/Shared Parking Facilities ............................................ 11-3 

Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements............................... 11-4 

Parking Lot Design and Construction............................................ 11-7 

Parking Restrictions ..................................................................... 11-13 




Site Design Standards 
Intent .......................................................................................... 12-1 

Landscaping................................................................................. 12-1 

Refuse and Recycling Containers.................................................. 12-17 

Equipment Screening................................................................... 12-18 

Lighting........................................................................................ 12-18 








CHAPTER 13 Environmental Provisions 

SECTION 13.01 Purpose ....................................................................................... 13-1 

SECTION 13.02 Preservation of Environmental Quality ........................................ 13-1 

SECTION 13.03 Flood Hazard Regulations............................................................. 13-2 

CHAPTER 14 Non-Conformities 

SECTION 14.01  Purpose ....................................................................................... 14-1  
SECTION 14.02  Non-Conforming Uses.................................................................. 14-1  
SECTION 14.03  Non-Conforming Buildings and Structures ................................... 14-3  
SECTION 14.04  Non-Conforming Lots of Record ................................................... 14-3  
CHAPTER 15  Zoning Board of Appeals  
SECTION 15.01  General Regulations..................................................................... 15-1  
SECTION 15.02  Powers and Duties ....................................................................... 15-2  
SECTION 15.03  Reverse or Affirm Zoning Administrator ....................................... 15-2  
SECTION 15.04  Variance ...................................................................................... 15-3  
SECTION 15.05  Voiding and Reapplication for Variance........................................ 15-4  
SECTION 15.06  Appeals of Zoning Board of Appeal Decisions............................... 15-5  
CHAPTER 16  Amendments  

SECTION 16.01 Initiation of Amendments............................................................ 16-1 

SECTION 16.02 Application Procedure ................................................................. 16-1 

SECTION 16.03 Amendment Procedure; Public Hearing and Notice...................... 16-1 

SECTION 16.04 Criteria for Amendment of the Official Zoning Map...................... 16-2 

SECTION 16.05 Amendments Required to Conform to Court Decree .................... 16-2 

SECTION 16.06 Conditional Rezoning Procedures................................................. 16-3 









This page is intentionally left blank. 






CHAPTER 1 

TITLE, PURPOSE, AND LEGAL CLAUSES 
SECTION 1.01 TITLE 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “The Delta Charter Township Zoning Ordinance”. 
SECTION 1.02 AUTHORITY, FINDINGS, AND PURPOSES 
A. 	Michigan Zoning Enabling Act.  The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended) establishes the authority to adopt comprehensive zoning regulations and empowers the Township to enact a Zoning Ordinance and provide for its administration, enforcement and amendment. 
B. 	Necessity. The Township deems it necessary to enact said regulations for the purpose of promot­ing and protecting the health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of its residents. 
C. 	Comprehensive Plan Compliance.  The Township has prepared and adopted a Comprehensive Plan designed to guide growth in a logical fashion; to provide for the establishment of districts in the Township which regulate the use of land and structures; to protect and preserve its natural resources; and to ensure a well-balanced community considering its present and potential physi­cal, economic, cultural, and environmental assets. 
D. 	Purposes. The Township has identified districts on a Zoning Map and prepared regulations in this Zoning Ordinance pertaining to such districts, in coordination with the Delta Charter Township Comprehensive Plan for the specific purposes of: 
1. 	
Promoting and protecting the public health, safety and general welfare; 

2. 	
Protecting the character and stability of the agricultural, recreational, residential, com­mercial, and industrial areas within Delta Township and promoting the orderly and benefi­cial development of such areas; 

3. 	
Providing adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property; 

4. 	
Regulating the intensity of use of land and lot areas, and determining the area of open spaces surrounding buildings and structures necessary to provide adequate light and air and to protect the public health; 

5. 	
Lessening and avoiding congestion on public highways and streets; 

6. 	
Promoting adequate and efficient provisions for transportation systems, sewage disposal, water, energy, recreation, and other public service and facility requirements; 

7. 	
Encouraging the use of lands and natural resources in the Township in accordance with their character and adaptability; 

8. 
Limiting the improper use of land; 


9. 
Fixing reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall conform; 

10. 
Prohibiting uses, buildings or structures which are incompatible with the character of de­velopment or the uses, buildings or structures permitted within specified zoning districts; 

11. 
Protecting against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and odors, heat, dust, smoke, glare, noise, vibration, radioactivity, and other nuisances and hazards in the interest of the public health, 









safety, and general welfare; 
12. 
Preventing the overcrowding of the land and undue concentration of buildings and struc­tures so far as is possible and appropriate in each zoning district by regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them; and 

13. 
Otherwise reduce hazards to life and property. 


SECTION 1.03 SCOPE AND CONSTRUCTION OF REGULATIONS 
A. 	Scope.  This Ordinance shall be liberally construed in such manner as to best effectuate its purposes. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, the requirements shall be held to the minimum for promotion and protection of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosper­ity, and general welfare. 
B. 	Construction. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered and maintained and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, 
structure or land, or part thereof, except as permitted by and in conformity with the provisions of 
this Ordinance. 
SECTION 1.04 VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY 
A. 	Validity. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this Ordinance to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in said 
ruling. 
B. 	Severability.  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provi­sion of this Ordinance to a particular parcel, lot, use, building or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, lot, use, building or structure not specifically 
included in said ruling. 
SECTION 1.05 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS 
A. 	More Restrictive. Where any condition imposed by any provision of this Ordinance upon the use of any lot, building, or structure is either more restrictive or less restrictive than any comparable condi­tion imposed by any other provision of this Ordinance or by the provision of any Ordinance adopted under any other law, the provision which is more restrictive or which imposes a higher standard or 
requirement shall govern. 
B. 	Abrogate or Annul.  This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or 
other private agreement provided that where any provision of this Ordinance is more restrictive or 





imposes a higher standard or requirement than such easement, covenant, or other private agree­ment, the provision of this Ordinance shall govern. 
C. 	Compliance.  Nothing within this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent compliance with an order by the appropriate authority to correct, improve, strengthen, or restore to a safe or healthy condition any part of a building or premises declared unsafe or unhealthy. 
SECTION 1.06 EFFECTIVE DATE 
This Ordinance shall become effective seven (7) days from the date of final publication. 
SECTION 1.07 REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE 
The Delta Charter Township Zoning Ordinance, effective December 14, 1990 and all amendments thereto and any prior zoning ordinances of Delta Charter Township are hereby repealed effective coincident with the effective date of this Ordinance. The repeal of said ordinance shall not have the effect of releasing or 
relinquishing any penalty, forfeiture, or liability incurred under said ordinance, or any part thereof, and 
such ordinance shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture or liability. 







This page is intentionally left blank. 




CHAPTER 2 
DEFINITIONS 

SECTION 2.01 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
The following rules of construction shall apply: 
A. 	The particular shall control the general. 
B. 	The word “person” includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated associa­tion, or any similar entity. 
C. 	The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained for,” or “occupied for.” 
D. 	A “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof. 
E. 	Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction “and,” “or,” “either...or,” the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
1. 	
“And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 

2. 	
“Or” indicates the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 

3. 	
“either...or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall ap­ply singly, but not in combination. 


F. 	Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
G. 	The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is permissive.  
H. 	Illustrations, diagrams, and schedules herein shall have the same force and effect as written text. 
I. 	Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
J. 	Days mean calendar days unless otherwise stated. 
K. 	A reference to a public official of the Township is to that person who performs the function re­ferred to, and may include a designee of the public official. 





SECTION 2.02 GENERAL DEFINITIONS 
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words and terms are defined as follows: 
Abutting (lot or parcel): A lot or parcel that is adjacent to or shares a common border with the subject lot or parcel. 
Access: A way or means of approach to provide vehicle or pedestrian physical entrance to a property.  In zoning and subdivision regulations, lots usually are required to have direct access to a public street or to a private street meeting public standards. This is done not only to permit entry of residents and other uses, 
but also to permit emergency vehicles to reach buildings. 
Access Management (Access Control): A technique to improve traffic operations along a major roadway, and decrease the potential for accidents through the control of driveway locations and design; consideration of the relationship of traffic activity for properties adjacent to and across from one another; and the promo­tion of alternatives to direct access. Methods used include construction of frontage roads, service drives, and shared driveways, as well as, medians or islands to restrict ingress and/or egress. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit attached to a principal dwelling unit which provides complete in­dependent living facilities for one (1) or more persons. The accessory dwelling unit shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
Accessory Use, Building or Structure: A use, building, or structure, whether attached or detached, which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, devoted exclusively to, subordinate to, and 
located on the same lot as the principal use to which it is related. 
ADA (American’s with Disabilities Act): A 1990 federal law designed to bring Americans with disabilities into the economic mainstream by providing them equal access to employment, transportation, public facilities, 
and services.  
Adaptive Reuse: The development of a new use for an older building or for a building originally designed for 
a special or specific purpose. 
Adult Day-Care Facilities: 
1. 	Adult Day-Care Family Home:  A private home in which six (6) or less adults eighteen (18) years of age or older, receive care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day.  It includes facili­
ties for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped that 
require supervision on an on-going basis.  An adult day care home does not include alcohol or sub­
stance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day care facility. 
2. 	Adult Group Day-Care Home:  A private home in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve 
(12) adults eighteen (18) years or older, receive care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or phys­ically handicapped that require supervision on an on-going basis.  An adult day care home does not 
include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of 
adult day care home. 





3. 	Adult Day-Care Center:  A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one (1) or more per­sons, eighteen (18) years of age or older, for care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours 
per day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or 
physically handicapped that require supervision on an on-going basis.  An adult day-care center 
does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day-care center. 
Adult Foster Care Facility:  A state licensed establishment that provides foster care to adults.  It includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physi­cally handicapped who require supervision on an on-going basis but who do not require continuous nurs­ing care.  An adult foster care facility does not include convalescent or nursing homes, homes for the aged, 
hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which have been exempted from the defini­tion of adult foster care facility by the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, MCL 400.701, et. seq.; MSA 
16.610 (61), et. seq., as amended. The following additional definitions shall apply in the application of this Ordinance: 
1. 	Adult Foster Care Family Home:  A private residence with the approved capacity to receive six (6) 
or fewer adults to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days per week and for two (2) or more con­secutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
2. 	
Adult Foster Care Small Group Home:  A private residence with the approved capacity to receive twelve (12) or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addi­tion to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours per day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks. 

3. 	
Adult Foster Care Large Group Home:  A facility with approved capacity to receive at least thir­teen (13) but not more than twenty (20) adults to be provided supervision, personal care, and 


protection in addition to room and board, twenty-four (24) hours per day, five (5) or more days per week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks. 
4. 	Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility:  An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than twenty (20) adults to be provided with foster care. 
Adult Use Business:  Includes all of the following: 
1. 	
Adult Book Store: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or an estab­lishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 

2. 	
Adult Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified anatomical areas”, for observation by patrons. 

3. 	
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) 







4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 


persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter de­picting, describing, or relating to “specified anatomical areas”, for observation by patrons. 
Adult Outdoor Theater: An outdoor commercial facility used for motion pictures or other shows which present material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describ­ing, or relating to “specific sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”. 
Adult Physical Culture Establishment:  An “Adult Physical Culture Establishment” is any establish­ment, club, or business by whatever name designated, which offers or advertises, or is equipped or arranged so as to provide as part of its services, massages, body rubs, alcohol rubs, physical stimula­tion, baths, or other similar treatment by any person. The following uses shall not be included with the definition of any adult physical culture establishment: 
(a)  Establishments which routinely provide such services by a licensed physician, a li­censed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a licensed physical therapist, a licensed practical nurse, or any other similarly licensed medical professional;  
(b)  Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator or electrolysis equipment;  
(c)  Continuing instruction in material or performing arts or in organized athletic activi­ties;  
(d)  Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, or medical offices; and  
(e)  Barber shops or beauty parlors and/or salons that offer massage to the scalp, the face, or the neck and shoulders only.  

Body-Piercing:  The perforation of human tissue other than an ear for a non-medical purpose. 
Body-Piercing Establishment: An establishment where the perforation of human tissue other than an ear for a non-medical purpose is performed, whether or not it is in exchange for compensation or any form of consideration. 
Brand or Branding: The creation of a permanent mark made on human tissue by burning with a hot 
iron or other instrument. 
Burlesque Show: An establishment which features topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go danc­ers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, where beer or intoxicating liquors are not sold on the premises. 
Escort Agency:  Any business, agency, or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or prof­
it, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons, who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of 
amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Nude Modeling Studio: An establishment used for housing and exhibiting persons in the nude act­ing as models for other persons to paint, photograph, or draw. 





12. 	
Public Nudity: Knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place, or for payment or promise of payment by any person, including but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an ad­mission fee, any individual’s genitals or anus with less than a full opaque covering. 

13. 	
Specified Anatomical Areas: Means and includes any one (1) or more of the following: (a) less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a 


point immediately above the top of the areola; or (b) human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
14. 	
Specified Sexual Activities: Means and includes any one (1) or more of the following: (a) the fon­dling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; (b) hu­man sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including but not limited to: intercourse, oral copulation, and sodomy; (c) human masturbation, actual or simulated; (d) human excretory functions as part of, or as related to, any one of the activities described above; and (e) physical violence, bondage, mutilation, or rape (actual or simulated), as part of, or as related to, any of the activities described above. 

15. 	
Tattoo Parlor:  An establishment where persons are tattooed for consideration, other than by a li­censed medical practitioner or cosmetologist; or any place where tattooing is regularly conducted whether or not it is in exchange for compensation. 

16. 	
Tattoo, Tattooed, Tattooing: Any method of placing permanent designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols, or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any other substance, with the aid 


of needles or any other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin, resulting in either the coloration of the skin, or the production of scars or scarring, other than by branding. 
Agricultural/Commercial Tourism: The act of visiting a working farm or any agricultural, horticultural, or agribusiness operation to enjoy, be educated, or be involved in agricultural activities. Activities might in­clude: picking fruits and vegetables, riding horses, tasting honey, learning about wine and cheese making, or shopping in farm gift shops and farm stands for local and regional produce or hand-crafted gifts.  
Agricultural Land: Substantially undeveloped land devoted to the production of plants and animals use­ful to humans, including, but not limited to: forage and sod crops, grains, feed crops, field crops, dairy products, poultry and poultry products, livestock, herbs, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, fruits, veg­etables, Christmas trees, and other similar uses and activities. 
Agricultural Processing and Food Storage: A structure or building (or area within a structure or building) 
used for sorting, cleaning, packaging, and storing of agricultural products preparatory to sale or shipment 
in their natural form.  Agricultural processing shall not include slaughtering or processing of animals or animal products.  It shall also not include manufacturing of secondary products using agricultural products such as commercial kitchens, bakeries, breweries, woodworking, and wood processing plants. 
Alley:	  A public or legally-established private right-of-way primarily to provide secondary vehicular access 
to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting upon a street. 
Alteration: Any modification, addition, or change in construction or type of occupancy; any change or rearrangement in the structural parts of a building, whether by increasing the height or extension of dimi­
nution; or the moving of a building from one location to another. 





Animal or Rescue Shelter: A building supported by a governmental unit or agency or by a non-profit corpo­ration where domestic pets or other animals are kept because of requirements of public health officials, loss by owner, neglect, or violation of a public law or ordinance. 
Adjacent (lot or parcel): A lot or parcel which abuts or is directly across a street right-of-way from any lot or parcel line of the subject lot or parcel.    
Antenna: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building, or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio fre­quencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals, or other communications signals. 
Antenna, Attached: An antenna that is affixed to an existing structure; for example, an existing building, tower, water tank, flag pole, utility pole, etc. which does not include an additional tower. 
Apartment: A dwelling unit within a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
Arterial Street: A street built to carry high traffic volumes and provide connections to locations outside of 
the Township. 
Base Flood: A flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.  This type of flood is also referred to as the 100-year flood. 
Basement: That portion of a building that is partly or wholly below finished grade, but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling.  A basement shall not be counted as a story. 






FIGURE 2.02-A.  BASEMENT & STORY 


Basin: 
1. 	
Detention: A basin wherein water is stored for a relatively brief period of time, part of it being retained until the outlet can safely carry the ordinary flow plus the released water. Some basins have outlets usually without control gates, and are used for flood regulation. 

2. 	
Retention: A basin wherein water is stored for a period of time until the outlet can safely carry the released water. Such basins have control gates which can be released at a given time. This type of basin is used for flood regulation. 


Bed and Breakfast Establishment: A subordinate use within a single family dwelling unit in which tran­
sient guests are provided a sleeping room, breakfast, and access to bathing and lavatory facilities in return 
for payment. 





Bicycle Facilities: Improvements and provisions made by public agencies to accommodate or encourage bicycling, including shared roadways, bicycle lanes, or shared use paths. 
Blood Plasma Center: A building and premises used for the primary function of the performance of plas­mapheresis.  Plasmapheresis means the procedure whereby whole blood is removed from a plasma donor by venipuncture or phlebotomy, the plasma is separated therefrom for sale or transfer, and the formed elements of the blood are returned to the donor. This definition does not include blood banks in which pri­marily whole blood is extracted from donors and used, transferred, or sold, such as blood donation centers 
sponsored by the American Red Cross. 
Buildable Area:  The buildable area of a lot is the space remaining after the minimum open space require­ments of this Ordinance are complied with. 


FIGURE 2.02-B. BUILDABLE AREA 

Building: A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls. 
Building, Farm:  Any building or structure other than a dwelling maintained, used, or built on a farm which 

is essential and customarily used on farms of that type in the Township for the pursuit of their agricultural activities, including the storage or housing of farm implements, produce, or farm animals. 
Building, Mixed Use:  A building containing a combination of residential, office, and commercial uses. Building, Principal: A building in which the main or principal uses are conducted on the lot on which said building is located. 
Building, Temporary: A structure erected on a property which is intended for limited duration. 
Building Code: The currently adopted code or codes regulating building construction in Delta Charter Town­ship. 






Building Height: The building height is the vertical distance measured from the average finished grade to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and the average height between eaves and the ridges of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.  Where a building may be situated on slop­ing terrain, this height shall be measured from the average level of the finished grade at the building wall. 

FIGURE 2.02-C. BUILDING HEIGHT 

Building Inspector or Building Official: An individual appointed by the Township Board delegated to ad­minister the Delta Charter Township Building Code Ordinance. 
Building Material Sales: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in retail or wholesale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures, but specifically excluding automobile or equipment supplies otherwise classified herein. Typical uses include building material stores and home supply establishments. 
Building Permit: A building permit is written permission issued by the Building Official for the construction, alteration, or expansion of buildings or improvements on the land in conformance with this Ordinance. 
Building Setback Line: A line which defines the minimum distance (as determined by the minimum front, side, or rear yard setback) which any building shall be located from a property line, existing street right-of­way, easement line of an approved private street, proposed right-of-way line as indicated in the Township’s Comprehensive Plan, or ordinary high water mark. See Figure 2.02 H, Corner Lot Layout and Interior Lot Layout. 
Business Service and Repair: An establishment providing other businesses with various services including: maintenance, repair and service, testing, and rental. 





Campgrounds:  An area or an establishment intended to contain temporary or permanent buildings, tents, 
recreational vehicles such as motor homes or travel trailers, or other structures established or maintained as temporary living quarters, usually operated during the summer for recreation purposes. 
Cellar: See definition for basement. 
Cemetery:  Property used for the interring of the dead.  This may include a structure and/or facilities for storing ashes of remains that have been cremated such as a mausoleum.  Also may include structures for the internment of the dead in sealed crypts or compartments. 
Certificate of Zoning Compliance: A document signed by the Zoning Administrator as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the construction/reconstruction of a structure or building which acknowl­edges that such use, structure, or building complies with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
Child Day-Care Facilities: The following definitions shall apply in the construction and application of this Ordinance: 
1. 	Child Family Day-Care Home:  A private residence in which one (1) but not more than six (6) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours a day un­attended by a parent or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more 
than four (4) weeks in a calendar year. 
2. 	Child Group Day-Care Home:  A private residence in which seven (7) but not more than twelve (12) children are received for care and supervision for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours per day 
unattended by a parent or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoptions. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four (4) weeks in a calendar year. 
3. 	Child Care Center:  A facility, other than a private residence, receiving more than one (1) or more children for care and supervision for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours, and where the par­ents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. 
Child Foster Family Facilities:  Means the following: 
1. 	Child Foster Care Family Home:  A private home in which one (1) but not more than four (4) minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or who are 
not placed in the household pursuant to the adoption code, Chapter X of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, being sections 710.21 to 710.70 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, are given care and 
supervision for twenty-four (24) hours per day, for four (4) or more days per week, for two (2) or 
more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
2. 	Child Foster Care Group Home:  A private home in which more than four (4) but fewer than seven 
(7) minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, 
or who are not placed in the household pursuant to Chapter X of Act No. 288 of Public Acts of 1939, 
are provided care for twenty-four (24) hours per day, for four (4) or more days per week, for two (2) 
or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 





Church or Synagogue: See Places of Worship. 
Clinic, Medical: An establishment where human patients are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, or similar professionals on an out-patient basis, but not to include the 
dispensing of medical marihauana. A clinic may incorporate customary laboratories and pharmacies inci­
dental or necessary to its operation. 
Club or Lodge: The buildings and facilities owned or used by a non-profit organization of persons for spe­cial purposes or for the promotion of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, social activities, and other similar group activities and open only to members and not the general public. 
Commercial Fueling Station: An unmanned automated fuel service facility that dispenses gasoline and 
diesel fuel exclusively to commercial fleet vehicles. 
Commercial Recreation Facility: A privately owned facility designed and equipped for the conduct of 
sports, amusement or leisure time activities, and other customary recreational activities either indoors 
(within an enclosed building) or outdoors (outside of an enclosed building) operated as a business and open for use by the public for a fee. 
Common Land: A parcel or parcels of land with the improvements thereon, the use, maintenance, and enjoyment of which are intended to be shared by the owners and or occupants of individual building units in a subdivision or a planned unit development. 
Common Open Space: An unoccupied area within a planned unit development which is reserved primarily for the leisure and recreational use of all the planned unit development residents and generally owned and maintained in common by them, often through a homeowners association. 
Community Supported Agriculture: A marketing strategy in which a farm produces farm products for a 
group of farm members or subscribers who pay in advance for their share of the harvest.  Typically, the 
farm members receive their share once per week, sometimes coming to the farm to pick up their share; 
or farms deliver to a central point. 
Comprehensive Plan: A document containing the future development policies and map for Delta Char­
ter Township, together with supporting documentation, as most recently adopted or amended by the 
Delta Township Planning Commission pursuant to the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, 2008 PA 33 (MCL 125.3801 et. seq.), as amended. 
Condominium: A building or lot governed under Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended.  The following condominium terms shall apply in the application of this Ordinance: 
1. 	
Condominium Documents: The master deed, recorded pursuant to the Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obliga­tions of a co-owner in the condominium. 

2. 	
Condominium Lot:  The land in a condominium unit, together with the land in the adjacent and appurtenant limited common element, if there is such a limited common element. 

3. 	
Condominium Subdivision Plan: The drawings and information prepared in accordance with Sec­tion 66 of the Condominium Act. 







4. 
Condominium Unit: The portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed. 

5. 	
Consolidating Master Deed: The final amended master deed for a contractible or expandable con­dominium project or a condominium project containing convertible land or convertible space, which the final amended master deed fully describes the condominium project as completed. 

6. 	
Contractible Condominium: A condominium project containing condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the filing of a notice of taking reservations under Section 7 of the Con­dominium Act. 

7. 	
Expandable Condominium: A condominium project to which additional land may be added in ac­cordance with this Ordinance and the Condominium Act. 

8. 	
General Common Elements: A portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the use of all of the co-owners. 

9. 	
Limited Common Elements: A portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners. 

10. 	
Master Deed: The condominium document recording the condominium project to which are at­tached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project, the condominium sub­division plan for the project, and all other information required by Section 8 of the Condominium Act. 


11. 	
Notice of Proposed Action: The notice required by Section 71 of the Condominium Act, to be filed with Delta Charter Township and other agencies. 

12. 	
Site Condominium: A condominium development containing residential, commercial, office, in­dustrial, or other structures or improvements for uses permitted in the zoning district in which the condominium development is located, in which each co-owner owns the exclusive right to a volume of space within which each co-owner may construct a structure or structures. 


Conference, Meeting, and Banquet Facilities: A facility used for conventions, conferences, seminars, prod­uct displays, exhibitions, and entertainment activities along with accessory functions, including temporary outdoor displays and food and beverage preparation for on-premises consumption. 
Conservation Easement: A legal agreement in which the landowner retains ownership of private property, 
but conveys certain specifically identified rights to a land conservation organization or public body. 
Construction: Any assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, for or of public or pri­vate rights-of-ways, structures, utilities, or similar property. 
Convalescent Center: A state licensed medical care facility for the care of children, of the aged, or infirm providing twenty-four (24) hour care for patients recovering from acute or post-operative conditions.  
Corridor Plan(s), Studies: Specific studies of a roadway and its adjacent land uses. Topics addressed com­monly include traffic volumes, access management, right-of-way, and signage. 





Crematory: A building or structure within which the remains of deceased persons or animals are or are intended to be cremated. 
Cul-de-sac: A dead end public or private street, generally short in distance, which terminates in a circular or semi-circular section of a street which allows for vehicle turnaround.  
Data Processing and Computer Centers: Facilities which store, process, and serve large amounts of elec­tronic data.  This use also includes service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment. 
Deceleration Lane: An added roadway lane that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream before turning. 
Deck: A platform commonly constructed of wood, which is typically attached to a house, and which is typi­cally used for outdoor leisure activities. 
Density: The number of dwelling units situated on or to be developed per net or gross acre of land. 
Design Guidelines: A set of standards and recommendations intended to guide new development of in­dividual properties and consolidated parcels along the corridor, and promote a cohesive and inviting pe­destrian realm through abundant landscaping and public amenities, integrated transit infrastructure, and smart access management. 
Development: The construction of a new use or building, or other structure on a lot or parcel; the reloca­tion of an existing use or building on another lot or parcel; or the use of acreage or open land for the new 
use or building. 

Drainage: 
1. 	
Surface water runoff. 

2. 	
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means which include runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during the construction or devel­opment. The means for preserving the water supply and the prevention or alleviation of flooding. 


Drive-Through: A business establishment providing retail goods or services to patrons while in a motor vehicle, including customer communication facilities for banks or other uses.  
Driveway Throat Width: The driveway width, measured perpendicularly from face-of-curb to face-of-curb, 
in the narrowest section of the driveway. 
Dumpster: A mobile garbage bin or trash receptacle used or intended to be used for the collection of quan­tities of garbage, refuse, debris, waste, and rubbish, greater than one (1) cubic yard in area. 
Dwelling, Efficiency: A dwelling unit of not more than one (1) room in addition to a kitchen and a bath­room. 
Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A building designed exclusively for, and containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 





Dwelling, Single-Family: A detached building designed exclusively for, and containing one (1) dwelling unit only. 
Dwelling, Two-Family: A detached building designed exclusively for, and containing two (2) dwelling units only. 
Dwelling Unit: A building, or enclosed portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one (1) family for residen­tial purposes and having independent living, eating, sleeping, cooking, and sanitary facilities. A dwelling unit shall include both manufactured units (manufactured homes and modular homes) and site built units, but in no case shall include a travel trailer, motor home, trailer coach, automobile chassis, tent, or other portable building. 
Dwelling Unit, Attached: A dwelling unit attached to one (1) or more dwelling units by common major struc­tural elements. 
Dwelling Unit, Detached: A dwelling unit which is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means. 
Easement: A grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by a property owner to and/or for use by the 
public, or another person or entity. 
Erect: Build, construct, alter, reconstruct, move upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction. Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered a part of erection. 


Equestrian Facilities: 
1. 	
Riding Academy:  Any establishment where horses are kept for training, riding, driving, or stabling for compensation or incidental to the operation of any club, association, ranch, or similar establish­ment. 

2. 	
Stable, Commercial: A stable with a capacity of five (5) or more horses, mules, or donkeys which are rented, hired, used, or boarded on a commercial basis or for compensation. For the purpose hereof, five (5) or more animals kept and maintained as a hobby stable, or for any other purpose, shall be deemed and considered a commercial stable. 

3. 	
Stable, Hobby:  A stable with a capacity of four (4) or fewer horses, mules, or donkeys which are used by the owners of the property. 


Essential Service: The erection or construction of utility systems whether underground, surface, or over­head which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by private or public utilities for the general 
public health, safety, and welfare.  These systems include storm and sanitary sewer, water, electric, gas, telephone, and cable television facilities, and their required accessory facilities, not to include telecommu­nication towers.  
1. 	
Major Essential Service: A major essential service installation shall consist of building(s) and/or structures which cover one thousand (1,000) square feet or more of area. 

2. 	
Minor Essential Service: A minor essential service installation shall consist of building(s) and/or structures which cover less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of area.  







Excavation: An activity which may include cutting, digging, or removing. 
Extractive Uses: A use involving removal of surface or subsurface mineral products of natural resources 
including, but not limited to: sand, gravel and stone operations, and soil mining, but not to include timber cutting and petroleum and natural gas wells. 
Fall Zone: A distance from the base of a tower, measured in all directions, where an unoccupied area shall 
be maintained, except for accessory structures related to the facility, in case of structural damage to the facility, falling debris, or catastrophic failure. 
Family:  A family shall be defined as one (1) of the following: 
1. 	
One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, plus not more than two (2) persons not so related, who are either domestic employees, or caregivers, including, but not limited to: a nurse, nanny, physical therapist, or persons who occupy rooms for which com­pensation may or may not be paid, living together as a single housekeeping unit. 

2. 	
Two (2) persons and their children by natural birth or adoption, plus not more than two (2) per­sons not so related, who are either domestic employees, care givers, including, but not limited to: a nurse, nanny, physical therapist, or persons who occupy rooms for which compensation may or 


may not be paid. 
3. 	A functional family living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
Family, Functional: A group of persons which does not meet the definition of “Family” herein, living in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit and intended to live together as a group for the indefinite fu­ture. This definition shall not include any fraternity, sorority, club, hotel, or other group of persons whose association is temporary or commercial in nature. 
Farm Market: A place or an area where transactions between a farm market operator and customers take 
place. This includes roadside stands. It does not necessarily include a physical structure such as a build­
ing, and is considered part of a farm operation. The products marketed for sale at a farm market must be produced on and by the affiliated farm. Farm Products may be processed more extensively into a form that adds value and makes them more marketable for direct customer sales. 
Farm Operation: The operation and management of a farm or a condition or activity that occurs at any time as necessary on a farm in connection with the production, harvesting, and storage of farm products, and includes, but is not limited to: 
1. 	
Marketing produce at roadside stands or farm markets. 

2. 	
The generation of noise, odors, dust, fumes, and other associated conditions. 

3. 	
The operation of machinery and equipment necessary for a farm including, but not limited to: irri­gation and drainage systems and pumps and on-farm grain dryers, and the movement of vehicles, machinery, equipment, and farm products, and associated inputs necessary for farm operations 


on the roadway as authorized by the Michigan vehicle code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, 
being sections 257.1 to 257.923 of the Michigan Complied Laws. 





4. 	
Field preparation and ground and aerial seeding and spraying. 

5. 	
The application of chemical fertilizers or organic materials, conditioners, liming, materials, or pesti­cides. 

6. 	
Use of alternative pest management techniques. 

7. 	
The fencing, feeding, watering, sheltering, transportation, treatment, use, handling, and care of livestock. 

8. 	
The management, storage, transport, utilization, and application of farm by-products, including ma­nure or agricultural wastes. 

9. 	
The conversion from a farm operation activity to other farm operation activities. 


10. The employment and use of labor. 
Farm Product:  Those plants and animals useful to human beings produced by agriculture and includes, 
but is not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and feed crops; field crops; dairy and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; cervidae; livestock, including breeding and grazing; equine; fish and other aqua-cultural products; bees and bee products; berries; herbs; fruits; vegetables; flowers; seeds grasses; 
nursery stock; trees and tree products; mushrooms; and other similar products; or any other product which incorporates the use of food, feed, fiber, or fur, as determined by the Michigan Commission of Agriculture. 
Fence: An accessory structure intended for use as a barrier to property ingress or egress, a screen from an 
objectionable vista, noise, and/or for decorative use. 
Filing Date: The date upon which any application pursuant to this Ordinance is submitted and the required filing fee is paid. 
Filling: The permanent depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the ground, except for agricultural 
purposes, ground care, or landscaping. 
Firearm Sales and Service: An establishment, or part thereof, devoted to the sale, lease, purchase, or servic­
ing of firearms or ammunition. 
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1. 	
The overflow of inland waters. 

2. 	
The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source. 


Flood Hazard Area: Land which, on the basis of available flood plain information, is subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): A map of the Township prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which identifies the 100- and 500-year flood plain and other related flood information; and which is used as the official floodplain map for flood insurance purposes. 





Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency con­taining flood profiles, as well as the Flood Hazard Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface eleva­tions of the base flood. 
Floodplain (see also Flood Hazard Area): That portion of land adjacent to or connected to a water body or water course which is subject to periodic inundation in accordance with the one hundred (100) year flood cycle as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other applicable federal agency. 
Flood-proofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas designated in the Flood Insurance Study which shall be reserved in order to discharge the base flood. Floodway is also the same as the regulatory floodway. 
Floor Area, Gross: The sum of all gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building or buildings measured from the outside dimensions of the outside face of the outside wall. Unenclosed porches, court yards, 
or patios shall not be considered as part of the gross area except where they are utilized for commercial 
purposes such as the outdoor sale of merchandise. 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The ratio of the floor area of a building to the area of the lot on which it is located, calculated by dividing the floor area by the lot area, and expressing it as a percentage. In calculating the floor area, the floor area of accessory buildings shall be included. 
FIGURE 2.02-D.  FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) 






Floor Area, Usable: For the purposes of computing parking requirements, usable floor area shall be consid­ered as that area to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients, or 
customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, stairways, and elevator shafts, or restrooms, shall be excluded from this computa­tion of usable floor area. Usable floor area shall be measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls, and total usable floor area for a building shall include the sum of the usable floor area for all floors. 
Form Based District: A type of land development regulations that places primary emphasis on the physical form of buildings and site development with the end goal of producing a predictable built environment or 
specific type of place. 
Fraternity/Sorority House: A dwelling unit maintained exclusively for persons who are joined together by 
common interests and affiliated with an institution of higher learning. 
Frontage Road: A public or private drive which generally parallels a public street between the right-of-way and the front building setback line. Frontage roads can be one-way or bi-directional in design. The frontage road provides specific access points to private properties while maintaining separation between the arterial street and adjacent land uses.  A road which allows parking or is used as a maneuvering aisle within a parking area is generally not considered a frontage road. 
Funeral Home/Mortuary: An establishment where the dead are prepared for burial or cremation and where 
wakes or funerals may be held. 
Garage: A non-habitable attached or detached accessory building which is designed for the storage of pri­vate automobiles, materials, tools, or other equipment necessary to maintain the property. 
Garden Center: A building, room, or area usually chiefly of transparent material in which the temperature is maintained within a desired range, used for cultivating tender plants or growing plants out of season for 
retail sale to the general public. 
Generally Accepted Agricultural and Management Practices (GAAMPS): Those practices as defined by the Michigan Commission of Agriculture. The Commission shall give due consideration to available Michigan Department of Agriculture information and written recommendations from the Michigan State University Experiment Station in cooperation with the United State Department of Agricultural Natural Resources Con­servation Service and other Consolidated Farm Service Agency, the Michigan Department of Natural Re­sources, and other professional and industry organizations. 
Geothermal Energy Systems: A system that uses a heat pump to extract heat from the earth in heating 
mode and/or reject heat into the earth in cooling mode. 
Golf Course or Country Club: The premises upon which the game of golf is played, including clubhouses, 
parking lots, swimming pools, tennis courts, or other facilities or uses customarily incidental to a golf course or country club.  Unlit driving ranges may be permitted as an accessory use to a golf course. 
Grade:  The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface. 








FIGURE 2.02-E. GRADE 


Grade, Average: The arithmetic average of the lowest and highest grade elevations in an area within five 
(5) feet of the foundation line of a building or structure. 
Grade, Finished: The lowest point of elevation between the exterior wall of the structure and a line five (5) feet from the exterior wall of the structure. 
Grade, Natural: The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before man-made alterations. 
Greenbelt: A landscaped area which is intended to provide a transition between a public road right-of-way and an existing or proposed land use. 
Gross Site Area: The total area of a planned unit development site including flood plains and water bodies. 
Habitable Space: Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
High-Rise Buildings: A building located within an office or commercial zoning district over sixty (60) feet in height, which is permitted only as a Special Land Use. 
Home Occupation: Any occupation conducted entirely within the dwelling or enclosed accessory building and carried on by the residents thereof, not involving employees other than members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling, which use is clearly secondary to use of the dwelling for residential pur­poses. 
Horses:  See Equestrian Facilities. 





Hospital: A facility offering primarily in-patient care, and services for observation, diagnosis, and active treatment of patients with a medical, surgical, obstetric, chronic, or rehabilitative conditions requiring the daily care and supervision of a physician(s) and medical support staff. A hospital may or may not also have a clinic offering out-patient services. 
Hotel: A series of attached, semi-detached, or detached rental units which provide lodging on a temporary basis, and are offered to the public for compensation. The term “hotel” shall include tourist cabins and homes, motor courts, and motels.  A hotel shall not be considered or construed to be a multiple-family dwelling. 
Impervious Surface: Any surface which does not allow water to be absorbed so it may percolate into deeper 
ground. Such surfaces are those constructed of cement, bituminous asphalt, paving brick, composed stone or gravel, or any other surface that allows no water penetration.  
Kennel:  Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs six (6) months of age or older, are kept, either permanently or temporarily, for the purposes of breeding, boarding, training, sale, or transfer. Dogs which 
are utilized as service animals shall not be counted for the purpose of this definition. 
Laboratory:  A place in which the principal use is devoted to experimental, routine, or basic study including, but not limited to, testing and analytical operations. 
Landscaping:  The following definitions shall apply in the application of this Ordinance: 
1. 	
Berm:  A landscaped mound of earth which blends with the surrounding terrain. 

2. 	
Buffer:  A landscaped area composed of living material, wall, berm, or combination thereof, es­tablished and/or maintained to provide visual screening, noise reduction, and transition between conflicting types of land uses. 

3. 	
Conflicting Non-Residential Land Use: Any non-residential use, including, but not limited to: of­fice, commercial, industrial, research, parking, or public road right-of-way land use which abuts a residential land use. 

4. 	
Conflicting Residential Land Use: Any residential land use developed at a higher density which abuts a residential land use developed at a lower density. 

5. 	
Opacity: The state of being impervious to sight. 

6. 	
Plant Material:  A collection of living evergreen and/or deciduous, woody-stemmed trees, shrubs, vines, and ground cover. 

7. 	
Screen: A structure providing enclosure, including, but not limited to, a fence, and /or visual barrier between the area enclosed and the adjacent property.  A screen may also consist of living materials including, but not limited to trees and shrubs. 


Livestock: Animals including, but not limited to, horses, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, poultry, and rabbits. 





Livestock Production Facility: All facilities where livestock are kept with a capacity of fifty (50) animal units or greater and/or the associated manure facilities. Sites such as loafing areas, confinement areas, or feed­lots which have livestock densities that preclude prominence of desirable forage species are considered part of a livestock production facility.  This does not include pastureland. 
Loading Space: An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise, materials, or passengers. 
Lot: A parcel of land separated from other parcels of land by description on a recorded plat or by metes and bounds description, including a condominium unit in a condominium subdivision; having frontage upon a public or private street, and having sufficient size to comply with the requirements of this ordi­nance for minimum area, setbacks, coverage, and open space. 
Lot, Corner: A lot with frontage on two (2) intersecting streets. 
Lot, Interior:  A lot other than a corner lot that has only one (1) lot line fronting on a street. 
Lot, Through (also called double frontage): An interior lot having frontage on two (2) more or less parallel streets. 






FIGURE 2.02-F.  LOT TYPES 


Lot Area, Gross:  The area contained within the lot lines or property boundary including street right-of-way if so included. 
Lot Area, Net:  The total area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of any public street right-of-way abutting any side of the lot. 
Lot Area, Net Buildable:  
1. For Planned Unit Developments: The net lot area less area devoted to water bodies; water 
bodies being defined as areas greater than one (1) acre in size (either before or after project implementation) which are periodically or permanently covered with water. 





2. 	For Non-Planned Unit Developments: The net lot area less area devoted to floodplains or water bodies; water bodies being defined as areas greater than one (1) acre in size (either before or after project implementation) which are periodically or permanently covered with 
water. 
Lot Coverage:  The part or percent of a lot occupied by buildings and accessory buildings. 
Lot Depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the mid-point between side lot lines. 
FIGURE 2.02-G. LOT DEPTH AND LOT WIDTH 






Lot Frontage:  The length of the front lot line. 
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot or parcel. FIGURE 2.02-H. LOT LINES 

Lot Line, Front:  The line(s) separating the lot from any street right-of-way, private road or other access ease­ment. 
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.  In the case of a triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lot or parcel, an imaginary line ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot or parcel, parallel to, and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
Lot Line, Side: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. 
Lot of Record: A tract of land which is part of a subdivision shown on a plat or map which has been recorded 
in the Office of the Register of Deeds for Eaton County, Michigan; or a tract of land described by metes and bounds which is the subject of a deed or land contract which is likewise recorded in the Office of the Register 
of Deeds. 
Lot Width: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the front lot line at the mini­mum required front setback line (see Figure 2.02-F.). 





Manufactured Home: A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained 
in the structure.  A manufactured home shall not include modular homes, motor homes, or travel trailers. 
Manufactured Housing: A dwelling unit which is designed for long-term residential use and is wholly or substantially constructed at an off-site location. Manufactured housing includes manufactured homes and 
modular housing units. 
Manufactured Housing Development: A parcel or tract of land upon which three (3) or more manufac­
tured homes are located on a continual non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that 
purpose regardless of whether a charge is made, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a manufactured home and which is not intended for use as temporary housing.  
Medical Laboratories: A laboratory where tests are usually done on clinical specimens in order to obtain 
information about the health of a patient as pertaining to the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of 
disease. 
Modular Home: A dwelling which consists of prefabricated units transported to the site on a removable undercarriage or flat-bed and assembled for permanent location on the lot. 
Motel: (See Hotel) 
Natural Features:  Natural features shall include soils, wetlands, floodplains, water bodies and channels, topography, trees and other types of vegetative cover, and geologic formations. 
Non-Conforming Building or Structure: A structure or building lawfully constructed that does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is situated. 
Non-Conforming Lot: A lot of record which does not meet the dimensional requirements of this ordinance. 
Non-Conforming Use: A use, which existed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments thereto, that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 

Non-Commercial Parks and Recreational Facilities: Parks owned and maintained by the Township and/or 
residential developments through designated common space. 
Nursery: Any land, space, building or structure, or combination thereof, used for the storage of live trees, shrubs, or plants, but not including medical marihuana; and not including any land, space, building, or structure, or any part thereof, used for the sale of fruits, vegetables, or harvested and cut Christmas trees. 
Occupancy, change of: A discontinuance of an existing use and the substitution of a use of a different kind or class, or the expansion of a use. 
Occupied: The use of any structure, parcel, or property for human endeavor, but not including the prepa­
ration of any structure of land for occupancy. 
Offset: The distance between the centerlines of driveways or streets across the street from one another. 







FIGURE 2.02-I. OFFSET 


Off-Street Parking Area: A land surface or facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of three (3) or more automobiles or trucks. 
Open Air Business: A business operated for profit, substantially in the open air, usually without buildings or structures, including, but not limited to the following: 
1. 	
Bicycle, utility truck or trailer, motor vehicle, boats or home equipment sale, repair, or rental ser­vices. 

2. 	
Outdoor display and sale of garages, motor homes, mobile homes, snowmobiles, farm implements, swimming pools, and similar products. 

3. 	
Retail sale of trees, fruits, vegetables, shrubbery, plants, seeds, topsoil, humus, and/or fertilizer. 

4. 	
Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, rifle ranges, miniature golf, golf driv­ing range, children’s amusement park or similar recreation uses (transient or permanent). 


Open Space: Any land area suitable for growing vegetation, recreation, gardens, or household service activi­ties, but not occupied by any buildings or other structures, except as provided in this Ordinance. 
Open Space Use:  Any principal or accessory use of a lot or parcel not involving the use of buildings or struc­tures. 
Ordinary High Water Mark: The line between upland and bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels below which the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configura­tion of the surface soil, and the vegetation. 





Outdoor Storage: A land area occupied and used for outdoor storage of building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, equipment, and other supplies. 
Parcel: A lot described by metes and bounds or described in a recorded plat. 
Parking Space: Any space used for the off-street parking of motor vehicles. 
Peak Hour: The hour during a typical day in which traffic volumes are the highest. 
Permitted Use: A use allowed by right in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that 

zoning district. 
Personal Service Establishment: A business where personal services are provided for profit and where the sale of goods is only accessory to the provisions of such services, including but not limited to the following: 
barber shops, beauty shops, tailor shops, laundry or dry cleaning shops, and shoe repair shops. 
Places of Assembly: Unless otherwise identified and defined by this Ordinance, “places of assembly” 
means any building, structure, and/or grounds where groups meet or assemble.  Places of assembly shall include, but are not limited to: auditoriums, stadiums, sports arenas, fine and performing art venues, and other similar facilities. 
Places of Worship: A site used for or intended for the regular assembly of persons for the conducting of 
religious services and accessory uses therewith. 
Planned Unit Development: A form of land development comprehensively planned as an entity via a uni­tary site plan which permits flexibility in building, siting, usable open spaces, and the preservation of signif­icant natural features. Such a development may contain a mix of housing types and non-residential uses. 
Planning Commission: The Delta Charter Township Planning Commission as duly created under Act 33 of 2008, as amended. 
Plat: A map of a subdivision of land showing location, boundaries, and ownership of individual properties. 
Portable Storage Units: A portable, weather-resistant receptacle designed and used for the storage or shipment of household goods, wares, building materials, or merchandise.  
Post-Secondary Schools: Any education institution that provides classes to students who have already completed high school. Post-secondary schools include trade schools, traditional colleges, or graduate 
schools. 
Practical Difficulty: See “Variance”. 
Premises: All portions of contiguous land in the same ownership that are not divided by any public high­
way, street, or alley, and upon which is located a residence or place of business. 
Principal Building or Structure: The main building or structure in which the primary use is conducted. 
Principal Use: The main use to which the premises are devoted and the main purpose for which the prem­
ises exist. 






Private Road: Any road or thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is privately owned and maintained and which provides the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Public Park: Any park, playground, beach, outdoor swimming pool, parkway, within the jurisdiction and con­trol of a governmental agency authorized by state statutes to own and maintain parks. 
Public/Semi-public Use: A non-profit or quasi-public use or institution such as a church, library, public or private school, hospital, or Township-owned or operated building, structure, or land used for public purpose. 
Public Service Building and Facilities: Building or facility used for a public service or purpose. 
Public Street: A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.  
Reasonable Access: A property owner’s legal right, incidental to property ownership, to access a public road right-of-way. Reasonable access includes indirect access via frontage roads, service drives, and shared 
driveways or partial access at a driveway where turning movements are restricted due to site and traffic conditions.  
Recording Studio: A facility for audio, video, film recording and production, and similar activities. This may also include radio and television broadcast facilities without towers. 
Recreational Vehicle or Unit: A vehicular-type structure designed primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motor power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle which is self-powered. Recreational units of this type shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: travel trailers, camping trailers, tent trailers, motor homes, and truck campers. Recre­ational units shall also include, but shall not be limited to the following: boats, boat trailers, snowmobiles, 
snowmobile trailers, all-terrain vehicles, dune buggies, horse trailers, and similar equipment. 
Recycling: Using dismantled materials to make a product. 
Recycling Center: A collection, sorting, baling, and bundling center for recycling materials including but not limited to: glass, metal, plastic, cardboard, paper products, and other recyclable materials. This use includes the utilization of recycling units and is classified as a small or large collection facility as follows. 
1. Recycling Center - Large Collection Facility: A recycling center occupying an area of over two thou­
sand (2,000) square feet for the drop-off or deposit of recyclable materials. 
2. Recycling Center - Small Collection Facility: A recycling center of two thousand (2,000) square feet 
or less for the drop-off or deposit of recyclable materials. 
Recycling Units: Bins, boxes, containers, bays, or enclosures used for the collection of recyclable materials (e.g., metals, glass, plastic, cardboard, paper, etc.), which are either stationary or transported by trucks, trail­ers, or vans, etc. 
Refuse Storage Space: Any exterior space which is not a principal use for containers, structures, or other receptacle intended for temporary storage of solid waste materials. 
Restaurant:  An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages to the customer in 





a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-through, fast food, sit-down restaurant, or bar/lounge, or combination thereof, as defined below: 
1. 	
Restaurant, Carry-Out:  A carry-out restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption primarily off of the premises. 

2. 	
Restaurant, Drive-In/Drive-Through:  A drive-in/drive-through restaurant shall be deemed to be any restaurant designed to permit or facilitate the serving of meals, sandwiches, ice cream, bev­


erages, or other food served directly to or permitted to be consumed by patrons in cars or other vehicles parked on the premises, or permitted to be consumed by patrons elsewhere on the site outside of the main building. 
3. 	
Restaurant, Fast Food:  A fast food restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the customer at a counter or cafeteria line for consumption at the counter where it is served, or at tables, booths, or stands inside or out­side of the structure, or for consumption off the premises, but not in a motor vehicle at the site. 

4. 	
Restaurant, Sit Down:  A standard restaurant whose method of operation involves either the deliv­ery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building, or the prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line, and is subse­quently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely enclosed building. 

5. 	
Bar/Lounge: A bar or lounge is a type of restaurant which is operated primarily for the dispensing 


of alcoholic beverages, although the sale of prepared food or snacks may also be permitted. If a bar or lounge is part of a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so designated or operated. 
Research and Development Facilities: A structure or group of structures used primarily for applied and 
developmental research, where product testing is an integral part of the operation and goods or products may be manufactured as necessary for testing, evaluation, and test marketing. 
Retail, General: Any building or structure in which goods, wares, or merchandise are sold to the consumer 
for direct consumption and not for resale. 
Retail, Large-Scale: A retail establishment commonly referred to as a “big box” store, which exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) square feet in gross floor area. 
Retail, Wholesale: A commercial activity, building, or land primarily engaged in or used for the display, storage, and sale of goods to other firms for resale, or an off-price and/or a retail/warehouse establish­ment offering a range of general merchandise to the public. 
Right-of-Way: A street, alley, or other thoroughfare, or an easement permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles. 
Roadside Stand: A temporary structure which is used seasonally for the sale of produce which is produced on the premises. The operation of a roadside stand shall not constitute a commercial district or use. 
Salvage: Material to be used for further use, recycling, or sale. See Recycling Center. 





Salvage Yard: Any operation in which the principal or accessory use is the storage, separation, and/or recy­cling of salvage for purposes of sale of the salvage or its component parts. 
Satellite Dish Antenna: A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar config­ured; is in the shape of a shallow dish, parabola, cone or horn; and has a minimum dimension of three (3) feet or greater. Such a device shall be used to transmit and/or receive television, radio, or other electro­magnetic communication signals between terrestrially and/or extraterrestrial-based sources. This definition includes, but is not limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVRO’s (Television Reception Only satellite antennas), and satellite microwave antennas. 
Scrap Tire Collection Site: A property, other than a sanitary landfill, which has five hundred (500) or more scrap tires and is not associated with a retail operation. If the property is owned by a person who is in the business of selling tires at retail, and if one thousand five hundred (1,500) or more scrap tires are accumu­lated at that site, it is also considered a collection site. 
Scrap Tire Processor: A person who stores, buys, or otherwise acquires scrap tires and reduces their volume by shredding or otherwise facilitating recycling or resource recovery techniques. 
Self-Storage Facility: A building or group of buildings, each of which consists of several individual storage 
units, each with a separate door and lock, and which can be leased on an individual basis. Such facilities are 
typically, but not necessarily, contained within a fenced, controlled access compound. 
Senior Housing: A building or group of buildings containing dwellings intended to be occupied by older 
persons as defined by the Fair Housing Act. Senior housing may include independent and/or assisted living arrangements, but shall not include convalescent homes or homes for the aged regulated by the State. The following additional definitions shall apply in the application of this Ordinance: 
1. 	Assisted Living for the Elderly:  Housing that provides twenty-four (24) hour supervision and is designed and operated for elderly people who require some level of support for daily liv­
ing. Residents may receive support services for daily living based on individual needs. Such support shall include daily personal care, meals, transportation, security, and housekeeping. 
Individual dwellings may contain kitchen units. 
2. 	Independent Living for the Elderly:  Housing that is designed and operated for elderly peo­ple in good health who desire and are capable of maintaining independent households, and 
do not require assistance to meet daily needs. Such housing may provide certain services such as meals, linkage to health care, transportation, security, housekeeping, and recre­ational and social activities. Project sites shall be designed to accommodate an active and mobile resident population. Individual dwellings are designed to promote independent liv­ing and shall contain kitchen facilities. 
Separation: Collection and/or dismantling of individual recyclable components at the point of generation or 
discard. 
Service Animal: In accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended, a service ani­mal is any dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a 
disability, including a physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual, or other mental disability. Other species of 
animals, whether wild or domestic, trained or untrained, are not considered service animals. Service animals 





are working animals, not pets. The work tasks performed by a service animal must be directly related to the individual’s disability. The work or task a dog has been trained to provide must be directly related to 
the person’s disability. Dogs whose sole function is to provide comfort or emotional support do not qualify 
as service animals under the ADA or this Ordinance. 
Service Drive: A drive which generally parallels the public right-of-way but runs along the back of a land use which fronts on the public street. A service drive may provide access to properties on both sides, and vary in width and design. 
Setback: The minimum unoccupied distance between a front, side, or rear lot line and the principal and accessory buildings, as required herein (see Figures 2.02-K. Corner Lot Layout and 2.02-L. Interior Lot Lay­out). 
Shopping Center:  More than one (1) commercial establishment, planned, developed, owned, and man­
aged as a unit with off-street parking provided on the property. 
Sight Distance: The length of roadway visible to the driver. Generally related to the distance or time (per­ception/reaction time) sufficient for the driver to execute a maneuver (turn from driveway or side street, 
stop or pass) without striking another vehicle or object in the roadway. 
FIGURE 2.02-J.  SIGHT DISTANCE 

Site Plan: A scaled drawing(s) illustrating existing conditions and containing the elements required herein 
as applicable to the proposed development to ensure compliance with zoning provisions. Sketch Plan: A preliminary drawing illustrating the general development of a site. 
Solar Energy Systems: 
1. 	
Building Integrated Photovoltaic (BIPV) Systems: A solar energy system that consists of integrat­ing photovoltaic modules into the building structure, such as the roof or the façade, and which does not alter the relief of the roof. 

2. 	
Ground-Mounted Solar Energy System: A solar energy system that is directly installed in the ground and is not attached or affixed to an existing structure. 

3. 	
Photovoltaic (PV) Systems: A solar energy system that produces electricity by the use of semicon­ductor devices, called photovoltaic cells, which generate electricity whenever sunlight strikes them. 







4. 	
Rooftop Solar System: A solar energy system in which solar panels are mounted on top of a roof either as a flush-mounted system or as modules fixed to frames which can be tilted. 

5. 	
Solar Collector: A solar photovoltaic cell, panel, or array, or solar hot air or water collector device, which relies upon solar radiation as an energy source for the generation of electricity or transfer of 


stored heat. 
6. 	
Solar Energy System: Solar collectors, controls, energy storage devices, heat pumps, heat exchang­ers, and other materials, hardware or equipment necessary to the process by which solar radiation is collected, converted into another form of energy, stored, protected from unnecessary dissipation, and distributed.  Solar systems include solar thermal, photovoltaic, and concentrated solar. 

7. 	
Solar Panel: A device for the direct conversion of solar energy into electricity. 

8. 	
Solar-Thermal Systems: Solar thermal systems directly heat water or other liquid using sunlight. The heated liquid is used for such purposes as space heating and cooling, domestic hot water, and heating pool water. 

9. 	
Wall-mounted Solar Energy System: A solar energy system that is installed flush to the surface of the wall of a permanent building. 


Special Land Use: A use of land which is permitted within a particular zoning district only if the applicable standards have been met.  A special land use requires that a special land use permit be obtained. 
Stadiums/Arenas: A large open or enclosed place used for sporting events and major events and partly or completely surrounded by tiers of seats for spectators. (See also Places of Assembly.) 
Storage Container:  A steel enclosure without wheels that is greater than two hundred (200) square feet in area designed for shipment, storage and handling. The container is typically used for the storage, but not 
limited to, merchandise, fixtures, building materials, lay-aways, and used articles. 
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it (See Figure 2.02-A. Basement & Story.) 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, excepting utility poles, sewage pumping stations, and utility manholes. 
Subdivision: A partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the owner or any legal representatives for the purpose of sale, or lease for more than one (1) year, or building development. 





Substantial Improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure located within the 100­year floodplain, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either, (1) before improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is con­sidered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building com­mences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
1. 	
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 

2. 	
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Michigan Register of Historic Places. 


Temporary Use of Building or Land: A use of a building or premises permitted to exist during construction of the main building, or for a specified period of time. 
Township Board: The Charter Township of Delta Board. 
Trade Contractor: A building or portion thereof where building and construction trade services are provided to the public. “Trade Contractor” shall include, but will not be limited to, contractor offices, including landscap­er’s showrooms, construction supplies and storage including plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and building equipment and materials, and other uses similar in nature and impact. 
Trip: A single or one-way vehicle movement either to or from a site or a specific land use. 
Trip Ends: The total number of trips entering or leaving a site or a specific land use over a designated period of time. 
Trip Generation (Rates): The number of trip ends associated with a development; based on building area, lot 
size, number of units/employees or other parameters. The number can be estimated using actual data from comparable developments or information given in nationally accepted sources such as the “Trip Generation Manual” developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or the Federal Highway Administration 
(FHWA). 
Truck Terminal: A structure to which goods, except raw or unprocessed agricultural products, natural miner­
als, or the resources, are delivered for immediate distribution or to be amalgamated or divided for delivery in larger or smaller units to other points, or for distribution, amalgamation, or division involving transfer to other modes of transportation. 
U-Pick Operation:  A farm that provides the opportunity for customers to harvest their own farm products directly from the plant. 
Use:  The lawful purpose for which land, premises, a structure, or building thereon is designed, arranged, in­tended, or for which is occupied, maintained, let, or leased for a use or activity. 
Variance: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of 





the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in a practical difficulty. Variances are autho­rized by the Zoning Board of Appeals under the provisions of this Ordinance and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act as amended. 
Vehicle: Unless specifically stated otherwise, a motorized vehicle intended to be driven on roads or trails, such as cars, pickup trucks, vans, and motorcycles, and other vehicles defined as motor vehicles by the Michigan ve­hicle code. 
Vehicle/Equipment Storage Yards: Any operation or business activity in which the principal use is the storage of inoperative, wrecked, unlicensed, and/or repossessed vehicles, abandoned vehicles, and/or vehicles to be sold. Such operation or business shall not include salvage activities. 
Vehicle Fueling Station: A building or premises used primarily for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles; together with the sale of minor accessories and services for mo­
tor vehicles such as: filling tires with air, checking fluid levels, adding water to radiators, and similar activities; as 
well as, selling convenience foods and other such items through a convenience store. Minor or major automobile 
repair is expressly excluded from this definition. 
Vehicle Rental Facility: Commercial establishments where motor vehicles are kept and maintained for lease, 
where such vehicles are dropped off or picked up, and where customers complete all transactions necessary for 
the short-term lease of such vehicle. 
Vehicle Repair Station, Major: A facility which offers and provides for, repair of mechanical, electrical, cooling, exhaust, brake, and power system repairs, including: transmission repair shops, shops used for the internal re­pair or engine components and drive train repair, and radiator repair shops. 
Vehicle Repair Station, Minor: A facility which offers or provides for, repair of mechanical, electrical, cooling, 
exhaust, brake, and power system repairs.  Collision shops, transmission repair shops, shops used for the internal repair of engine components and drive train repair, and radiator repair, are expressly excluded from this defini­tion. 
Vehicle Sales/Leasing and Service Facility: A building or premises used primarily for the sale, lease, or rental of 
new and/or used vehicles. These facilities may also provide both minor and major repair services in a completely 
enclosed building as an ancillary service. 
Vehicle Wash:  The primary purpose of a building, or portion, thereof, to wash vehicles either by automatic or self-service means. 
Veterinary Clinic: An enclosed building wherein animals including domestic household pets and farm animals are given medical or surgical treatment, and used as a boarding place for such animals limited to short time boarding incidental to clinic or hospital use. Such clinics include only those under direction of a licensed veteri­narian registered in the State of Michigan. Such animal clinics shall be constructed in such a manner that noise 
and odor are not discernible beyond the property upon which it is located. 
Wall:  An obscuring structure of definite height and location, constructed of masonry, concrete, or similar ap­proved material. 
Warehouse: A building used primarily for storage of goods and materials.  





Watercourse: An open conduit either naturally or artificially created which periodically or continuously 
contains moving water draining an area of at least two (2) square miles. 
Wetlands: Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support (and that under normal circumstances does support) wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly 
referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh. 
Wild Animal: A dangerous, wild, or undomesticated animal which is not of a species customarily used as an ordinary household pet, but one which would ordinarily be confined to a zoo, or one which would ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other country. Such animals would cause a reasonable 
person to be fearful of bodily harm. 
Wind Energy Conversion System: “Wind Energy Conversion System” (WECS) is any system or assembly that contains any or all of the following characteristics: 
1. 	
A windmill, turbine, or any similar machine designed to be operated by the wind; 

2. 	
A surface area, either variable or fixed, for utilizing the wind for electrical or me­chanical power; 

3. 	
A shaft, gearing, belt, or coupling utilized to convey the rotation of the surface areas turned by the wind into a form suitable for driving a generator, alternator, or other mechanical or electricity producing device; 

4. 	
A generator, alternator, or other device utilized to convert the mechanical energy generated by the wind into electrical energy; 

5. 	
A tower, pylon, or other structure upon which any, all, or some combination of the above are mounted, and; 

6. 	
Any wind monitoring station shall be exempt from the requirements of this ordi­nance. 


Wind Energy Conversion System, Large: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a wind turbine(s), tower, and associated control or conversion electronics, which if located in the RA, RB, RC, or RM zoning 
districts exceeds fifty (50) feet (as defined herein), or if located in the NR, AG1, AG2, O, or C zoning districts exceeds seventy (70) feet (as defined herein), or if located in the I zoning district has a rated capacity of more than ten (10) Kilowatts (kW). 
Wind Energy Conversion System, Small: A wind energy conversion system consisting of wind turbines, towers, and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than ten 
(10) Kilowatts (kW) and which is intended to reduce or replace the onsite consumption of utility power. 
Wireless Communication Facilities: Shall mean and include all structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to: radio towers; television towers; telephone devices and exchanges; 
microwave relay towers; telephone transmission equipment; and building and commercial mobile radio 
service facilities. Not included in this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short wave facilities; ham amateur radio facilities; satellite dishes; and governmental facilities which may be subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority. For purposes of this Ordinance, the fol­lowing additional terms are defined: 





1. 	
Attached Wireless Communications Facilities: Any wireless communication facility affixed to an existing structure, including, but not limited to a building, tower, water tank, utility pole, or other feature utilized to receive and transmit federally or state licensed communication services via duly licensed segments of the radio frequency spectrum. This definition shall not include support struc­tures. 

2. 	
Colocation: The location by two (2) or more wireless communication providers of wireless com­munication facilities on a common structure, tower, or building, with the view toward reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas within the com­munity. 

3. 	
Stealth Wireless Facility Design: A wireless communications facility which is not recognizable as a conventional facility (e.g., a metal lattice or monopole), but instead is disguised, concealed, or ar­chitecturally integrated into a building’s design in such a fashion as to conform to its surroundings. 

4. 	
Wireless Communication Support Structures: Structures erected or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles, and guyed towers, or other structures which 


appear to be something other than a mere support structure. 
Yard: The open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied, and unobstructed from the 
ground upward except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, and as defined herein: 
1. 	
Front Yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the foundation or building wall of the main building, whichever is closest.  There shall be maintained a front yard on each street side of a corner lot. 

2. 	
Rear Yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the foundation or building wall of the main building, whichever is closest.  In the case of corner lots there shall only be one (1) rear yard which shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator. 

3. 	
Side Yard:  An open space between the principal building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side lot line to the nearest point of the foundation or building wall of the main building, which­ever is closest. 









FIGURE 2.02-K. CORNER LOT LAYOUT 








FIGURE 2.02-L. INTERIOR LOT LAYOUT 


Zero Lot Line:  The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the building’s sides rest directly on a lot line. 






FIGURE 2.02-M. ZERO LOT LINE 


Zoning Administrator: An individual, or his/her deputy, appointed by the Township Board delegated to administer the Delta Charter Township Zoning Ordinance. 
Zoning Board of Appeals:  The Charter Township of Delta Zoning Board of Appeals created under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended. 
Zoning District: An area of land for which there are uniform regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, density of development, yard requirements, and height regulations. 







This page is intentionally left blank. 




CHAPTER 3 
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
SECTION 3.01 AUTHORITY 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered by the Delta Charter Township Planning Commis­sion and the Delta Township Board in accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, 2008 PA 33 (MCL 125.3801 et. seq.), as amended; the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, 2006 PA 110 (MCL 125.3101 et. seq.), as amended; and the Charter Township Act, 1947 PA 359 (MCL 42.1 et. seq.), as amended. 
SECTION 3.02 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 
A. 	The Township Board shall employ a Zoning Administrator to effectuate administration of this Or­dinance. 
B. 	The Zoning Administrator or their deputy shall have the power to grant certificates of zoning com­pliance and to make inspections of premises necessary to carry out their duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance, and to otherwise carry out the duties assigned herein. 
C. 	The Zoning Administrator, or their deputy, shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, build­ings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures; or shall take any other action autho­rized by this Ordinance to ensure compliance with, or prevent violations of its provisions. 
SECTION 3.03 CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE 
A. 	Purpose. A permit for erection, alteration, or moving of any building shall not be issued by the Zoning Administrator until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued.  It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof 
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, wholly or partly altered, or enlarged in its use or structure until a Certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. The Certificate shall state that the building, structure, lot, and use thereof, conform to the require­ments of this Ordinance. 
B. 	Requirements. When a building permit is required for new construction, application for a Certifi­cate of Zoning Compliance shall accompany or precede the application for a building permit. In all other cases in which a building permit is not required, the application for a Certificate of Zoning 
Compliance shall be made prior to the date when a new or enlarged use of a building or lot or part thereof is intended to begin. The Zoning Administrator shall retain the original copy for their files and said record shall be open for public inspection. 
SECTION 3.04 NOTICES 
Notices of hearings regarding zoning amendments, special land uses, and matters before the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be provided as required by the Zoning Enabling Act. 





SECTION 3.05 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE 
A. 	Purpose and Intent.  In the interest of ensuring compliance with the Zoning Ordinance provisions, the Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to deposit a performance guarantee for any or all site improvements required by this Ordinance.  The purpose of the performance guarantee is to ensure completion of improvements connected with the proposed use as required by this Ordi­nance including but not limited to: the installation of roadways, landscaping, curbs, lighting, drain­age, sidewalks, pathways, driveways, utilities, and similar items. 
A performance guarantee may be a cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit in the amount of the cost of the improvements based upon an itemized estimate submitted by the applicant and verified by the Township. The Township shall be authorized to employ the Zoning Ad­ministrator, Township Engineer and/or Township consultants to review cost estimates, and conduct periodic inspection of the progress of improvements. 
B. 	Procedure.  Performance guarantees shall be processed in the following manner: 
1. 	
Upon receipt of the required performance guarantee, and provided all other applicable standards and requirements have been met, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall is­sue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. 

2. 	
The Zoning Administrator, upon the written request of the obligor, shall rebate portions of the performance guarantee upon determination that the improvements for which the rebate has been requested have been satisfactorily completed. The portion of the perfor­mance guarantee to be rebated shall be in the same amount as stated in the itemized cost 

estimate for the applicable improvement. 

3. 	
Upon completion of the required improvements, the obligor shall provide the Zoning Ad­ministrator with a written notice of the completion. Within thirty (30) days of the obligor’s notice, the Zoning Administrator shall inspect the improvements and inform the obligor whether the improvements are approved, partially approved, or rejected. If rejected, the Zoning Administrator shall provide a written statement of the reasons for rejection. If the improvements are partially approved, the Zoning Administrator shall release the obligor from liability pertaining to the relevant portions of the performance guarantee, and inform 


the obligor of the remainder of the performance guarantee retained. 
4. 	In the event the applicant defaults in making the improvements for which the performance guarantee was required, the Township shall have the right to use the performance guar­antee deposited and any interest earned thereon to complete the improvements through 
contract or otherwise, including, specifically, the right to enter upon the subject property to 
make the improvements. 
5. 	If the performance guarantee is not sufficient to allow the Township to complete the re­quired improvements for which such guarantee was posted, the applicant shall be required 
to pay the Township the amount by which the cost of completing the improvements exceeds the amount of the performance guarantee, or a portion thereof, to complete the required improvement. Any amounts remaining after said completion shall be applied first to the Township’s administrative costs including, without limitation, attorney fees, planning con­sultant fees, and engineering consultant fees in completing the improvement with any 





balance remaining being refunded to the applicant. 
6. 	A record of authorized performance guarantees shall be maintained by the Zoning Admin­istrator. 
SECTION 3.06 APPLICATION FEES 
Before considering any application submitted in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance, a fee shall be collected by the Zoning Administrator. The fee for the various applications shall be set from time to time by the Township Board by resolution. 
SECTION 3.07 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
A. 	Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall constitute a violation and shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction as prescribed by Chapter 1 of the Code of 
Ordinances of the Charter Township of Delta. 
B. 	This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator, or designees who are hereby des­
ignated as the authorized Township Official to issue municipal civil infraction violation notices, directing alleged violators to appear at the Township of Delta Municipal Violations Bureau as pro­vided by the Code of Ordinances of the Charter Township of Delta. 
C. 	The issuance of municipal civil infraction citations shall be pursuant to the Code of Ordinances of the Charter Township of Delta. 
SECTION 3.08 COMPLIANCE WITH PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES 
Building permits or Certificates of Zoning Compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applica­tion authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applica­tions, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance, and punishable as provided by Section 3.07, herein. 







This page is intentionally left blank. 




CHAPTER 4 
DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
SECTION 4.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
Delta Charter Township is hereby divided into the following zoning districts to be known as and having the 
following names and symbols: 
Natural Resources District (NR) 
Agricultural District (AG1) 

Agricultural/Residential District (AG2) 
Very Low Density Residential District (RA) 
Low Density Residential District (RB) 
Moderate Density Residential District (RC) 
Multiple-Family Residential District (RM) 
Office District (O) 

Commercial District (C) 
Industrial District (I) 

West Saginaw Overlay District (WSOD) 
SECTION 4.02 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 
A. 	Official Zoning Map of Delta Charter Township. The zoning districts are bounded and defined as shown on a map entitled “Official Zoning Map of Delta Charter Township” and said map, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this Ordinance. 
B. 	Signature and Seal. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Township Supervisor, attested by the Township Clerk and bear the seal of the Township under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in the Delta Charter Town­ship Zoning Ordinance “ together with the effective date of this Ordinance. 
C. 	Changes due to the Zoning Enabling Act.  If, in accordance with the procedures of this Ordinance and of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended, a change is made in a zoning district bound­ary, such change shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map by the Township Zoning Administrator promptly after the Ordinance authorizing such change shall have been adopted and published. A date shall be affixed to the Official Zoning Map noting revisions to the Map. No change in the Of­ficial Zoning Map of any other nature shall be made unless authorized by the Zoning Board of Ap­peals, and then only by the Township’s Zoning Administrator. Any change in corporate boundaries 
within the Township shall be recorded on the Official Zoning Map in conformity with procedures 
set forth herein.  





D. 	Damaged, Destroyed, Lost, or Difficult to Interpret. In the event that the Official Zoning Map be­comes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of chang­es made thereto, the Township Board may, by ordinance, adopt a new Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions on the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such corrections shall have the effect of amending the Zoning Ordinance or the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Township Supervisor, attested by the Township Clerk, and bear the seal of the Township under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Of­ficial Zoning Map referred to in the Zoning Ordinance of Delta Charter Township, adopted on (date) which replaces and supersedes the Official Zoning Map which was adopted on (date).  
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or totally destroyed, the prior map or any signifi­cant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved together with all available records pertaining to its 
adoption or amendment. 
E. 	Location. Regardless of the existence of reported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map, which shall be located in the office of the Township’s Zoning Administrator and open to public inspection, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of any land, parcel, lot, district, use, building or structure in the Township. 
SECTION 4.03 RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules for interpretation shall govern: 
A. 	Centerline. A boundary indicated as approximately following the centerline of a highway, street, al­ley, or easement shall be construed as following such centerline. 
B. 	Recorded Lot Line.  A boundary indicated as approximately following a recorded lot line or the line bounding a parcel shall be construed as following such line. 
C. 	Corporate Boundary. A boundary indicated as approximately following the municipal boundary line of a city, village, or township shall be construed as following such line. 
D. 	Railroad.  A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be construed as following the right­of-way line. 
E. 	Shoreline. A boundary indicated as following a shoreline shall be construed as following such shore­line, and in the event of a change in a shoreline, shall be construed as following the actual shoreline. 
F. 	Body of Water.  A boundary indicated as following the centerline of a stream, river, canal, lake or other body of water shall be construed as following such centerline. 
G. 	Parallel or Extension.  A boundary indicated as parallel to, or an extension of, a feature indicated in 
this Section shall be so construed. 
H. 	Variance. Where a natural or manmade feature existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in any other circumstances not covered by this Section the Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the location of the zoning district boundary. 





I. 	Distance. A distance not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map to the nearest foot. 
J. 	Division through a Lot.  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which is in single ownership at 
the time of adoption of the Zoning Ordinance the regulations for the more restrictive district shall apply for the entire lot or parcel. 
SECTION 4.04 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
No structure shall be constructed, erected, placed or maintained and no use shall be commenced or con­
tinued within Delta Charter Township except as specifically, or by necessary implication, authorized by this Ordinance, in the zoning district in which said structure or use is to be located.  Special Land Uses shall be allowed only if listed as a special use specifically, or by necessary implication, in the zoning district in which the use is to be located, and only after a Special Land Use permit has been approved by the Township Board. Where a lot is devoted to a principal use, either permitted by right or as a special use, accessory uses and structures are authorized except as prohibited specifically or by necessary implication, provided such use or structure meets the definition of accessory use, building or structure in this Ordinance. 
SECTION 4.05 SCOPE OF PROVISIONS 
A. 	Effective Date.  Where a building permit for a building or structure, use of building or structure, or use of lot or parcel, has been issued in accordance with the law prior to effective date of this Ordi­nance and provided that construction is begun within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of such effective date and diligently pursued to completion, and said building or structure, use of building or structure, or use of lot or parcel, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit has been used, and further, may upon completion be oc­cupied by the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of Chapter 14 of this Ordinance. 
B. 	Minimum Requirements. No yard or lot existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.  Yards or lots 
created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements 
established by this Ordinance. 

SECTION 4.06 NATURAL RESOURCES DISTRICT (NR) 
A. 	Intent. It is the intent of this district to create, preserve, and enhance parkland, open space, and 
undeveloped natural amenities to meet the active and passive recreational needs of township residents, encourage and protect the conservation of undeveloped areas, promote recreational uses that are compatible with surrounding land uses, and prevent the encroachment of incompat­ible land uses on undeveloped areas.  This district is designed to protect and enhance the natural 
resources, natural amenities and natural habitats of wildlife, and public recreation areas. 
B. 	Use Regulations. Section 4.18 sets forth permitted, accessory and special land uses within the NR district. 
C. 	Dimensional Requirements.  The following dimensional requirements shall apply to development 
within the NR District: 






TABLE 4.06-C.1. NATURAL RESOURCES (NR) DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Minimum Lot Area  10 acres  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  380 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  5%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  75 feet  
Side  50 feet  
Rear  50 feet  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  1 story  1,200 square feet at grade  
1.5 story  750 square feet at grade  
2 story  700 square feet at grade  
Split/Bi-level  900 square feet at grade  

FIGURE 4.06-C.1. NATURAL RESOURCES (NR) DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL 

REQUIREMENTS 





D. 	Site Development Standards. 
1. 	
In addition to those bulk regulations as listed in Table 4.06-C.1., all development shall comply with supplemental development regulations as listed in Section 4.17. 

2. 	
Site Plan Review is required as per the requirements of Section 6.02, herein. 

3. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall be regulated in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.02. 

4. 	
Single family dwellings, either constructed on the site or manufactured off the site, shall comply with the following regulations. 

(a) 	
Any one floor of a single family detached dwelling shall contain a minimum width of twenty (20) feet across any horizontal elevation, exclusive of garage, basement or porch. 

(b) 	
The foregoing regulations shall not apply to a manufactured dwelling or mobile home located in a licensed manufactured housing development, except to the 




extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required herein. 
SECTION 4.07 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (AG1) 
A. 	Intent. It is the intent of this district to preserve, enhance and stabilize existing areas within the Township which are presently used for general farming as well as areas which, because of their soil characteristics, should be conserved for agricultural uses. In addition, premature urban devel­opment within rural areas can result in increased public costs because of the necessity of serving 
scattered urban development with water, sanitary sewers, storm drains, improved roads and other 
public services. 
B. 	Use Regulations. Section 4.18 sets forth permitted, accessory and special land uses within the AG1 district. 
C. 	Dimensional Requirements.  The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the AG1 
District: 






TABLE 4.07-C.1.  AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (AG1) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


Minimum Lot Area  20 acres  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  380 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  5%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  75 feet  
Side  50 feet  
Rear  50 feet  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  1 story  1,200 square feet at grade  
1.5 story  750 square feet at grade  
2 story  700 square feet at grade  
Split/Bi-level  900 square feet at grade  






D. 	Site Development Standards. 
1. 	
In addition to those bulk regulations as listed Table 4.07-C.1., all development shall comply with supplemental development regulations as listed in Section 4.17. 

2. 	
Site Plan Review is required as per the requirements of Section 6.02, herein. 

3. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall be regulated in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.02. 

4. 	
The same requirements for single family dwellings as contained in Section 4.06 D.4. 


SECTION 4.08 AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (AG2) 
A. 	Intent. It is the intent of this district to preserve a predominately rural character while permitting limited agricultural activities. In addition to the single family dwellings permitted in this district, there are specific permitted uses which are regulated to ensure compatibility. Properties in this 
district can typically be served by private wells and on-site sewage disposal systems. 
B. 	Use Regulations. Section 4.18 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses within the AG2 district. 
C. 	Dimensional Requirements.  The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the AG2 
district: 






TABLE 4.08-C.1.  AGRICULTURAL/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (AG2) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Minimum Lot Area  2 acres  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  165 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  10%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  50 feet  
Side  25 feet  
Rear  50 feet  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  1 story  1,200 square feet at grade  
1.5 story  750 square feet at grade  
2 story  700 square feet at grade  
Split/Bi-level  900 square feet at grade  

FIGURE 4.08-C.1. AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (AG2) DIMENSIONAL 

REQUIREMENTS 





D. 	Site Development Standards. 
1. 	
In addition to those bulk regulations as listed in Table 4.08-C.1., all development shall comply with supplemental development regulations as listed in Section 4.17. 

2. 	
Site Plan Review is required as per the requirements of Section 6.02, herein. 

3. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall be regulated in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.02. 

4. 	
The same requirements for single family dwellings as contained in Section 4.06 D.4. 


SECTION 4.09 VERY LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RA) 
A. 	Intent. It is the intent of this district to provide for large lot residential development primarily limited to single family detached dwellings. Properties in this district generally are not served by the public water supply and sanitary sewage system. Specific non-residential uses are permitted in this district with the intent that they will be compatible with the residential character of this 
district. 
B. 	Use Regulations. Section 4.18 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses within the RA District. 
C. 	Dimensional Requirements.  The following dimensional requirements shall apply to development 
within the RA District: 






TABLE 4.09-C.1.  VERY LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RA) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Minimum Lot Area  1 acre  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  Interior Lot  100 feet  
Corner Lot  120 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  20%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  50 feet  
Side  10 feet  
Rear  40 feet  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  1 story  1,200 square feet at grade  
1.5 story  750 square feet at grade  
2 story  700 square feet at grade  
Split/Bi-level  900 square feet at grade  
Maximum Residential Density  1 dwelling unit / acre  

FIGURE 4.09-C.1. VERY LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RA) DIMENSIONAL 

REQUIREMENTS 





D. 	Site Development Standards 
1. 	
In addition to those bulk regulations as listed in Table 4.09-C.1., all development shall comply with supplemental development regulations as listed in Section 4.17. 

2. 	
Site Plan Review as per the requirements of Section 6.02, herein. 

3. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall be regulated in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.02. 

4. 	
The same requirements for single family dwellings as contained in Section 4.06 D.4. 


SECTION 4.10 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RB) 
A. 	Intent.  It is the intent of this district to provide for low density residential development consist­ing primarily of single-family detached dwellings. The regulations for this district are designed to create and preserve a suburban character in those areas served by the public water supply system 
and the sanitary sewage system. Specific non-residential uses are permitted in this district subject to regulations intended to ensure their compatibility with residential uses. 
B. 	Use Regulations. Section 4.18 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses within the RB district. 
C. 	Dimensional Requirements.  The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the RB 
district: 






TABLE 4.10-C.1.  LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RB) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Minimum Lot Area  12,000 square feet  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  Interior Lot  80 feet  
Corner Lot  95 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  30%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  30 feet  
Side  8 feet  
Rear  30 feet  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  1 story  1,200 square feet at grade  
1.5 story  750 square feet at grade  
2 story  700 square feet at grade  
Split/Bi-level  900 square feet at grade  
Maximum Residential Density  3.63 dwelling units / acre  
*Accessory Building Standards - Table 9.02-A.1*  


FIGURE 4.10-C.1. LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RB) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 






D. 	Site Development Standards. 
1. 	
In addition to those bulk regulations as listed in Table 4.10-C.1., all development shall com­ply with supplemental development regulations as listed in Section 4.17. 

2. 	
Site Plan Review is required as per the requirements of Section 6.02, herein. 

3. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall be regulated in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.02. 

4. 	
The same requirements for single family dwellings as contained in Section 4.06 D.4. 


SECTION 4.11 MODERATE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RC) 
A. 	Intent. It is the intent of this district to achieve the same character, stability and sound residential environment as provided in the RB district. The primary difference in the RB and RC districts is that the latter permits a slightly higher density as well as attached housing options. There is no intent that the RC district will result in a residential development pattern of a lower quality than the RB district. 
B. 	Use Regulations. Section 4.18 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses within the RC district. 
C. 	Dimensional Requirements.  The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the develop­ment of residential dwellings within the RC District: 






TABLE 4.11-C.1.  MODERATE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RC) SINGLE FAMILY DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Minimum Lot Area  10,000 square feet  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  Interior Lot  65 feet  
Corner Lot  80 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  30%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  30 feet  
Side  6.5 feet  
Rear  30 feet  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  1 story  1,000 square feet at grade  
1.5 story  750 square feet at grade  
2 story  700 square feet at grade  
Split/Bi-level  900 square feet at grade  
Maximum Residential Density  4.36 dwelling units / acre  
*Accessory Building Standards - Table 9.02-A.1*  

FIGURE 4.11-C.1. MODERATE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RC) SINGLE FAMILY 

DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS TABLE 4.11-C.2. MODERATE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RC) TWO-FAMILY DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 



Minimum Lot Area  9,000 square feet/d.u.  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  Interior Lot  80 feet  
Corner Lot  80 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  30%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  30 feet  
Side  8 feet  
Rear  30 feet  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  700 square feet /dwelling unit  
Maximum Residential Density  4.84 dwelling units /acre  

FIGURE 4.11-C.2. MODERATE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RC) TWO-FAMILY 

DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS TABLE 4.11-C.3.  MODERATE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RC) MULTIPLE­FAMILY DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 







Minimum Lot Area  18,000 square feet/d.u.  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  Interior Lot  100 feet  
Corner Lot  100 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  30%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  30 feet  
Side  18 feet  
Rear  40 feet  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  550 square feet /dwelling unit  
Maximum Residential Density  4.84 dwelling units /acre  

FIGURE 4.11-C.3. MODERATE DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RC) MULTIPLE­

FAMILY DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 





D. 	Site Development Standards. 
1. 	
In addition to those bulk regulations as listed in Tables 4.11-C.1.; 4.11-C.2.; and 4.11-C.3., all development shall comply with supplemental development regulations as listed in Section 

2. 	
Site Plan Review is required as per the requirements of Section 6.02, herein. 

3. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall be regulated in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.02. 

4. 	
The same requirements for single family dwellings as contained in Section 4.06 D.4. 


4.17. 
SECTION 4.12 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RM) 
A. 	Intent. It is the intent of this district to provide multiple-family residential uses at a higher density than single-family districts, but at no lower standards of quality.  Uses in this district are required 
to be served by adequate public infrastructure. The regulations herein provide compatibility with adjacent properties while achieving the strategies recommended in the Comprehensive Plan. 
B. 	Use Regulations. Section 4.18 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses within the RM district. 
C. 	Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the RM district. 






TABLE 4.12-C.1.  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RM) TWO-FAMILY DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Minimum Lot Area  18,000 square feet  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  Interior Lot  70 feet  
Corner Lot  80 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  40%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Build­ings  Front  30 feet  
Side  7 feet  
Rear  25 feet  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  700 square feet / dwelling unit  
Maximum Residential Density  4.84 dwelling units / acre  

FIGURE 4.12-C.1. MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RM) TWO-FAMILY 

DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS TABLE 4.12-C.2.  MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RM) MULTIPLE-FAMILY DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 







Minimum Lot Area  2 acres  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  200 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  40%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  40 feet1  
Side  40 feet1  
Rear  40 feet  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet2  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  550 square feet / dwelling unit  
Maximum Residential Density  Up to 11 dwelling units / acre  
1Required side and rear setbacks shall be increased to 60 feet when abutting RA or RB zoning districts. 2Maximum building height may be increased by one (1)-foot for each two (2) feet of additional, front, side and rear setback provided, over and above the minimum required to a maximum height of sixty (60) feet.  

FIGURE 4.12-C.2. MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RM) MULTIPLE­

FAMILY DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 





D. 	Site Development Standards. 
1. 	
In addition to those bulk regulations as listed in Tables 4.12-C.1. and 4.12-C.2., all develop­ment shall comply with supplemental development regulations as listed in Section 4.17. 

2. 	
Site Plan Review is required as per the requirements of Section 6.02, herein. 

3. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall be regulated in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.02. 


SECTION 4.13 OFFICE DISTRICT (O) 
A. 	Intent. It is the intent of this district to provide for a variety of office uses of a business and profes­sional nature as well as activities compatible with these uses. It is also the intent of this district to direct office uses to areas having access to arterial streets. The regulations contained herein are de­signed to encourage a harmonious relationship between the Office district and abutting land uses. 
B. 	Use Regulations. Section 4.18 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses within the O district. 
C. 	Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the O district. 






TABLE 4.13-C.1.  OFFICE DISTRICT (O) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


Minimum Lot Area  15,000 square feet  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  100 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  40%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  50 feet  
Side  20 feet (total both sides)1  
Rear  20 feet1  
Maximum Building Height  45 feet2  
1 Required side and rear setbacks shall be increased to 40 feet when abutting RA, RB, RC or RM zoning districts. 2 Maximum building height may be increased by one (1)-foot for each two (2) feet of additional front, side and rear setback provided over and above the minimum required to a maximum height of 60 feet.  


FIGURE 4.13-C.1. OFFICE DISTRICT (O) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 






D. 	Site Development Standards. 
1. 	
In addition to those bulk regulations as listed in Table 4.13-C.1., all development shall ap­ply to supplemental development regulations as listed in Section 4.17. 

2. 	
Site Plan Review is required as per the requirements of Section 6.02, herein. 

3. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall be regulated in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.02. 


SECTION 4.14 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C) 
A. 	Intent.  It is the intent of this district to provide commercial enterprises which provide convenient shopping and services addressing day to day demands as well as serving the community-wide needs. The regulations are designed to provide compatibility with surrounding land uses and en­sure the provision of adequate infrastructure.  Commercial areas are to be located and designed as recommended in the Comprehensive Plan with the resulting development being safe, attractive and walkable. 
B. 	Use Regulations. Section 4.18 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses within the C district. 
C. 	Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the C district. 






TABLE 4.14-C.1.  COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


Minimum Lot Area  15,000 square feet  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  100 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  40%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  50 feet  
Side  20 feet (total both sides)1  
Rear  20 feet1  
Maximum Building Height  45 feet2  
1 Required side and rear setbacks shall be increased to 40 feet when abutting RA, RB, RC or RM zoning districts. 2 Maximum building height may be increased by one (1)-foot for each two (2) feet of additional front, side and rear setback provided over and above the minimum required to a maximum height of 60 feet.  


FIGURE 4.14-C.1. COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (C) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 






D. 	Site Development Standards 
1. 	
In addition to those bulk regulations as listed in Table 4.14-C.1., all development shall comply with supplemental development regulations as listed in Section 4.17. 

2. 	
Site Plan Review is required as per the requirements of Section 6.02, herein. 

3. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall be regulated in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.02. 


SECTION 4.15 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I) 
A. 	Intent. It is the intent of this district to provide areas suitable for a variety of warehousing, in­dustrial and manufacturing uses as recommended in the Comprehensive Plan. The regulations for this district are designed to result in industrial areas which will be compatible with one another as well as adjacent land uses. Properties in this district are to be served by public water and sanitary sewage and also adequate infrastructure. These regulations are also intended to protect existing 
industrial uses and prevent the establishment of uses which are more suitably provided in other districts. 
B. 	Use Regulations. Section 4.18 sets forth permitted, accessory, and special land uses within the I district. 
C. 	Dimensional Requirements. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to the I district: 






TABLE 4.15-C.1.  INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I) DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


Minimum Lot Area  1 acre  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  150 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  50%  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  75 feet1  
Side  25 feet (each side)2  
Rear  30 feet1,2  
Maximum Building Height  No Limit  
1 Industrially zoned subdivision lots existing as of December 14, 1990 shall be permitted a minimum front set­back of 50 feet, and a minimum rear setback of 25 feet. 2 Required side and rear setbacks shall be increased to 100 feet when abutting RA, RB, RC or RM zoning districts.  


FIGURE 4.15-C.1. INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I) DIMENSIONAL REQUIRMENTS 






D. 	Site Development Standards. 
1. 	
In addition to those bulk regulations as listed in Table 4.15-C.1., all development shall com­ply with supplemental development regulations as listed in Section 4.17. 

2. 	
Site Plan Review is required as per the requirements of Section 6.02, herein. 

3. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall be regulated in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.02. 

4. 	
Living quarters of a watchman or caretaker may be provided on the premises. Such quarters shall meet the minimum floor area requirements of the RM District and meet all setback requirements as outlined in Table 4.15-C.1. 

5. 	
All goods or materials stored outside which are visible from a public road shall be screened by an opaque fence or wall a minimum of six (6) feet in height. 


SECTION 4.16 WEST SAGINAW OVERLAY DISTRICT (WSOD) 
A. 	Intent. It is the intent of this district to encourage the redevelopment of existing properties in a manner that permits flexibility while maintaining compatibility with adjacent uses and provides adequate infrastructure. The district is typified by smaller parcels with limited depth, older build­ings and numerous non-conforming buildings and parcels. The regulations herein are intended to promote mixed land uses, enhance the streetscape, facilitate walkability, and improve aesthetics. 
B. 	District Boundaries. The WSOD includes all properties having direct frontage on West Saginaw Highway between Elmwood Road and Waverly Road. 






FIGURE 4.16-B.1. WEST SAGINAW OVERLAY DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

R
I

S
T
H
EO
RM 
BAYBERRY 
MIDLAND 
RB Low Density Residential RC Moderate Density Residential RM Multiple Family Residential O Office C Commercial 
RB 
ADDI SON 
RC 
RC 
O
RC 
RM
C 
O 
C
C
OO 
SAGINAW 
C
O 
C 
RM
O 
RC 

O

RM 

LARIAT
ST IE FEL 
RM 

IVAN IVA N 
RB
RC 
HO OVER 
COLT
W
OO
D
A
L
E
D
O
R
N
ET

MA
L

I
C
H
A
R

D
J
U
L
I
A
N
W
N
I

FR
ED

H
A
R

I
ET
B
R
N
C
O

C
O
R

A
L
R
EN
K
ER
C
L
A
R
K

T
H
OM
A
S
L
.T
H
OM
A
S
L
.D
I
B

L
E

W
A
V
ER
L
Y 

G. 
H. 
I. 

Landscaping.  A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the site area shall be comprised of landscaping 
which may include the preservation of existing trees, planting of new trees and plant materials, installation of planting beds, and other practices as approved by the Zoning Administrator. Green­belts, buffer strips, and parking lot landscaping shall be credited towards the ten percent (10%) minimum. 
Building Design. 
1. 	Building materials for principal buildings shall include, but not be limited to, wood, brick, 
clapboards, glass, stone, and integrally tinted/textured concrete masonry units.  No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total exterior wall area of any principal building shall consist of, or be composed of vinyl, metal, aluminum, plastic, plain faced concrete masonry unit, precast concrete, cement plaster, exterior insulation finishing system, glass 
block, canvas awnings, asphalt shingles, or other materials determined by the Zoning Ad­ministrator to be comparable in grade and quality, or any combination thereof. The walls (north, south, east and west) of each building shall be considered separately for the pur­
pose of calculating the percentages of materials in compliance with the aforementioned 
standard.  
2. 	Ground floor exterior façades that face West Saginaw Highway shall have transparent win­dows and doorways that cover no less than forty (40) percent of their horizontal length. The windows and doors shall maintain the required transparency and shall not be covered 
over with boards, film, or paint. Security gates or grillwork on the inside or outside of the 
windows or doors must be primarily transparent. Window signs shall be regulated as per 
the requirements of the Delta Township Sign Ordinance. 
3. 	Building facades and exterior walls greater than fifty (50) feet in length, measured horizon­tally, shall incorporate recesses or projections with a minimum depth of five (5) feet along 
at least twenty percent (20%) for the length of the façade or wall. 
4. 	Parapets shall be provided to conceal flat roofs and rooftop equipment such as HVAC units from public view.  Buildings with pitched roofs shall provide overhanging eaves a minimum 
of twelve (12) inches including gutter, and an average slope greater than 4:12. 
5. 	Ground mounted HVAC and similar systems shall be screened from street level view on all sides by an opaque structure or appropriate landscape materials. 
General Design Practices. The following practices are encouraged when redeveloping properties in the WSOD:   
1. 	
Rehabilitation of properties which have become deteriorated or have non-conforming buildings. 

2. 	
Construction of mixed-use buildings with a combination of residential, office, and/or retail tenants. 

3. 	
Construction of multi-story buildings. 

4. 	
Limiting parking in the required front yard and, if such parking is provided, screening options shall be considered. 

5. 	
Use of ground signs, rather than pole signs for identification. 

6. 	
Provision of pedestrian-friendly features such as benches and shaded outdoor seating areas. 

7. 	
Use of underground storm water storage facilities rather than open detention/retention ponds. 









J. 	Signage. Signage within the WSOD shall be subject to the provisions of the Delta Township Sign Ordinance. 
K. 	Lighting.  All lighting within the WSOD shall be subject to the provisions of Section 12.05. 



SECTION 4.17 SUPPLEMENTAL DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS 
A. 	Continued Conformity with Bulk Regulations. The maintenance of setback, height, floor area ratio, coverage, open space, transition strip, lot area and lot area per dwelling unit required for one (1) use, lot, building or structure shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building or struc­ture or of the lot on which such use, building or structure is in existence.  Furthermore, no setback, height, floor area ratio, coverage, open space, transition strip, lot area per dwelling unit allocated to or required about or in connection with one (1) lot, use, building or structure may be allocated to 
any other lot, use, building or structure. 
B. 	Division of a Lot.  No one (1) lot, once designated and improved with a building or structure, shall be 
reduced in area, or divided into two (2) or more lots, and no portion of one (1) lot, once designated and improved with a building or structure, shall be sold unless each lot resulting from each such reduction, division or sale, and designated and improved with a building or structure, shall conform with all of the bulk and yard regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
C. 	Dwellings per Lot or Parcel.  A lot or parcel zoned NR, AG1, AG2, RA, RB, RC, or RM shall contain no more than one (1) single-family dwelling, nor more than one (1) two-family dwelling if two-family dwellings are permitted. This sub-section shall not apply to authorized Planned Unit Developments, Condominium Subdivisions, or Multiple-Family Dwelling Developments. 
D. 	Permitted Front Setback Reductions.  Where the front setback of existing building is less than the required minimum front setback required in the underlying zoning district, the minimum front set­
back for a proposed building shall be the average front setback of existing buildings on the same side 
of the street within two hundred (200) feet of the side yard property line of the proposed building 
site. There shall be two (2) existing buildings on the same side of the street within two hundred 
(200) feet of the side yard property line of the proposed building site in order to establish an average 
front setback, otherwise the minimum front setback specified in the underlying zoning district shall 
apply.  In no case shall the minimum required front setback be less than twenty (20) feet. 
E. 	Permitted Yard Encroachments.  
1. 	Certain architectural features such as cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys, pilasters and simi­





lar features may project three (3) feet into the required front setback areas, five (5) feet into required rear setback areas and two (2) feet into the required side setback area. 
2. 	
An unenclosed porch, deck, balcony or awning may project from a principal building into the required rear setback area for a distance not to exceed fifteen (15) feet; into a required front setback area for a distance not to exceed eight (8) feet; and into a required side set­back area for a distance not to exceed three (3) feet, but in no case shall a balcony, porch, or awning be placed closer than five (5) feet to any lot line. When projecting from a de­tached accessory building, an unenclosed porch, balcony or awning must comply with the minimum setback requirements for detached accessory buildings in Section 9.02. Physical structures relating to barrier-free access, such as ramps, shall not be required to comply with setback requirements. 

3. 	
There shall be a minimum distance of five (5) feet between the outside of a swimming pool wall and any property line. 

4. 	
Fire escapes and outside stairways, if of open construction, may project into a required yard to a maximum of five (5) feet. 


F. 	Permitted Height Exceptions. The following types of structural appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the maximum building height limitations of this Ordinance: 
1. 	Purely ornamental structural appurtenances such as church spires, belfries, cupolas, 
domes, ornamental towers, flag poles and monuments. 
2. 	
Appurtenances necessary to mechanical or structural functions, such as chimneys and smoke stacks, water tanks, elevator and stairwell penthouses, ventilators, bulkheads, per­sonal radio towers including masts and aerials, personal television antennas, poles and towers for electric power transmission and distribution, fire and hose towers, water trans­mission structures, cooling towers, barns as an accessory use to an agricultural enterprise, grain elevators, and silos. Satellite dish antennas shall conform to the provisions of Sec­tion 9.07. 

3. 	
Structural extensions deemed necessary for appropriate building design, such as cornices or parapet walls, may extend a maximum of five (5) feet above the maximum building height limitations, and shall have no window openings. 


G. 	Cul-de-Sac Lots. 
1. 	A lot shall be considered to be a cul-de-sac lot if the lot has more than one-half (0.5) of its required frontage on the cul-de-sac.  The one-half (0.5) required frontage shall be deter­
mined prior to reducing the required frontage permitted by subsection 3, below. 
2. 	
The cul-de-sac shall be determined to commence at the intersection of the radius of the cul-de-sac with the street right-of-way line. 

3. 	
A lot on a cul-de-sac shall have frontage on a cul-de-sac which is not less than eighty per­cent (80%) of the minimum lot width required for the zoning district in which it is located. 







H. Corner Lots. 
1. 	General provisions for corner lots: 
a. 	
The required front setback shall be measured from both front lot lines. For a corner lot with three (3) front setbacks, the remaining setback shall be a rear setback. 

b. 	
The remaining setbacks shall be a rear and a side setback. 

c. 	
The minimum lot width for corner lots as contained in the underlying zoning district shall apply to the two (2) lot lines adjacent to both streets. 

d. 	
The width of a corner lot shall be determined by the entire length of that front line which is opposite the rear lot line. 


2. 	Provisions regarding corner lots in the office and commercial zoning districts: 
a. 	For a corner lot which is completely within the office or commercial zoning district the setback along the secondary street(s), as determined by the Zoning Administra­tor, shall not be less than thirty (30) feet.  All other setbacks shall comply with the minimum setback requirements of the zoning district within which the lot is located. 
SECTION 4.18 DISTRICT USE TABLE 
A. Specified Uses.  In all Districts, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erect­
ed except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this 
Chapter. 
B. Schedule of Uses.  The Schedule of Use Regulations identifies uses as follows: 
1. 	
“P” identifies uses permitted by right. 

2. 	
“S” identifies uses requiring Special Land Use Approval as outlined in Chapter 8. 

3. 	
“A” identifies accessory uses. 

4. 	
No marking identifies uses not permitted. 








TABLE 4.18-B.1.  DISTRICT USE TABLE 

Use Category Agricultural Agricultural Processing and Food Storage  DISTRICT USE TABLE Districts  
 
 Specific Use Standard (Section) 
Agricultural/ Natural Resources  Residential  Office/ Commercial/ Industrial  
AG1  AG2  NR  RA  RB  RC  RM  O  C  I  

S  S  P  8.07  
Agricultural/Commercial Tourism  S  S  8.08  
Equestrian Facilities  P  P  P  
Farm Market  P  P  8.27  
Farm Operations  P  P  P  
Keeping of Livestock  P  P  
Livestock Production Facilities  P  8.37  
U-Pick Operation Residential Accessory Dwelling Units  P S  P S  
 S  S  S  
 
 
 
 8.27  

8.02  
Bed and Breakfast  S  S  S  S  S  8.10  
Condominium Subdivisions (Non-Residential only in O, C, & I districts)  S  S  S  S  S  S  8.17  
Dwellings, Multiple-family  S  P  
Dwellings, Multiple-family (on upper floors only in a mixed-use building)  S  8.39  
Dwellings, Single-Family Detached  P  P  A  P  P  P  
Dwellings, Single-Family Attached  S  P  8.58  
Dwellings, Two-Family  S  P  8.58  
Fraternities / Sororities  S  8.28  
Functional Family Dwellings  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  8.29  
Home Occupations  S  S  S  S  S  S  8.32  






Use Category  DISTRICT USE TABLE Districts  
 
 Specific Use Standard (Section) 
Agricultural/ Natural Resources  Residential  Office/ Commercial/ Industrial  
AG1  AG2  NR  RA  RB  RC  RM  O  C  I  
Manufactured Housing Communities  S  8.38  
Planned Unit Developments  S  S  S  
Senior Assisted Living  P  
Senior Independent Living Recreation Commercial Marinas, Boat Launching Facilities, and similar water related uses  
 S  S  
 
 
 P  
 
 
 

8.18  
Commercial Recreational Facility (Outdoor)  S  S  S  8.19  
Commercial Recreational Facility (Indoor)  P  
Conservation Area / Game Refuge / Forest Preserve  P  P  P  
Country Clubs  S  S  S  S  8.21  
Golf Courses  S  S  S  8.30  
Golf Driving Range  S  
Non-Commercial Parks, and Recreational Facilities  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Playground  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Public and Private Campground Institutional / Cultural Adult Day Care Center  S  S  S  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8.48  
S  S  8.03  
Adult Family Day Care Home  P  P  P  P  
Adult Group Day Care Home  S  S  S  8.05  
Adult Foster Care,  Congregate Facility  S  S  S  8.04  
Adult Foster Care, Family Home  P  P  P  P  P  8.04  
Adult Foster Care, Large Group Home  S  8.04  






Use Category  DISTRICT USE TABLE Districts  Specific Use Standard (Section) 
Agricultural/ Natural Resources  Residential  Office/ Commercial/ Industrial  
AG1  AG2  NR  RA  RB  RC  RM  O  C  I  
Adult Foster Care, Small Group Home  S  S  S  8.04  
Cemeteries  S  S  S  S  S  S  8.13  
Child Day Care Center/Pre­schools  S  S  8.14  
Child Family Day Care Homes  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Child Group Day Care Homes  S  S  S  S  S  S  8.15  
Convalescent Centers  S  S  S  S  S  8.20  
Essential Service, Minor Installation  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  
Essential Service, Major Installation  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  8.24  
Geothermal Energy Systems  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  
Hospitals  S  S  8.33  
Places of Worship  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  8.45  
Post-Secondary Schools (techni­cal, colleges, business schools)  P  P  P  8.46  
Primary / Secondary Schools  S  S  S  S  8.47  
Publicly Owned/Operated Office & Service Facilities  P  P  P  
Solar Energy Systems  (Refer to Table 8.57-D.1.)  
Wind Energy Conversion System – large  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  8.65  
Wind Energy Conversion System –small Retail, Entertainment, and Service Adult Use Business  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  8.66  
S  8.06  
Animal or Rescue Shelter  S  S  8.09  
Bar / Lounge  P  
Blood Plasma Center  S  8.11  






Use Category  DISTRICT USE TABLE Districts  
 
 Specific Use Standard (Section) 
Agricultural/ Natural Resources  Residential  Office/ Commercial/ Industrial  
AG1  AG2  NR  RA  RB  RC  RM  O  C  I  
Building Materials, Garden Centers, Nurseries and Similar Uses  P  8.12  
Business Service and Repair  P  P  
Club or Lodge  P  P  
Conference, Meeting and Banquet Facilities  P  P  
Dance, Martial Arts, Music, and Art Studios  P  P  
Drive-Up/ Drive-Through Facilities  S  8.23  
Durable Medical Supplies  P  
Financial Institutions, without Drive-Through Facilities  P  P  
Financial Institutions with Drive-Through Facilities  S  S  8.23  
Firearm Sales  P  
Hotel/Motel  S  P  8.34  
Funeral Home / Mortuary  P  P  
Kennels/Veterinary Care/ Pet Day Care  S  S  S  S  8.35  
Mixed Use Building  S  8.39  
Open Air Business, as a principal use  S  8.40  
Outdoor Seating and Service  A  A  8.42  
Personal services  P  P  
Pharmacies  P  P  
Places of Assembly  S  8.44  
Radio and Television Broadcast facilities (without towers)  P  P  






Use Category  DISTRICT USE TABLE Districts  
 
 Specific Use Standard (Section) 
Agricultural/ Natural Resources  Residential  Office/ Commercial/ Industrial  
AG1  AG2  NR  RA  RB  RC  RM  O  C  I  
Recording Studios  P  P  P  
Restaurants, Drive-In/ Drive-Through  S  8.23  
Restaurants, Sit-Down  S  P  8.56  
Retail, General  P  
Retail, Large-Scale  P  8.36  
Retail, Wholesale  P  P  
Shopping Centers Office Business Services  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 P  P P  
 


Data Processing and Computing Centers  P  P  P  
High-Rise Buildings  S  S  8.31  
Medical Clinics  P  P  
Medical Laboratories  P  P  
Offices, General  P  P  
Professional and Medical Offices  P  P  
Veterinary Care Industrial Assembly, Compounding, or Processing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 S  S  
 8.35  
P  
Commercial Fueling Stations  S  S  8.16  
Crematorium  S  8.22  
Extractive Uses  S  S  8.25  
Lumber Yards  P  P  
Manufacturing and Assembly  P  
Material Distribution Facilities  P  
Outdoor Displays and Sales  A  A  8.41  
Outdoor storage  P  






Use Category  DISTRICT USE TABLE Districts  
 
 Specific Use Standard (Section) 
Agricultural/ Natural Resources  Residential  Office/ Commercial/ Industrial  
AG1  AG2  NR  RA  RB  RC  RM  O  C  I  
Printing and Publishing  P  
Radio and Television Broadcast Towers  S  S  S  8.49  
Recycling Center, Large Collection Facility  S  8.50  
Recycling Center, Small Collection Facility  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  A  8.51  
Refuse and Garbage Incinerators  S  8.52  
Research, development, design, testing, technical training, and related activities for industrial scientific, medical, and technological enterprises; including experimental and wet laboratories.  P  
Salvage Yards  S  8.53  
Scrap Tire Collection/ Processing  S  8.54  
Self-Storage facilities  S  S  8.55  
Tool and Die / Plating Shops  P  
Trade Contractors / Home Service Repair  P  8.59  
Truck Terminal Facilities  P  
Warehouse Establishments  P  
Wireless Communication Facilities Automotive / Transportation Farm Equipment Sales/Leasing and Repair  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S  8.67  

S  S  8.26  






Use Category  DISTRICT USE TABLE Districts  
 
 Specific Use Standard (Section) 
Agricultural/ Natural Resources  Residential  Office/ Commercial/ Industrial  
AG1  AG2  NR  RA  RB  RC  RM  O  C  I  
Vehicle/ Equipment Storage Yards  S  8.63  
Vehicle Fueling Stations  S  S  8.60  
Vehicle Repair Stations (minor & major)  S  S  8.61  
Vehicle Sales/Leasing and Service Facility  S  S  8.62  
Vehicle Washes  S  8.64  








This page is intentionally left blank. 




CHAPTER 5 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 
SECTION 5.01 PURPOSE 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a process to permit flexibility in the regulation of land develop­ment, to allow a mixture of uses, to encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout, and type of structure constructed, to achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy, and the provision of public services and utilities, to encourage the creation of useful open spac­es, and provide better housing, employment and shopping opportunities. This chapter is not intended as a device to disregard the Township’s zoning regulations nor the planning concepts advocated in the 
Comprehensive Plan. 
SECTION 5.02 AUTHORIZATION 
Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) shall be permitted as stipulated in the District Use Table via the grant­ing of a Special Land Use permit by the Township Board following a public hearing and a recommendation from the Planning Commission. The Special Land Use Permit shall be processed as per the requirements of Chapter 7 of this Ordinance. All PUD applications shall be accompanied by the necessary fees and a preliminary site plan as per the requirements of Chapter 6 of this Ordinance. 
SECTION 5.03 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR REVIEW 
The Planning Commission and Township Board shall apply the following general standards when reviewing 
PUD applications: 
A. 	The proposed development shall be consistent with, and further the implementation of the Com­prehensive Plan or represent land use policies which are a logical and acceptable change in the Comprehensive Plan. 
B. 	The proposed development shall be adequately served by public facilities and services including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks and pathways, water and sanitary sewer facilities, drainage improvements, and police and fire protection, or the applicant shall confirm that these facilities 
and services can be provided. 
C. 	The development shall encourage the provision of useful open spaces and long-term conservation of natural features and resources. 
D. 	The mix of housing types and densities and the relationship between residential and non-residen­tial uses shall be acceptable in terms of convenience, privacy, and compatibility. 
E. 	A PUD may be used to redevelop or improve an existing property where current ordinances do not provide the flexibility required for the adaptive reuse of the property, infrastructure and buildings. 





SECTION 5.04 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR PUDs 
The following site development standards for PUDs shall apply: 
A. 	Low Density Residential (RB) PUD Use and Dimensional Requirements. Table 5.04-A.1. outlines the use and dimensional requirements for PUD developments in the RB district. 
Table 5.04-A.1. Low Density Residential (RB) PUD Use and Dimensional 
Requirements 
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (AND DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMPermitted Uses  RB) PUD USE ENTS Single- and Two-Family Dwellings  
Minimum Lot Area  None  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  Interior Lot  60 feet  
Corner Lot  70 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  None  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  24 feet  
Side  None  
Rear  None  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  1 story  1,000 square feet at grade  
1.5 story  750 square feet at grade  
2 story  900 square feet at grade  
Split/Bi-level  900 square feet above grade  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit for a Two-Family Dwelling  700 square feet at grade  






Figure 5.04-A.1.  Low Density Residential District (RB) PUD Dimensional 

Requirements 

B. Moderate Density Residential District (RC) PUD Use and Dimensional Requirements. Table 5.04­
B.1. outlines the use and dimensional requirements for PUD developments in the RC district. 





Table 5.04-B.1.  Moderate Density Residential (RC) PUD Use and Dimensional 

Requirements 

Permitted Uses  Single-, Two-Family, and Multiple-Family Dwellings (not to exceed 6 units per building)  
Minimum Lot Area  None  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  Interior Lot  50 feet  
Corner Lot  60 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  None  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  24 feet  
Side  None  
Rear  None  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  1 story  900 square feet at grade  
1.5 story  750 square feet at grade  
2 story  700 square feet at grade  
Split/Bi-level  900 square feet above grade  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit for a Two-Family Dwelling  700 square feet at grade  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit for a Multiple-Family Dwelling  550 square feet at grade  






Figure 5.04-B.1.  Moderate Density Residential District (RC) PUD Dimensional 

Requirements 

C. Multiple-Family Residential District (RM) PUD Use and Dimensional Requirements. Table 5.04­
C.1. outlines the use and dimensional requirements for PUD developments in the RM district. 





Table 5.04-C.1.  Multiple-Family Residential District (RM) PUD Use and 

Dimensional Requirements 

Permitted Uses  Two-and Multiple-Family Dwellings  
Permitted Uses in O and C Districts  
Minimum Lot Area  2 acres  
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage  200 feet  
Maximum Lot Coverage Ratio  None  
Minimum Required Yards for Principal Buildings  Front  40 feet  
Side  40 feet1  
Rear  40 feet1  
Maximum Building Height  40 feet2  
Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit  550 square feet at grade  

1 Required side and rear setbacks shall be increased to 60 feet when abutting RA, RB, and RC zoning districts. 
2 Maximum building height may be increased by one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of additional front, side, an drear setback provided over and above the minimum required to a maximum of 60 feet. 




Figure 5.04-C.1.  Multiple-Family Residential District (RM) PUD Dimensional 

Requirements 

D. 	Each principal building shall be connected to public water and sanitary sewers. 
E. 	Electrical, telephone, and cable television lines shall be placed underground with the exception that the Township Board may approve the use of overhead distribution lines. 
F. 	Each parcel, lot, or principal building shall have adequate access from a public or private street/ road as required by the Township Board. 
G. 	Each parcel, lot, or principal building shall have adequate pedestrian and non-motorized access via sidewalks, pathways, or other such facilities as required by the Township Board. 
H. 	The proposed development shall be designed to create a cohesive community/development by providing common open space areas for passive or active recreation and resident/tenant interac­tion. All open space areas shall be equally available to all residents of the Planned Unit Develop­ment. 
I. 	Open Space areas shall be conveniently located in relation to dwelling units and have minimum dimensions which are useable for the intended functions. Public or private road easements and rights-of-ways shall not be considered open space areas.  Buildings, parking lots, driveways and similar improvements may be permitted in open space areas if related and necessary to the func­tions of the open space. Open space areas may include land temporarily or permanently inundated 





by water. 
J. 	When completed, the PUD shall have significant areas, but not less than twenty-five percent (25%) of total land area, devoted to open space, which shall remain in a natural state and/or be restricted for use for active and/or passive outdoor recreational purposes. Priority shall be on preserving the most important natural features on the site, as identified by a site analysis. The amount of open space, including the area and percentage of the site, shall be specified on the site plan. 
K. 	The parking requirements of Chapter 11 of this Ordinance shall apply, with the exception that the Township Board may reduce the total number of required spaces upon a finding that adequate park­ing will result. 
L. 	Development of a PUD may be phased as depicted on the required site plans. 
M. 	The PUD shall comply with all other applicable regulations as required by this Ordinance. 
N. 	The mix of housing types and densities, and the mix of residential and non-residential uses, shall be acceptable in terms of convenience, privacy, compatibility, and similar measures. Office and/or commercial uses within a PUD shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of the total PUD land area. Land area devoted to the development of office and/or commercial uses shall not be utilized 
in calculating the permitted residential density within a PUD. 
SECTION 5.05 PROJECT DENSITIES 
A. 	Residential Density. 
1. 	Residential densities in a PUD project shall not exceed the maximum permitted by-right residential density specified for the underlying zoning districts. However, density bonuses allowing an increase in density above that permitted by-right up to the maximum permitted 
PUD density may be achieved as follows: 
a. 	PUDs providing a minimum of thirty percent (30%), but less than forty percent (40%), of open space shall be entitled to a density increase of an additional fifteen percent (15%). 
b. 	
PUDs providing a minimum of forty percent (40%), but less than fifty percent (50%), of open space shall be entitled to a density increase of an additional twenty-five percent (25%). 

c. 	
PUDs providing fifty percent (50%) or more of open space shall be entitled to a den­sity increase equivalent to the maximum permitted PUD density specified for the 


underlying zoning district. 





Table 5.05-A.1 Residential Densities. 


2. 	A PUD may be developed in phases. The Zoning Administrator may require, prior to site plan approval, that land depicted on the site plan as open space be held in reserve as part of the phase to be developed to ensure that density limits for the entire PUD will not be exceeded when the subject phase is completed. Such reserved land may be included in 
the development of subsequent phases of the PUD if the density limits will not be exceed­
ed upon completion of that phase or if other land is similarly held in reserve. 
SECTION 5.06 	OPEN SPACE AGREEMENT 
Prior to final site plan approval of a PUD, an Open Space Agreement shall be provided to the Township Board by the developer to ensure preservation and maintenance of the open space areas.  The Agree­ment shall comply with the terms and conditions of the Special Land Use Permit authorizing the PUD. The 
Agreement shall include the following: 
A. 	A legal description and map depicting the total site area. 
B. 	A legal description and map depicting the lands reserved as open space to comply with the twenty-five (25%) requirement, as well as, open space areas designated to qualify for bonus densities. 
C. 	A plan for permanent maintenance of the area reserved for open space. 
D. 	Prior to the issuance of any building permits for any principal buildings in a PUD, the Township 
Clerk shall record the Open Space Agreement at the Eaton County Register of Deeds Office. The 
Agreement shall be binding upon Delta Charter Township, the developer and all successors and assigns. 


SECTION 5.07 	STATUS OF PRIOR APPROVED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUD) OR PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS (PURD) 
Any PUD or PURD which was approved prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be a permitted 
use, and shall not be considered a non-conforming use. Prior authorized PUDs and PURDs shall be devel­
oped in compliance with the Delta Charter Township Zoning Ordinance which was in effect at the time it 
was approved. 






This page is intentionally left blank. 




CHAPTER 6 

SITE PLAN REVIEW 
SECTION 6.01 PURPOSE 
The site plan review requirements of this Chapter are intended to provide a consistent and uniform meth­od of review of proposed development plans, to ensure full compliance with the regulations in this Ordi­nance, other applicable ordinances, and state and federal laws.  The intent is to encourage a harmonious relationship of buildings and uses both within a site and in relation to adjacent uses; achieve efficient use of the land; encourage innovative design solutions; protect natural resources; ensure safety for both inter­nal and external vehicular and pedestrian users; and prevent adverse impacts on adjoining or nearby prop­erties. It is the intent of these provisions to encourage cooperation and consultation between the Town­ship and the applicant to facilitate development in accordance with the Township’s land use objectives. 
SECTION 6.02 BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES SUBJECT TO SITE PLAN 

REVIEW 
A. Site Plan Review Requirement.  The following buildings, structures, and uses require site plan 
review:  
1. 	
All proposed and permitted uses and related buildings, except single-family and two-fam­ily dwellings. 

2. 	
All proposed Special Land Uses and related buildings except that home occupations, func­tional family dwellings, bed and breakfast establishments, group child care homes, foster care group homes, and farm markets shall only be required to provide the following infor­mation for preliminary site plan review: 

a. 	
Site Plan application form supplied by the Zoning Administrator. 

b. 	
A Site Plan containing the following information: 




i. 	Legal description of site dimensions of site boundary lines, total site area, water courses and water bodies. Locations of all buildings, driveways, park­ing areas; and other structures on adjacent properties within one hundred 
(100) feet of the property, including those located across the street from the property. 
ii. 	Required and proposed building setbacks, and if applicable, distances between buildings on the site. 
iii. 	Location of abutting streets and proposed alignment of streets, drives and easements serving the development, including existing rights-of-way and pavement widths. 
iv. 	The Planning Commission and/or Zoning Administrator, as applicable, may require written statements relative to the impact on existing utilities, natural features, or the environment. 





3. 	
Any alteration, addition, or expansion of an existing permitted or Special Land Use and/or related building; 

4. 	
Any building or use for which site plan review is required by this Ordinance; and 

5. 	
Any parking lot or addition thereto. 


B. 	Status of Site Improvements.  
1. 	The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a certificate of zoning compliance and the Town­ship Building Official shall not issue a building permit for construction of, or addition to, any one of the above listed buildings or structures until a final site plan has been approved.  A use not involving a building or structure, as above listed, shall not be commenced or ex­
panded, nor shall the Zoning Administrator issue a Certificate of Zoning Compliance until a final site plan has been approved. 
2. 	The clearing, grading, and balancing of land may commence absent site plan review if all 
necessary permits have been obtained from the appropriate State or local agencies. The property owner(s) or developer(s) proceed at their own risk despite having a Soil Erosion Permit, due to the fact that subsequent reviews may necessitate modifications to the grades. If deemed necessary, a Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Permit shall be obtained from the Eaton County Drain Commissioner. If regulated floodplains and/or wetlands are located on the property, the applicable permits shall be obtained from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
SECTION 6.03 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE (Optional) 
Any site plan review applicant may schedule an informal conference with the Zoning Administrator. 
SECTION 6.04 SITE PLAN REVIEW 
A. 	Application and Fee for a Site Plan. An application for site plan review shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator and include the required fee, the information specified in Section 6.06, and other data exhibits, and information hereinafter required. The application, fees, and supporting documenta­tion as specified herein shall generally be filed a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission. 
B. 	Planning Commission Review of a Site Plan. If the Zoning Administrator determines that the site plan includes the required information set forth in this Chapter, he/she shall transmit the applica­tion, site plans and other information to the Planning Commission prior to its next regularly sched­uled meeting. The Planning Commission shall review the same and shall, within sixty (60) days from the date of the first Planning Commission meeting at which the application and site plan are 
received from the Zoning Administrator, issue an approval or disapproval of the site plan unless mu­tually agreed upon by both the applicant and the Planning Commission to extend the review period. 
The Planning Commission shall inform the applicant in writing of any changes or modifications to the proposed site plan which are needed to achieve conformity to the standards specified in this 
Ordinance. 





C. 	Variance Requests. Site plan review applicants who intend to seek a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals shall first file an application with the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to the Plan­ning Commission reviewing the site plan. 
D. 	Zoning Administrator Review of a Site Plan. 
1. 	
After the Planning Commission conducts their review of a site plan, the Zoning Adminis­trator shall review the site plan to ensure that it reflects any changes or modifications as mandated by the Planning Commission. 

2. 	
The Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the submitted plan.  If denied, the Zoning Administrator shall cite the reasons for denial and transmit 


them in writing to the applicant. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the Township Building Official of the site plan approval. 
3. 	The applicant shall submit a PDF copy and three (3) paper copies of the final site plan, which shall be signed, sealed, and drafted by the professional (licensed in the State of 
Michigan) responsible for the accuracy of the plan. 
4. The Zoning Administrator shall affix a stamp and signature to the approved site plan. 
E. 	Effective Term of Site Plan Approval.  
1. 	Approval of a site plan by the Zoning Administrator is valid for two (2) years.  If actual physical construction of a substantial nature of the on-site utility systems and/or building improvements included in the approved site plan has not commenced and proceeded 
meaningfully toward completion during that period, the approval of the site plan shall be null and void. Site plans whose approval has expired shall be required to be resubmitted and processed as an original application. 
2. 	Upon written application, filed prior to the termination of the two (2) year review period, stated in Section 6.04 E.1., the Zoning Administrator may authorize a single extension of the site plan approval for one (1) year. Such extension shall only be granted based on evidence from the applicant that the development has a likelihood of commencing construction within the one (1) year extension period.  
SECTION 6.05 ADMINISTRATIVE SITE PLAN REVIEW 
A. 	Authority. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to conduct an Administrative Review of a Site Plan, provided all other standards of this Ordinance are met as set forth in Section 6.07. The Zoning Administrator may seek the review and comments of applicable Township staff and/or consultants, County, State, and Federal agencies; and reserve the right to refer the matter to the 
Planning Commission, if necessary. 
B. 	Projects to be Reviewed Administratively. Administrative review of a site plan may be conducted for the following projects or under the following circumstances: 
1. 	Properties less than two (2) acres in size. 





2. 	
Minor changes, as determined by the Zoning Administrator during construction that are required by outside governmental agencies. 

3. 	
Increase in parking area up to twenty-five percent (25%) or ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area without any building changes. 

4. 	
Changes to the building height that do not add additional floor area nor exceed the maxi­mum height requirements of the district. 

5. 	
An increase in floor area of up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing floor area. 

6. 	
A change in use to a similar or less intense use. 

7. 	
Accessory buildings associated with a non-residential use. 

8. 	
Aesthetic and architectural changes to a non-residential structure. 

9. 	
Site improvements such as installation of walls, fences, lighting, or landscaping consistent with the Ordinance standards. 

10. 	
Temporary uses, sales, and seasonal events. 

11. 	
Construction of a Wind Energy Conversion System where such construction is considered an accessory use in the district. 

12. 	
Construction of Solar Collection Systems where such construction is considered an acces­sory use. 


SECTION 6.06 DATA REQUIRED FOR SITE PLANS 
Site Plans shall include the information set forth in Table 6.06-A.1. 





TABLE 6.06-A.1.  DATA REQUIRED FOR SITE PLANS 


1.  Application Form  
a. Name and address of the applicant and property owner.  
b. Address and common description of property and complete legal description.  
c. Dimensions of land and total acreage.  
d. Zoning on the site and all adjacent properties  
e. Description of proposed project or use, type of building or structures, and name of proposed development, if applicable.  
f. Name and address of firm or individual who prepared the site plan.  
g. Proof of ownership of the property.  
2.  Site and Zoning Data  
a. Existing lot lines, structures, parking areas and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the site.  
b. Proposed lot lines, lot dimensions, property lines, setback dimensions, structures, parking areas, and other improvements to the site and within 100 feet of the site.  
c. All existing and proposed easements including type.  
d. Zoning district of site and all adjacent properties.  
e. Land use of site and all adjacent property.  
f. Proposed use of site.  
g. Gross and net lot area, and areas in proposed rights-of-way, access easements, wetlands, and bodies of water (including streams, ponds, lakes).  
h. Ground floor and total floor area to be constructed.  
i. Lot coverage (ground floor area divided by net lot area)  
j. Impervious surface (total impervious area and percentage of impervious area to total net lot area)  
k. Number and type of dwelling units and density, for residential projects  
l. Required yards/setbacks.  
3.  Natural Features  
a. General location of existing plant materials, with identification of materials to be removed, and materials to be preserved.  
b. Topography on the site and within 100 feet of the site at two (2)-foot contour intervals, ref­erenced to a U.S.G.S. Benchmark.  
c. Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes and streams, and wetlands.  







d. Existing wetland areas must be shown for each wetland.  All impacted areas and mitigation areas shall be shown with calculations provided.  
e. General soils information, location, and extent of soils that are unbuildable in their natural state because of organic content or water table level, based on the Eaton County Soil Survey or equivalent information.  
4.  Access and Circulation  
a. Dimensions, curve radii and centerlines of existing and proposed access points, roads and road rights-of-ways or access easements.  
b. Driveways and intersections within 100 feet of the site.  
c. Location of proposed roads, driveways, parking lots.  Sidewalks and non-motorized path­ways.  
d. Cross-section details of proposed roads, driveways, parking lots, sidewalks and non-motor­ized pathways.  
e. Dimensions of acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes.  
f. Calculations for required number of parking spaces including location and layout.  
g. Dimensions of parking spaces, islands, circulation aisles and loading zones.  
h. Designation of fire lanes.  
i. Traffic regulatory signs and pavement markings.  
5.  Landscape Plans  
a. General landscape plan, including location and type of all proposed shrubs, trees, and other live plant material.  
b. Existing live plant materials to remain, and if materials will be applied to landscaping re­quirements.  
c. Existing and proposed topography, by contours, correlated with the grading plan.  
d. Location of all proposed landscape improvements.  
e. Planting list for proposed landscape materials with caliper size or height of material, botani­cal and common names, and quantity.  
f. Irrigation system plan for watering and draining landscape areas.  
g. Cross-sections and details for required landscape improvements including berms, walls, fences, retaining walls, etc.  
6.  Building, Structure, and Miscellaneous Site Information  
a. Location, height, number of floors, and outside dimensions of all proposed buildings and structures.  
b. Building floor plans and total floor area.  
c. Details on accessory structures and any screening  
d. Location of proposed free-standing signs such as billboards, pole signs, and ground signs.  
e. Location of exterior lighting (site and building lighting).  







f. Lighting details, including height, initial lumen rating, type of lamp, method of shielding, and depiction of lighting pattern for all site and building lighting.  
g. Lighting photometric grid overlaid on proposed site plan showing light intensity (in foot candles) on site and ten (10) feet beyond the property lines of the subject parcel. Sites which have parking lots with twenty (20) parking spaces or less or which do not abut a residentially zoned property are exempt from the photometric grid overlay requirement.  
h. Location of trash receptacle(s) and transformer pad(s) and method of screening.  
i. Location of any outdoor sales or display area.  
7.  Information Concerning Utilities, Drainage and Related Issues.  
a. Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary sewers and/or septic systems  
b. Location and size of existing and proposed water mains, well sites, water service and fire hydrants.  
c. Site grading, drainage patterns and other stormwater management measures.  
d. Stormwater retention and detention ponds.  
e. Location and size of storm sewers and drains.  
f. Location of above and below ground gas, electric and telephone lines, existing and pro­posed.  
g. Location of transformers and utility boxes.  
8.  Additional Information Required for Multiple Family Residential Development  
a. The number and location of each type of residential unit (one bedroom units, two bedroom units, etc.).  
b. Density calculations by type of residential unit (dwelling units per acre).  
c. Garage and / or carport locations and details, if proposed.  
d. Location, dimensions, and floor plans of common building(s) (E.G., recreation, laundry, etc.), if applicable.  
e. Swimming pool fencing detail, including height and type of fence, if applicable.  
f. Location and size of recreation and open space areas.  
g. Indication of type of recreation facilities proposed for recreation area.  
9.  Additional Studies/Information  
a. Traffic Impact Study (as described in Section 10.03)  
b. State & County Environmental Permits Checklist for Eaton County Communities  
c. Delta Township Fire Department Chemical Survey  
d. Description, identification, and location of any existing or proposed areas, whether above or below ground, for the storage, use, loading/unloading of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes.  
e. Delineation of areas which have been contaminated, as determined by a State or Federal agency, and submittal of a report as to the status of the cleanup.  
f. Other Studies as may be required by the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator  






SECTION 6.07 STANDARDS FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW 
A. 	Compliance with all Regulations. In reviewing a site plan, the Planning Commission and the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the proposed site plan complies with all applicable regulations herein. 
B. 	Standards.  Prior to approving a site plan, the Planning Commission and/or Zoning Administrator 
shall require that the following standards be met: 
1. 	
The proposed use will not be injurious to the general health, safety, welfare, and character of the Township and surrounding neighborhood. 

2. 	
The proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 

3. 	
There is a proper relationship between public thoroughfares and proposed service drives, driveways, and parking areas. 

4. 	
The proposed development provides for proper development of roads, easements, and 


public utilities. 
5. 	All buildings or groups of buildings shall be arranged so as to permit necessary emergency vehicle access as required by the Fire Department. 
6. 	Site access and circulation shall be designed to ensure the safe and convenient movement of vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians and transit, where applicable. Where possible, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall be provided to avoid conflicts and unsafe conditions. Further, the arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circula­tion shall be connected to existing or planned streets and pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the area. Accessibility to the development shall be provided for persons of all abilities, in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. Streets and drives which are part of an existing or planned street pattern serving adjacent development shall be of a width appropriate to the traffic volume they will carry and shall have a dedicated right-of-way as required by this Ordinance, the Eaton County Road Commission, and/or the Michigan Department of Transportation, as is applicable. 
7. 	Site planning and design of specific improvements will accomplish the preservation and pro­tection of existing natural resources and features to the extent reasonably possible. 
8. 	All streets shall be developed in accordance with the Eaton County Road Commission’s or the Michigan Department of Transportation’s specifications, as is applicable; unless devel­oped as a private road in accordance with the requirements of Section 10.02. Properties abutting streets which have right of way deficiencies, as determined by the Eaton County Road Commission or the Michigan Department of Transportation shall provide additional right of way to the appropriate agency as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The ad­ditional right of way shall be provided to the appropriate agency via the appropriate written instrument and documentation prior to final site plan approval by the Zoning Administrator. 
9. Non-motorized transportation improvements, beyond the traditional sidewalk system which provides walks in front of homes and non-residential uses adjacent to roadways may 





be required.  The improvements could include trails, shared use paths, and traditional sidewalks. 
a. 	Many items, including but not limited to the following, shall be considered when 
siting non-motorized transportation improvements in new developments: 
i. 	The Delta Charter Township Non-Motorized Transportation Plan, the Delta Township Parks & Recreation Plan, and the Delta Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended. However, non-motorized transportation improvements may be required even if such improvements are not specifically recommend­ed in the aforementioned documents. 
ii. 	Providing safe routes to schools, creating recreational trails, and develop­ing connections to retail/office areas, residential neighborhoods, community buildings, recreational areas, and similar land uses. 
iii. 	Proximity to natural features such as woodlots, water bodies, open space ar­eas, etc. 
iv. 	
Potential connection to other existing non-motorized transportation facilities, including those in adjacent communities. 

v. 	
The demand created for non-motorized transportation facilities by residents/ customers of the proposed development. 


vi. 	Taking advantage of existing easements and publicly owned lands. 
vii. 	By providing a sidewalk/path, residents may be able to substitute a pedestrian movement for a vehicular movement. 
b. 	During the site plan review process the Planning Commission and Zoning Ad­ministrator shall determine whether the need for non-motorized transportation improvement(s) on the subject parcel is necessitated by the development itself, or if the improvements would primarily serve the public at large. 
c. 	Easements shall be provided for non-motorized transportation facilities as re­quired by the Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator. Easements may be required in anticipation of future construction of a trail, shared use path, and/ or sidewalk. 
10. 	
The design of storm sewers, stormwater facilities, water mains, sanitary sewers, and oth­er improvements shall meet the design and construction standards of the Township and other appropriate agencies. 

11. 	
On-site stormwater facilities shall be provided as follows: 


a. 	Appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure that stormwater runoff will not adversely affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system as determined by the Eaton County Drain Commissioner. 





b. 	Stormwater detention, retention, transport, and drainage facilities shall be de­signed to prevent the pollution of surface or groundwater resources, on-site or off-site. On-site stormwater management facilities shall be reviewed, approved, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations, and specifications of the Eaton County Drain Commissioner’s (ECDC) Office. Said facilities shall also conform to the requirements of the ECDC’s current standards for post-construction controls for channel protection and water quality as described in the ECDC’s current MS4 Stormwater Discharge Permit issued by the Michigan De­partment of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). 
12. 	
Wastewater systems, including on-site septic systems, shall be located to minimize any po­tential degradation of surface water or ground water quality, and be designed in accordance with applicable Township, County, and/or State standards 

13. 	
Sites which include storage of hazardous waste, fuels, salt, or chemicals will be designed to prevent spills and discharges of pollution materials to the surface or the air, or to the 


ground, groundwater, or nearby water bodies in accordance with applicable Township, 
County, State, and/or Federal standards; and any applicable permits shall be obtained. 
14. 	Landscaping, including grass, trees, shrubs, and other vegetation, shall be provided to main­tain and improve the aesthetic quality of the site and area, as per the standards contained 
in this Ordinance. 
15. 	The site plan shall comply with all applicable Township Ordinances and any other applicable laws. 
SECTION 6.08 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL 
A. 	As part of an approval to any site plan, the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator may im­pose any additional conditions or limitations as in its judgment may be necessary for protection of the public interest. Such conditions shall be related to and ensure that the review standards of Sec­tion 6.07 are met. 
B. 	
The Zoning Administrator shall not approve the site plan until the plan has been reviewed and ap­proved by all applicable Township, County, State and Federal personnel and agencies. Such person­nel and agencies may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 

1. 	
Township Engineer 

2. 	
Township Fire Chief 

3. 	
Township Utilities Director 

4. 	
Eaton County Road Commission 

5. 	
Eaton County Drain Commissioner 

6. 	
Barry-Eaton District Health Department 



7. 
Michigan Department of Transportation 








8. 	
Michigan Department of Natural Resources 

9. 	
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 

10. 	
Michigan Department of Public Health 


C. 	Approval of a site plan, including conditions made as part of the approval, is attached to the prop­erty described as part of the application and not to the owner of such property. 
D. 	A record of the decision of the Planning Commission, the reason for the decision reached, and any conditions attached to such decision shall be kept and made a part of the minutes of the Planning Commission. The conditions shall remain unchanged unless an amendment to the site plan is approved. 
E. 	Installation of public water or private water mains, public sanitary sewer lines, or private septic systems, shall not be commenced prior to the Zoning Administrator’s approval of the site plan. 
F. 	The Zoning Administrator may make periodic investigations of developments for which site plans have been approved. Non-compliance with the requirements and conditions of the approved site plan shall constitute grounds to terminate said approval. 
SECTION 6.09 CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE 
A. 	Certificate of Zoning Compliance. An issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance, as set forth in Section 3.03, shall be required prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or building permits, as applicable. 
B. 	Commencement of Site Work. Upon issuance of all appropriate approvals and permits, the ap­plicant may begin site work. 
SECTION 6.10 AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS TO APPROVED SITE PLANS 
A. 	Any person who has been granted site plan approval shall notify the Zoning Administrator of any proposed amendments to such approved plan. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the proposed amendment constitutes a minor or major amendment based on, but not necessarily limited to, the following: 
1. 	
The addition of land area to the legal description of the original approved site plan. 

2. 	
The establishment of another use or uses. 

3. 	
The addition of more sales or service area, or the addition of dwelling units. 

4. 	
An expansion or increase in intensity of the use. 


B. 	A major amendment to an approved site plan shall comply with the same filing and review procedures of the original approval, including site plan review by the Planning Commission if originally required for the development. A minor amendment may be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 





SECTION 6.11 APPEALS OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL 
A. 	Right to Appeal.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator in granting or denial of site plan approval, shall have the right to appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The appeal shall state the aggrieved parties’ grounds for appeal and shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator within seven (7) days of the decision of the Planning 
Commission or Zoning Administrator. 
B. 	Aggrieved Party. An aggrieved party must prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Board of Appeals that they have suffered, or may suffer, special damages not common to other property owners similarly situated. The mere increase in traffic in the area, proof of general economic and aesthetic losses, or the mere fact that the appellant owns adjacent property are not sufficient grounds to 
show special damages. 
C. 	Stay.  The filing of a site plan appeal shall act to stay the issuance of site plan approval or issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance authorizing improvements on the property which is the subject of the appeal. 





CHAPTER 7 



SPECIAL LAND USES 
SECTION 7.01 PURPOSE 
This Ordinance is based upon the division of the Township into districts which permit specified uses by-right that are mutually compatible. It is recognized that there are certain other “special” uses with unique characteristics, which, due to their actual or potential impacts on neighboring uses or public facilities, need to be more carefully regulated with respect to their location and operation in order to be made fully compatible with those uses that are permitted as of right within a particular district. Accordingly, these “special” uses can be allowed subject to relevant restrictions or conditions being imposed that address their unique characteristics. 
SECTION 7.02 PROCEDURE 
A. 	Application. An application for a Special Land Use permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Ad­ministrator on a form provided for that purpose.  Each application shall be signed by the property owner and accompanied by all required information and a fee as established by the Township Board, not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of a regular meeting of the Planning Com­mission, at which the Special Land Use application will be considered. The following information shall also be submitted: 
1. 	
Five (5) paper copies and a digital PDF format copy of a site plan meeting the requirements of Section 6.02 A.2. 

2. 	
A complete description of the proposed use, and a statement with regard to compliance with the criteria required for approval in Section 7.03 Required Standards and Findings for Making Determinations and any specific standards required by the Ordinance for the 


requested use. 
3. 	Failure to provide the required information and materials as a part of the application for Special Land Use approval shall render the application deficient, and said application shall be held in abeyance until the petitioner submits all required items. The Township Zon­ing Administrator may waive the submission of a site plan where such information is not material to the Planning Commission action, specifically where no physical changes to the site are proposed. 
B. 	Public Hearing. Following submission of the required application materials, the Planning Com­mission shall hold a public hearing on all Special Land Use permit requests in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the 
manner prescribed by the Act.    
C. 	Planning Commission Action.  At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application for the Special Land Use and shall recommend approval, denial, or approval with con­ditions. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the Township Board for their final consideration. 





D. Township Board Action. 

1. 	
The Township Board shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the request for Special Land Use. 

2. 	
The Township Board’s decision shall be made part of the public record and shall be incor­porated in a statement of findings and conclusions relative to the Special Land Use under consideration, and any conditions imposed. 


E. 	Approval. Upon approval of an application for a Special Land Use permit, the Township Clerk shall issue a Special Land Use permit. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for ensuring that any conditions attached to the approval of the special land use permit are adhered to. 
SECTION 7.03 REQUIRED STANDARDS AND FINDINGS FOR MAKING 
DETERMINATIONS 
A. 	Standards. The Planning Commission and Township Board shall review the particular circumstances and facts of each proposed use, and shall consider the following general standards: 
1. 	
Compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan.  The proposed Special Land Use shall be com­patible and in accordance with the goals, objectives and policies of the Delta Charter Town­ship Comprehensive Plan and any associated sub-area and corridor plans. 

2. 	
Compatibility with Adjacent Uses.  The proposed Special Land Use shall be constructed, operated and maintained so as to be compatible with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and so as not to change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed. A Special Land Use shall be designed and constructed so as to not create a significant detrimental impact, as compared to the impacts of permitted uses. 

3. 	
Impact on Public Services.  The proposed Special Land Use shall be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage, water and sewage facilities. Such services shall be provided and accommodated without an unreasonable public burden. 

4. 	
Impact on the Overall Environment.  The proposed Special Land Use shall not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment, or conditions of operation that will be detri­mental to the natural environment, public health, safety, or welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, odors, or other such nuisance in comparison to the im­pacts associated with typical permitted uses. 

5. 	
Traffic Impact.  The proposed Special Land Use shall be located and designed in a manner which will minimize the impact of traffic, taking into consideration: pedestrian access and safety; vehicle trip generation (i.e. volumes); types of traffic, access location and design, circulation and parking design; street and bridge capacity; and traffic operations at nearby intersections and access points. Efforts shall be made to ensure that multiple transportation modes are safely and effectively accommodated in an effort to provide alternate modes of access and alleviate vehicular traffic congestion. The applicant shall comply with the Town­ship’s Complete Street Ordinance. 







6. 	Operational Characteristics. The nature and character of the activities, processes, materi­als, equipment, or conditions of operation, either specifically or typically associated with 
the use shall be reviewed. 
7. 	
Outdoor Operations. Measures shall be taken to ensure that outdoor activity, storage, and work areas will be compatible with adjacent land uses. 

8. 	
Compliance with Zoning Ordinance Standards.  The proposed Special Land Use shall be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to meet the stated intent of the zoning district and shall comply with all applicable ordinance standards. 

9. 	
Special Land Use Approval Specific Requirements.  The general standards and require­ments of this Section are basic to all uses authorized by Special Land Use approval. The specific and detailed requirements relating to particular uses and area requirements must also be satisfied for those uses. 


B. 	Site Plan Review. Properties for which an application for Special Land Use approval is made shall also be subject to site plan review in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 6, Site Plan Review. 
SECTION 7.04 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL 
A. 	Authority.  Prior to granting any Special Land Use permit, the Township Board may, at its discre­tion, impose any additional conditions or limitations when it is determined that such conditions or limitations are required to achieve or assure compatibility with adjacent uses and/or structures. 
B. 	Scope.  Conditions that are imposed by the Township Board shall comply with the following: 
1. 	Such conditions shall be related to and ensure that the review considerations of Section 
7.03. A.1. through 9. and the applicable specific use regulations are met. 
2. 	Approval of a Special Land Use, including conditions made as part of the approval, is at­tached to the property described as part of the application and not to the owner of such 
property.  
3. 	
A record of conditions imposed shall be maintained, and shall remain unchanged unless an amendment to the Special Land Use approval is granted. 

4. 	
A record of the decisions, the reasons for the decisions reached and any conditions at­tached to such decision shall be kept and made a part of the minutes of the Planning Com­mission and the Township Board meetings. 

5. 	
The Zoning Administrator may make periodic investigations of developments authorized by Special Land Use permit to determine continued compliance with all requirements im­posed by the Township Board and this Ordinance.  Non-compliance with the requirements 


and stipulations pertaining to the Special Land Use permit shall constitute grounds for the 
Township Board to terminate said approval. 





SECTION 7.05 EFFECTIVENESS 

A. 	Remain in Force. Upon site plan approval by the Zoning Administrator, Special Land Use approval shall continue in force so long as the particular use or activity continues to operate as approved on the approved site, unless otherwise specified in the Township Board resolution of approval. 
B. 	Expiration. Any Special Land Use approval granted by the Township Board shall expire unless a site plan effectuating the Special Land Use is submitted within two (2) years of the date of approval. The Township Board has the authority to grant one (1) twelve (12)-month extension. 
C. 	Abandonment. Any use for which a Special Land Use permit has been granted and which is discon­tinued for a continuous period of one (1) year or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period shall be considered abandoned and the Special Land Use Permit shall become null and void. Prior to termination of a Special Land Use due to abandonment or discontinuation, the Township Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice of the Township’s intent to terminate such use to the property owner identified in the Township’s most recent property tax rolls by personal delivery or by first class mail. Said notice shall provide the date, time, and place when the Township Board will hold a public hearing on the question of such abandonment or discontinuance with a final de­termination being made by the Township Board.  Factors that the Township Board shall consider when determining whether there was intent to abandon the Special Land Use include, but shall not be limited to: 
1. 	
The length of time the use has ceased. 

2. 	
The disconnection of utility services. 

3. 	
The removal of buildings and structures. 

4. 	
The lack of normal maintenance of buildings and grounds. 


D. 	Resubmittal. No application for a Special Land Use permit which has been denied shall be resubmit­ted for the same parcel for a period of one (1) year from the date of said order of denial, except on 
the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions relating to all of the reasons noted for 
the denial are found to be valid by the Township Board. 
SECTION 7.06 SPECIAL LAND USE AMENDMENTS 
A. 	Amendments.  An individual, with an interest in a property which has been granted a Special Land Use permit, may request an amendment to the Special Land Use permit. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the proposed amendment constitutes a minor or major amendment. A major amendment to a Special Land Use permit shall consist of, but shall not be limited to, the fol­lowing actions: 
1. 	
The addition of land to the legal description of the original special land use permit. 

2. 	
The establishment of another use or uses. 

3. 	
The addition of more sales or service area, or the addition of dwelling units. 

4. 	
An expansion or increase in intensity of use. 







B. 	Amendment Review.  A major amendment to a Special Land Use permit shall comply with the application and review procedures contained in this Chapter. If the proposed amendment is deter­mined to be a minor amendment and is found to be in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall approve the amendment.  The Zoning Administra­
tor shall maintain a written record of all approved minor amendments to Special Land Use permits. 
C. 	Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the Township Board in the granting or denial of a Special Land Use permit may appeal to the Circuit Court of Eaton County as provided by law.  







This page is intentionally left blank. 




CHAPTER 8 
SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS 

SECTION 8.01 PURPOSE 
It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide regulations for various uses as permitted by the District Use Table in Section 4.18-B.1. herein. 
SECTION 8.02 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS 
A. 	Intent:  The intent of the accessory dwelling unit regulations is to accomplish the following: 
1. 	
Provide older homeowners with an opportunity to stay more comfortably in homes and neighborhoods they might otherwise be forced to leave. 

2. 	
Add moderately-priced rental units to the housing stock to meet the needs of smaller households and make housing units available to moderate income households. 

3. 	
Develop housing units in single-family neighborhoods that are appropriate for households at a variety of stages in their life cycle. 

4. 	
Provide housing units for persons with disabilities. 

5. 	
Protect stability, property values, and the residential character of a neighborhood. 


B. 	Standards of Approval: 
1. 	
The units shall be a separate housekeeping unit, and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of the principal residence. 

2. 	
Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on each lot or parcel. 

3. 	
The owners of the principal residence shall continue to occupy the principal residence. 

4. 	
The accessory dwelling unit shall be occupied by not more than three (3) persons. These persons must be related to the owners/occupants of the principal residence by blood, 


marriage, adoption, or guardianship. 
5. 	
All setback and lot coverage requirements of the district shall be met. 

6. 	
A minimum of one (1) additional off-street parking space shall be provided for the acces­sory dwelling unit. 


SECTION 8.03 ADULT DAY CARE CENTER 
A. 	Open Space: An open space, a minimum of five thousand (5,000) contiguous square feet, shall be provided on the subject parcel unless a public open space is available within one hundred (100) 





feet of the subject parcel. 
B. 	Building Setbacks: The Township Board may impose greater building setback requirements than the minimum specified in the subject parcel’s underlying zoning district in order to provide compatibility with adjacent properties. 
C. 	Parking: The Zoning Administrator shall determine the minimum required parking for the number of persons served by the center. 
SECTION 8.04 ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITIES 
A. 	Adult Foster Care Family Homes Serving Six (6) Persons or Less:  A state-licensed adult foster care home, foster family home, or foster family group home serving six (6) persons or less shall be con­sidered a residential use of property and a use permitted by-right in all residential districts. 
B. 	Adult Foster Care Small Group Homes Serving Seven (7) to Twelve (12) Persons: 
1. 	
A site plan, prepared in accordance with Chapter 6, shall be submitted with the Special Land Use Permit application. 

2. 	
The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 

3. 	
The dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of twelve hundred (1,200) square feet of living 


space excluding garages, unenclosed porches, and unfinished basements. 
4. 	
The subject parcel shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from another adult foster care small group home or a group child care home. 

5. 	
One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee/caregiver. 

6. 	
Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained. 


C. 	Adult Foster Care Large Group Homes Serving Thirteen (13) to Twenty (20) Persons: 
1. 	
A site plan, prepared in accordance with Chapter 6, shall be submitted with the Special Land Use Permit application. 

2. 	
The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 

3. 	
One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee/caregiver. 

4. 	
Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained. 


D. 	Adult Foster Care Congregate Facilities Serving More than Twenty (20) Persons: 
1. 	A site plan, prepared in accordance with Chapter 6, shall be submitted for the zoning district in which it is located. 





2. 	
The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 

3. 	
One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee/caregiver. 

4. 	
The maximum length of an uninterrupted building façade facing a public street or a resi­


dentially zoned property shall be fifty (50) feet. Building facades greater than fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, which face a public street or residentially zoned property shall provide façade articulation or architectural design variations for a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the length of the façade. Building wall offsets (projections and recesses), cornices, varying building materials, or pilasters shall be used to break up the mass of a single building. 
5. 	Such facilities may include multi-purpose recreational rooms, kitchens, and meeting rooms. Such facilities may also include medical examination rooms and limited space for 
ancillary services for the residents of the facility such as barber and beauty shops. 
6. 	Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained. 
SECTION 8.05 ADULT GROUP DAY CARE HOME 
A. 	Location:  The lot or parcel on which such use is located shall not be located closer than one thou­sand five hundred (1,500) feet, as measured along a street or road open to the public, to any of the following: 
1. 
Another Adult Group Day Care Home 

2. 
A Child Group Day Care Home 

3. 
An Adult Foster Care Small Group Home or Adult Foster Care Large Group Home 


B. 	Building Setbacks: The Township Board may impose greater building setback requirements than the minimum specified for the subject parcel’s underlying zoning district in order to ensure com­patibility with adjacent properties. 
C. 	Operation: The hours of operation shall be limited to sixteen (16) hours per twenty-four (24) hours per day. The Township may limit, but not prohibit, the operation of Adult Group Day Care Homes between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
SECTION 8.06 ADULT USE BUSINESSES 
A. 	Purpose and Intent: The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate adult use businesses, to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the Township, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult use businesses within the Township.  However, under no circumstances is public nudity, as defined herein, permis­sible in Delta Township. These regulations were created with the understanding that the Town­ship acknowledges that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby having deleterious effects upon adjacent residential and commercial areas. The Township recognizes that regulation of adult use businesses is necessary to ensure that adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of a surrounding residential area and will not negatively impact the health, safety, and general welfare of Township residents. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to adult materials protected by the Constitution of the United States or the Michigan Constitution, or to deny access by the distribu­tors and exhibitors of adult entertainment or adult use businesses to their intended market. It is 





also neither the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene 
material. 
B. 	Special Land Use Approval: The Township Board may impose such conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, or operation of an Adult Use Business, as shall, in its judgment considering the standards set forth in Chapter 7, Special Land Use Standards, be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, welfare, and interest, except that any conditions imposed on an Adult Use Business as defined in Chapter 2, Definitions, shall be limited to those conditions necessary to assure compliance with the standards and requirements of Section 
8.06 C. 
C. 	Standards: 
1. 	It shall be unlawful to operate an adult use business within five hundred (500) feet, mea­sured from the nearest property line to the nearest property line on a straight line basis, of 
any of the following: 
a. 	
A place of worship. 

b. 	
A school or childcare facility. 

c. 	
A public park, not to include public trails. 

d. 	
Any residential zoning district. 


2. 	
It shall be unlawful to permit the operation of an adult use business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another adult use business, measured from the nearest property line to the nearest property line on a straight-line basis. 

3. 	
It shall be unlawful to permit the operation or maintenance of more than one (1) adult use business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof. 

4. 	
Adult use businesses shall not be located in buildings in which dwelling units are located. 

5. 	
Activities conducted within buildings housing adult use businesses shall be shielded in such a manner that no person outside the building can see said activities, provided however that 


such shielding shall not consist of a curtain alone, shall not obstruct the exit sign or panic hardware for egress from the exit, nor be constructed in such a way as to block the exit, and shall be approved by the Fire Chief. 





SECTION 8.07 AGRICULTURAL PROCESSING AND FOOD STORAGE 
A. 	Administrative Review:  Agricultural processing uses where the use occupies an area five thou­sand (5,000) square feet or less or agricultural food storage uses where the use occupies an area ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less shall be subject to an administrative review and approval by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review a site plan, drawn to scale depicting property lines, structures and the location of the proposed processing and storage areas as well as supporting documents and determine compliance with the standards herein. The Zon­ing Administrator shall approve or deny the request within forty-five (45) days from the date of submittal of the application. If the application is denied, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of such action and the reasons for the denial. 
B. 	Special Land Use Permit Requirement:   Agricultural processing and/or agricultural food storage uses exceeding the aforementioned thresholds shall be subject to the Special Land Use Permit requirements of Chapter 7 herein. 
C. 	Standards: 
1. 	
Setbacks: Facilities used for agricultural processing and/or food storage shall be setback a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any residential lot line. 

2. 	
Parking: Parking areas shall be adequate to accommodate anticipated traffic and vehicles on site.  No parking shall be permitted within any public road right of way. 


SECTION 8.08 AGRICULTURAL/COMMERCIAL TOURISM 
A. 	Special Land Use Permit Requirement: The following agricultural/commercial tourism businesses shall be subject to the Special Land Use Permit requirements of Chapter 7 herein: 
1. 	
Cider mills or wineries selling product, in a tasting room. 

2. 	
Seasonal outdoor mazes such as straw bales or corn. 

3. 	
Uses 1 and 2 listed above may include any or all of the following ancillary agricultural related uses and some non-agriculturally related uses as long as the principal use on the property is agricultural and the agricultural-character of the farm is maintained. 


a. 	Value-added agricultural products or activities such as education tours of process­ing facilities, etc. 
b. 	Playgrounds or equipment typical of a school playground, such as slides, swings, etc. (not including motorized vehicles or rides). 
c. 	Petting farms, animal display, and pony rides. 
d. 	Wagon, sleigh, and hay rides. 





e. 	
Nature trails. 

f. 	
Open air or covered picnic area(s) with restrooms. 


g. 	Educational classes, lectures, seminars. 
h. 	Historical agricultural exhibits. 
i. 	
Kitchen facilities, for the processing, cooking, and/or baking of goods. 

j. 	
Gift shops for the sale of agricultural products and agriculturally related products. 


4. 	Other commercial/tourism businesses that are complementary and accessory to the princi­pal agricultural use of the property including but not limited to: 
a. 	
Small-scale entertainment (e.g. music concert, car show, art fair). 

b. 	
Organized meeting space (e.g. for use by weddings, birthday parties, and corporate events). 


c. 	Designated permanent parking for more than twenty (20) vehicles. 
B. 	Submittal of Information: The following information shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator at the time the Special Land Use Permit application is submitted:  
1. 
Months (season) of operation. 

2. 
Hours of operation. 

3. 
Estimated number of customers. 

4. 
Solid waste disposal. 

5. 
Signage. 

6. 
Lighting. 

7. 
Maximum number of employees on largest shift. 

8. 
Restroom facilities. 

9. 
Depiction of the location of all activities and corresponding structures. 


C. 	Standards: 
1. 	
Minimum lot area of five (5) acres. 

2. 	
A one hundred (100)-foot open buffer shall be provided on all sides of the property not abut­ting a roadway. Business activities shall not be conducted within the buffer area. Where 







possible, crops shall remain within this buffer area to help maintain the agricultural char­acter of the site. 
3. 	Off-street parking shall be provided as per Section 11.03. 
a. 	Parking facilities may be located on a grass or gravel area for seasonal uses, but such areas shall be maintained in a dust-free condition. 
D. 	Nuisance Abatement:  Agricultural/Commercial Tourism businesses shall be operated within the applicable limits imposed by this Ordinance and the Delta Charter Township Code of Ordinances; and shall not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment or condition of operation that will be detrimental to the natural environment, public health, safety or welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, odors, or other such nuisances. 
SECTION 8.09 ANIMAL OR RESCUE SHELTER 
A. 	Standards: 
1. 	
The Special Use Permit shall establish a limit on the permitted number of animals at the shelter at any one time. 

2. 	
Buildings in which animals are kept, animal runs, and exercise areas shall be setback a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any dwelling unit, a residentially zoned property line, and shall not be located in any required yard area. 

3. 	
The Special Land Use Permit may limit the specific species of animals that are permitted. 


B. 	Operations: 
1. 	
Services performed on the premises including grooming, bathing, veterinary care, and similar services shall only be for animals sheltered at the facility. 

2. 	
All animals shall be kept in an enclosed structure except for walking and exercise when accompanied by an employee/volunteer. 

3. 	
An operations and maintenance plan shall be submitted with the Special Land Use Permit application addressing how noise will be attenuated, waste handled, and noting the days and hours of operation. 


SECTION 8.10 BED AND BREAKFAST 
A. 	Resident Proprietor:  The proprietor shall reside at the Bed and Breakfast establishment. 
B. 	Primary Residential Use: The rooms utilized for sleeping shall be part of the primary residential use and not specifically constructed for rental purposes. 
C. 	Minimum Room Area:  The rental sleeping rooms shall have a minimum area of one hundred (100) square feet for one (1) or two (2) occupants with an additional thirty (30) square feet for each oc­cupant to a maximum of four (4) occupants per room. 





D. 	Required Utilities: The bed and breakfast establishment, if not served by public water and sanitary sewer service, shall be limited to four (4) sleeping rooms for rent. 
E. 	Parking: One (1) parking space per room to be rented shall be provided on site, in addition to the parking required for a single family dwelling. 
F. 	Structure Additions/Modifications: Additions or modifications to a structure for the purpose of ac­commodating additional guests shall be prohibited. Physical modifications to the structure may be permitted including, but not limited to, the provision of barrier free access. 
G. 	Accessory Uses:  Accessory retail uses to a bed and breakfast establishment, including but not lim­
ited to gift shops, antique shops, restaurants, and bakeries, shall be prohibited. 
H. 	Meals.  Meals shall be served only to residents, employees, family members, and overnight guests. 
SECTION 8.11 BLOOD PLASMA CENTERS 
A. 	Standards: A waiting area and restroom facilities must be available to all clients at least one (1) hour prior to the start of business inside the building housing the blood plasma center. 
SECTION 8.12 BUILDING MATERIALS SALES, GARDEN CENTERS, AND SIMILAR 
USES 
A. 	Application of Regulations:  Building materials sales, garden centers, plant and tree nurseries, green­houses, landscaping and landscaping supply businesses, and similar uses which are characterized by outdoor storage and sales, unless otherwise specified herein, shall be subject to the standards set forth in this section. 
B. 	Permanent Sales Office: A permanent sales office building shall be located on the subject parcel. The building(s) may also include activities ancillary to the principal use such as the storage of materi­als and equipment storage/repair. 
C. 	Outdoor Storage: No portion of the outdoor storage area shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential zoning district. Outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall, a minimum of six (6) feet in height.  The fence or wall shall have a minimum of two (2) gates providing access to the storage area for vehicles. The fence or wall enclosing the storage area shall meet the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
D. 	Height of Outdoor Storage Rack Fixtures: Outdoor storage racks shall not exceed a fixture height of twenty (20) feet. 
E. 	Access:  Primary access to the subject parcel shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the agency having jurisdiction over the road, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
F. 	Street Maintenance: Public streets within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the entry or exit to the subject parcel shall be kept reasonably clear of mud, dirt, debris and trash deposited from vehicles accessing the site. 





SECTION 8.13 CEMETERIES 
A. 	Screening: Landscape screening adjacent to residentially zoned properties shall be addressed dur­ing site plan review. 
B. 	Assembly: The site shall be designed such that adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles associated with a funeral procession. This assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. 
C. 	Ingress and Egress:  Points of ingress and egress for the site shall be designed so as to minimize possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent thoroughfares and funeral processions or visitors entering or exiting the site. 
D. 	Setbacks. No building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning dis­trict. 
SECTION 8.14 CHILD CARE CENTER/PRESCHOOL 
A. 	Utilities: The Child Care Center/Preschool shall be served by public sanitary sewer and water service. 
B. 	Open Space: There shall be a contiguous open space of a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet provided on the subject parcel.  The open space shall not be located within a required front yard.  This requirement may be waived by the Zoning Administrator if public open space is available within five hundred (500) feet of the subject parcel. 
C. 	Licensing: The Child Care Center/Preschool shall be properly licensed by the State of Michigan. 
D. 	Setbacks:  Child Care Centers/Preschools shall comply with the minimum building setbacks speci­fied for principal buildings in the zoning district in which the Child Care Center/Preschool is lo­cated.  In order to provide a quiet environment for neighboring residents, the Township Board may impose greater setbacks than the minimum specified in those instances where the Child Care Center/Preschool would be located adjacent to single family dwellings. 
SECTION 8.15 CHILD GROUP DAY CARE HOMES 
A. 	Location:  The lot or parcel on which such use is located shall not be located closer than one thou­sand five hundred (1,500) feet, as measured along a street or road open to the public for vehicular traffic, to any of the following: 
1. 	
Another licensed Child Group Day Care Home. 

2. 	
An Adult Group Day Care Home. 

3. 	
An Adult Foster Care Small Group Home or Large Group Home licensed under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, PA 219 of 1979, as amended. 

4. 	
A facility offering substance abuse and rehabilitation service to seven (7) or more people, licensed under Article 6 of the Public Health Code, PA 368 of 1978, as amended. 

5. 	
A community correction center, resident home, halfway house, or other similar facility which houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections. 









B. 	The property shall be maintained consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
C. 	Hours of Operation. The hours of operation of the use shall be limited to sixteen (16) hours per twenty-four (24) hour day. The Township may limit, but not prohibit the operation of Child Group 
Day Care Homes, between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. 
SECTION 8.16 COMMERCIAL FUELING STATIONS 
A. 	Access: Primary access to the site shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the agency hav­ing jurisdiction over the road, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
B. 	Setbacks:  Buildings shall meet the minimum setbacks for the zoning district in which the facility is located.  Canopies and pump islands shall meet the minimum setbacks stipulated in Table 8.60-A.1. 
C. 	Driveways: All driveways shall have a minimum width of thirty five (35) feet and a minimum curb radii of thirty (30) feet. 
D. 	Limited Fuel Sales: Sales of fuel shall be limited to commercial fleet and corporate owned vehicles. Sales of fuel to the general public shall be prohibited. 
E. 	Ancillary Services Setbacks:  Ancillary services and equipment, including but not limited to air hos­es, vacuums, water stations, etc. shall not be located within the required front setback area(s) and shall be situated such that they do not impede vehicular traffic. 
F. 	Prohibited Uses: The following uses and activities shall be prohibited in conjunction with Commer­cial Fueling Stations: 
1. 	
Vehicle Repair. 

2. 	
Vehicle Sales and Leasing. 

3. 	
Overnight storage or parking of vehicles. 

4. 	
Convenience stores. 

5. 	
Transfer of goods between vehicles. 


SECTION 8.17 CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISIONS 
A. 	District Requirements: All condominium units, including single-family detached units, shall comply with the applicable site development standards in Chapter 4 of this Ordinance. 





B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
Utilities: All condominium subdivisions shall comply with the provisions in Section 9.03 Water and Sanitary Sewer Service and Section 10.02 Private Roads. 
Easements: All condominium subdivisions shall provide for dedication of easements to the appro­priate public agencies for the purposes of construction, operation, maintenance, inspection, re­pair, alteration, replacement and/or removal of pipelines, conduits, mains, and other installations of a similar character for the purpose of providing public utility services, including conveyance of sewage; potable water and stormwater runoff across, through, and under the property subject to said easement; and excavation and refilling of ditches and trenches necessary for the location of such installations. 
Special Land Use: In addition to the materials required by Section 7.03, the special land use permit application for condominium subdivisions shall include a condominium subdivision plan containing the following information: 
1. 	
Project Description: A project description which describes the nature and intent of the proposed subdivision. 

2. 	
Survey Plan:  A survey plan of the condominium subdivision. 

3. 	
Site Plan: A site plan showing the location, size, shape, area, and width of all condo­minium units. 

4. 	
Utility Plan: If applicable, a utility plan showing all sanitary sewer and water lines, and easements granted to the Township for installation, repair, and maintenance of all facili­ties. 

5. 	
Flood Plain: Identification of any portions of the condominium subdivision within or abut­ting a flood plain. 

6. 	
Streets:  A street construction, paving, and maintenance plan for all private streets within the proposed condominium subdivision. 

7. 	
Storm Drainage:  A storm drainage and stormwater management plan, including all con­


duits, swales, drains, detention basins and other facilities. 
8. 	
Common Elements: A description of the common elements of the condominium subdivi­sion as will be contained in the master deed. 

9. 	
Use/Occupancy Restrictions:  Proposed use and occupancy restrictions as contained in the master deed. 


All provisions of the condominium subdivision plan which are approved by the Township Board shall be incorporated, as approved, in the master deed for the condominium subdivision.  Any proposed changes to the approved condominium subdivision plan shall be subject to review and approval by the Township Board as a major amendment to a Special Land Use Permit subject to the procedures outlined in Chapter 7 Special Land Uses. 





F. Monuments: All condominium subdivisions which consist in whole or in part of condominium units 
which are building sites shall be marked with monuments as provided below: 
1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 


Monuments shall be located in the ground and made according to the following require­ments, but it is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in the boundary of the subdivision if the angle points can be readily re-established by reference to monuments along the sidelines of the streets. 
All monument used shall be made of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half (0.5)-inch in diameter and thirty-six (36)-inches long and completely encased in concrete at least four (4)-inches in diameter. 
Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the subdivision; at the intersection lines of streets with the boundaries of the subdivision and at the inter­section of alleys with the boundaries of the subdivision; at all points of curvature, points of 
tangency, points of compound curvature, points of reverse curvature, and angle points in the side lines of streets and alleys; and at all angles of an intermediate traverse line. 
If the required location of a monument is in an inaccessible place, or where the locating of a monument would be clearly impractical, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof be clearly indicated on the subdivision and refer­enced to the true point. 
If a point required to be monumented is on a bedrock outcropping, a steel rod, at least one-half (0.5)-inch in diameter, shall be drilled and grouted into solid rock to a depth of at least eight (8)-inches. 
All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practical. 
All lot corners shall be monumented in the field by iron or steel bars or iron pipes at least 
eighteen (18)-inches long and one-half (0.5)-inch in diameter or other approved markers. 
The Township Board may waive the placing of any of the required monuments and mark­
ers for a reasonable time, not to exceed one (1) year, on the condition that the proprietor deposits with the Township Clerk cash or a certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of 
credit running to the municipality, whichever the proprietor selects, in the amount not less 
than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per monument and not less than ten dollars ($10.00) per marker. Such cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and markers have been placed as required within the time specified. 
All streets, either public or private, within a condominium subdivision, shall be constructed to at least the minimum requirements of the Eaton County Road Commission’s construc­tion standards.  The minimum width of the public street easement and the location of the street and required sidewalks within this easement shall be as determined by the Eaton County Road Commission.  The minimum width of the private street easement shall be 
forty (40) feet, and the street shall be located within the easement such that a five (5)-foot wide sidewalk can be constructed along at least one (1) side of the street entirely within the 


easement with a minimum separation of five (5) feet between the street edge (or back of 



curb) and the sidewalk edge.  The width of the private street easement shall be expanded to meet this minimum street/sidewalk separation requirement as necessary, or to accom­modate sidewalks on both sides of the private street, if desired. 
SECTION 8.18 COMMERCIAL MARINAS, BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITIES, AND 
SIMILAR WATER RELATED USES 
A. 	Setbacks: Buildings, docks, and parking areas shall be located no closer than thirty-five (35) feet from any residential zoning district. 
B. 	Accessory Uses:  Uses accessory to marinas, boat launches, and water related uses, such as re­freshment stands, retail shops, bait shops, marine fuel sales, and similar uses are permitted, pro­vided that such uses occupy no more than four hundred (400) square feet of building area. 
C. 	Parking. Parking spaces shall be provided at a rate of three-fourths (0.75) of a vehicular space for each boat slip. 
SECTION 8.19 COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITIES 
A. 	Uses: Outdoor commercial recreational facilities include, but need not be limited to, the follow­ing: 
1. 	
Recreational fields, rinks or courts, including football, softball, soccer, tennis, pickleball, basketball, ice skating, and similar activities. 

2. 	
Miniature Golf. 

3. 	
Swimming pools open to the general public or operated by a private, non-profit organiza­tion. 

4. 	
Archery and firearm shooting ranges. Firearm shooting ranges shall be subject to com­pliance with the Sport Shooting Ranges Act, P.A. 269 of 1989, as amended, and the U.S. Department of Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms regulations. 

5. 	
Music concert pavilions and band shells. 

6. 	
Amusement parks. 

7. 	
Drive-In theaters. 

8. 	
Golf Courses and driving ranges. 

9. 	
Uses accessory to the above uses, such as refreshment stands, retail shops, maintenance 


buildings, offices for management, spectator seating and service areas, locker rooms, rest 
rooms, and similar uses. 
B. 	Buildings and Seating: No building or spectator seating facility shall be located within one hun­dred (100) feet of a property line. 





C. 	Exterior lighting: Exterior Lighting shall be installed in such a manner that it is deflected away from any adjacent residential properties and so that it doesn’t impede the vision of traffic along adjacent streets in accordance with Section 12.05. 
D. 	Access: Access to the site shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the agency having ju­risdiction over the road, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
E. 	Litter Control: The site shall be periodically cleared of debris so that litter does not accumulate on adjacent properties. 
F. 	Nuisance Abatement:  Facilities shall be operated within the applicable limits imposed by this Ordinance and the Delta Charter Township Code of Ordinances; and shall not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment or condition of operation that will be detrimental to the natu­ral environment, public health, safety or welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, 
smoke, odors, or other such nuisances. 
SECTION 8.20 CONVALESCENT CENTERS 
A. 	Site Area:  Such facilities shall be developed on sites having a minimum site area of two (2) acres. 
B. 	Yards: All required yards shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet in width, they shall be landscaped, and they shall be free of parking, trash bins, etc. 
C. 	Ancillary Facilities: Such facilities may include multi-purpose recreational rooms, kitchens, and meeting rooms. Such facilities may also include medical examination rooms and limited space for 
ancillary services for the residents of the facility such as barber and beauty shops. 
SECTION 8.21 COUNTRY CLUBS 
A. 	Permitted Uses: Uses which may be permitted in conjunction with a country club include, but shall not be limited to, accessory buildings, a club house, swimming pool, and the sale of food. 
B. 	Setbacks: Buildings associated with country clubs and outdoor facilities such as swimming pools, tennis and basketball courts shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from a property line. 
C. 	Access: Access to the site shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transporta­tion. 
D. 	Nuisance Abatement:  The facility shall be operated within the applicable limits imposed by this 
Ordinance and the Delta Charter Township Code of Ordinances; and shall not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment, or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to the natural environment, public health, safety, or welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, 





noise, smoke, odors, or other such nuisances. 
SECTION 8.22 CREMATORIUM 
A. 	Public Utilities Required: Crematory sites shall be served by public water and sanitary sewer service. 
B. 	Required Setbacks: Crematories shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any residential zoning district. 
C. 	Auxiliary Electrical Service:  Crematories shall have an auxiliary means of electrical service in the event of a power failure. 
D. 	Fire Protection and Storage Measures:  The proprietor of a crematory shall provide the Zoning Administrator with the plans and specifications for the operation of the crematory indicating fire protection measures and specifying the type of storage for cremated and uncremated remains. 
SECTION 8.23 DRIVE-UP / DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES 
A. 	On-Site Stacking of Vehicles:  Adequate on-site stacking space for vehicles shall be provided for each drive-through window to ensure that vehicles will not interfere with vehicular circulation or parking maneuvers on-site.  Access to and from the property shall not interfere with traffic flows or cause congestion during peak hour traffic of the street(s) serving the property. 
B. 	Ingress and Egress:  Ingress and egress to drive-through facilities shall be part of the internal cir­culation of the site and integrated within the overall site design. 
C. 	Stacking Space Requirements: 
1. 	
Each stacking lane shall be one-way and each stacking lane space shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length. 

2. 	
If proposed, an escape lane shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width to allow other 


vehicles to pass those waiting to be served. 
3. 	The minimum number of stacking spaces per service lane shall be provided for the uses as listed in Table 8.23-C.1. When a use is not specifically listed, the requirements for off-street stacking spaces for a use with similar characteristics, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall apply. 
TABLE 8.23-C.1.  REQUIRED STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES 

Banks, Pharmacy, Laundry/Dry Cleaning 
3 




Restaurants with Drive-Through  6  
Vehicle Washes (Self-Service)  2 at entry, 1 at exit  
Vehicle Washes (Automatic)  6 at entry, 1 at exit  

SECTION 8.24 ESSENTIAL SERVICES, MAJOR 
A. 	Major essential service installations shall be exempt from compliance with the minimum setback, height, lot area, and lot coverage standards for the zoning district in which they are located; however, no portion of any building or structure servicing a major essential service installation shall be located within twenty (20) feet of a property line. 
B. 	The Zoning Administrator may require screening of above ground equipment and structures for 
major essential service installations. 
C. 	Landscaping shall be required for major essential service installations by the Zoning Administrator. 
SECTION 8.25 EXTRACTIVE USES 
A. 	Intent and Purpose: This section is intended to promote the purposes of this ordinance as described in Section 1.02 D. while at the same time permitting the extraction of minerals in locations where they have been naturally deposited. These regulations are also intended to ensure that mining ac­tivities shall be compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the capacities of public services while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. 
B. 	Special Land Use Permit Required:  The mining of sand, gravel, stone, and/or other mineral resourc­es shall be prohibited unless authorized by the granting of a Special Land Use Permit (Chapter 7) by the Township Board and the approval of a site plan as per Chapter 6. 
C. 	Criteria to be Reviewed:  The Planning Commission and Township Board shall consider the following factors when reviewing a Special Land Use Permit application for an extractive operation: 
1. 	
The proposed mining operation shall not result in a probable impairment, pollution, and/or destruction of the air, water, natural resources, and/or public trust therein. 

2. 	
The proposed mining operation shall not result in a probable impairment to the water table and/or private wells of property owners within the reasonably anticipated area of impact during and subsequent to the operation. 

3. 	
The proposed mining operation shall not create a probable impairment of and/or unreason­able alternation in the course, quantity, and quality of surface water, groundwater, and/or the watershed anticipated to be impacted by the operation. 

4. 	
The proposed mining operation shall be compatible with surrounding land uses currently in existence, or reasonably anticipated to be in existence, during the operation of the mining operation based upon application of generally accepted planning standards and principles. 

5. 
The proposed mining operation shall not unreasonably burden the capacity of public ser­







D. 
E. 
F. 
vices and facilities. 
6. 	The proposed mining operation shall not unreasonably impact surrounding property and/ or property along all routes, by the creation of noise, dust, air, water, odor, light, and/or vibration. 
Data Requirements:  The applicant shall submit a report prepared by a geologist and other experts with the credentials to provide compliance with section 205, paragraphs (3) and (4) of the Michi­gan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended, which pertain to mineral extraction. 
Site Standards. 
1. 	
There shall not be more than one (1) access point from a public road to the subject parcel for each six hundred sixty (660) feet of road frontage. 

2. 	
Access to the proposed extractive operation shall be limited to a county primary road, as classified the Eaton County Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. The public roads serving the site shall have the necessary and appropriate load-bearing and traffic volume capacity in relation to 


the proposed intensity of use. 
3. 	The proposed transportation route(s) within the Township shall be as direct and minimal in detrimental impact as reasonably possible, as determined in the discretion of the Town­ship Board. 

Operational Standards: 
1. 	
Mineral extraction shall not take place before sunrise or after sunset. 

2. 	
All activities conducted in conjunction with the extractive operation shall take place no closer than one hundred (100) feet to any property line. 

3. 	
All haul routes, drives, roads, parking/storage areas, and loading/unloading areas within one hundred (100) feet of any lot line shall be paved, watered, or chemically treated in 


order to limit the nuisance caused by wind borne dust on adjacent properties and roads. 
4. 	
All fixed equipment and machinery shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot line and five hundred (500) feet from any residential zoning district. 

5. 	
There shall be a fence erected of not less than six (6) feet in height around the periphery of the area being excavated. Fences shall be adequate to prevent trespass, and shall be 


placed on level terrain no closer than fifty (50) feet to the top edge of any slope. 
6. 	All areas within any single development shall be rehabilitated progressively as they are worked out or abandoned to a condition of being entirely lacking in hazards, inconspicu­ous, and blended with the general surrounding ground form so as to appear reasonably natural. 





G. Restoration Plan: 

1. 	The operator(s) shall file with the Zoning Administrator a detailed plan for the restoration of the development area. The restoration plan shall include: the anticipated future use of the restored land; the proposed final topography depicted by contour lines of an interval not greater than five (5) feet; steps which shall be taken to conserve topsoil; the type and number per acre of trees to be planted; and the location of future roads, drainage courses, and/or other improvements contemplated. 
2. 	The restoration plans shall be filed with and approved by the Zoning Administrator before quarrying or removal operations begin. The plans shall be certified by a soil or geology engineer. In restoration, no filling operations shall be permitted which will likely result in contamination of ground or surface water, or soils, through seepage of liquid or solid waste or which will likely result in the seepage of gases into surface or subsurface water or into the atmosphere. 
3. 	The operator(s) shall file with the Zoning Administrator a bond, payable to the Township and conditioned on the faithful performance of all requirements contained in the approved res­toration plan. The rate per acre of property to be used for the required bond shall be fixed by the Zoning Administrator. The bond shall be released upon written certification by the Zoning Administrator that the restoration is complete and in compliance with the restora­tion plan. 
SECTION 8.26 FARM EQUIPMENT SALES/LEASING AND REPAIR 
A. 	Uses Permitted:  Farm equipment sales and leasing shall include, but shall not be limited to, the sales and leasing of new and used farm equipment. 
B. 	Access:  Primary access to the subject parcel shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Depart­ment of Transportation. 
C. 	Display of Farm Equipment:  Areas used for the display of farm equipment shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from a road right-of-way. The lighting of display areas shall be deflected away from adjacent properties and streets in accordance with Section 12.05. 
D. 	Repair and Maintenance Activities: Repair and maintenance activities, including hydraulic hoists, lubrication pits, and similar activities shall be performed entirely within an enclosed building. 
E. 	Outdoor Storage:  Dismantled, wrecked, or inoperable farm equipment stored outdoors shall be within an area enclosed by an opaque fence or wall a minimum of six (6) feet in height.  Wire fences 
with inserted strips of metal, plastic, and similar materials shall not be permitted. 
SECTION 8.27 FARM MARKETS AND U-PICK OPERATIONS 
A. 	Duration:  these uses may operate seasonally or year-round. 





B. 	Structures:  A physical structure such as a building or tent may be provided, or a farmer may simply rely on an area where a transaction between a customer and a farmer is made. If the operation uses a physical structure such as a building it must comply with the Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act (Act 230 of 1972). 
C. 	Standards: 
1. 	
The building must comply with the setback and height requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 

2. 	
Parking and driveway surfaces are not required to be paved, but must be maintained in a 


dust-free condition. 
3. 	Signage must be in compliance with the Delta Township Sign Ordinance. 
SECTION 8.28 FRATERNITIES AND SORORITIES 
A. 	Parking: In addition to the parking requirement specified in Chapter 11 for fraternities and so­rorities, adequate parking shall be provided to serve formal and informal social activities, chapter meetings, and other on-site events which include the attendance of persons other than those who reside on the property. 
B. 	Sufficient yard areas, open space, landscaping, and screening shall be provided where necessary to ensure compatibility with adjacent residents and protect their privacy. 
SECTION 8.29 FUNCTIONAL FAMILY 
A. 	Standards: The limit upon the number of persons who may reside as a functional equivalent of a domestic family may be increased or enlarged upon a demonstration by the applicant of all of the following: 
1. 	
Parking: Adequate off-street parking is provided on the subject parcel for each adult pro­posed to reside on the premises. 

2. 	
Floor Area:  There shall be a minimum of one hundred and twenty-five (125) square feet of useable floor space per person on the premises excluding garages, unenclosed porches and unfinished basements. 

3. 	
Limitations: In no case shall more than six (6) persons reside in a dwelling as a functional family.  For the purposes of this provision, only one group of two (2) persons related by 


blood, marriage or adoption shall be considered as one (1) person. 
4. 	
Utilities: If the subject parcel is not served by public water and sanitary sewer, an approval of a functional family shall be obtained from the Barry-Eaton District Health Department. 

5. 	
If an application for a functional family is granted, the Special Land Use Permit shall specify the maximum number of persons authorized to reside on the subject parcel. 







SECTION 8.30 GOLF COURSE 

A. 	Location: The site shall be located on a paved street which is classified as a county primary road by the Eaton County Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
B. 	Setbacks: No building or spectator seating facility shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of a property line. 
C. 	Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be installed in such a manner that it is deflected away from any adja­cent residential properties and so that it does not impede the vision of traffic along adjacent streets in accordance with Section 12.05. 
D. 	Property Maintenance:  The site shall be periodically cleared of debris so that litter does not accu­mulate on adjacent properties. 
E. 	Nuisance Prevention: Measures shall be taken as necessary by the Zoning Administrator to ensure that excessive dust, noise, traffic, lighting glare, and trespassing are not inflicted on adjacent proper­ties. 
SECTION 8.31 HIGH RISE BUILDINGS 
A. 	Location: The subject parcel must abut the right-of-way of I-96, I-496, or I-69 to qualify for a build­ing height increase exceeding what is permitted in Chapter 4 District Regulations, for buildings in the Office and Commercial Districts. 
B. 	Height: The maximum building height may be increased by one (1)-foot for each two (2) feet of additional front, side, and rear setback provided, over and above the minimum setback required, to a maximum height of one hundred (100) feet.  If the subject parcel abuts an RA, RB, RC, or RM zoning district, the additional setback shall be added onto the minimum setback distance specified in Chapter 4 District Regulations. 
SECTION 8.32 HOME OCCUPATIONS 
A. 	Special Land Use Requirement: A Special Land Use Permit shall be required for a home occupation. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether or not a proposed home-based business shall be required to obtain a Special Land Use Permit in order to operate as a home occupation. If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, the proposed home-based business activities do not generate traffic to the property, or create noise dust, vibration, odor, smoke, glare, electrical interference, or fire hazard to a greater extent than normally expected to be associated with a single family resi­dence; or substantially increase the use of services such as water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, or garbage collection; the activities may be conducted within the home without having to obtain a Special Land Use Permit for a home occupation. 
B. 	Incidental and Secondary Use: The use of the premises for the occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes. 
C. 	Outdoor Storage:  Exterior storage of equipment or accessory items and/or display of materials, goods, or supplies associated with the home occupation is prohibited. 





D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
Employees:  No person, other than a resident of the premises, shall be engaged in the conduct of 
the occupation on the premises. 
Outside Appearance: There shall be no alterations or exterior treatment to the building or prop­erty which changes its residential appearance or character, with the exception of modifications to accommodate persons with physical disabilities. 
Signage: Signage for home occupations shall be as regulated by the Delta Township Sign Ordi­nance. 
Traffic: 	Unless otherwise stipulated by the Township Board, no more than ten (10) customers or 
clients shall be allowed to visit the subject parcel for any service or product during one (1) day. Customer/client visits and deliveries shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Mon­day through Saturday. 
Floor Area: The area devoted to the occupation shall be limited to a total of four hundred (400) square feet of floor area of the dwelling and any accessory building. 
Nuisance Abatement: The home occupation shall not produce fumes, odors, dust, vibration, or smoke which is discernible to adjacent residents.  The use shall comply with the provisions of the Delta Township Noise Ordinance. 
Commodities: An occupation shall not sell or offer for sale on the premises any article or service which is not produced on the premises. 
Prohibited Home Occupations: Uses which shall be prohibited as home occupations shall include those listed below. Similar uses to those listed shall also be prohibited as determined by the Zon­ing Administrator. 
1. 	
Animal hospitals, veterinarians, and kennels. 

2. 	
Uses which involve medical or dental procedures. 

3. 	
Manufacture or repair of any vehicle, machine, tool, apparatus, or device involving the use 


of an internal combustion engine of any type or size. 
4. 	
The repair of boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, or similar equipment or vehicles, wheth­er motorized or non-motorized. 

5. 	
Welding, machine shop operations, or metal fabricating. 

6. 	
Dismantling, junk, scrap, recycling operations, refuse collection, or storage yards. 

7. 	
Sale of antiques or second hand goods. 

8. 	
Restaurants. 

9. 	
Food preparation and catering; except for the preparation of baked goods, jams/jellies and similar items as permitted by the State of Michigan’s Cottage Food Law, P.A. 113 of 2010, 







as amended. 
10. 	
Tattooing or body piercing. 

11. 	
Firearm sales, service, and repair. 

12. 	
Lawn care, snow plowing, tree services, refuse, and property maintenance businesses. 

13. 	
Dog grooming and doggy daycare. 


L. 	Prior Approved Home Occupations: Home occupations which were previously authorized by the approval of the Township Board prior to the effective date of these regulations shall be permitted to operate under the regulations which were in effect at the time they were authorized, as well as being subject to the stipulations attached contingent to their authorization. 
SECTION 8.33 HOSPITAL 
A. 	Accessory Uses: Accessory uses such as a pharmacy, gift shop, cafeteria, parking garage, etc. shall be permitted in conjunction with a hospital. The total floor area of such uses shall not exceed that of the main hospital complex. 
B. 	Ingress and Egress:  Primary access to the site shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the agency having jurisdiction over the road, or a State trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
C. 	Setbacks:  The minimum front setback for any principal or accessory building from a property line shall be fifty (50) feet and the minimum side and rear setbacks shall be forty (40) feet. Parking areas shall provide a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet. Hospitals located completely within the Office 
(O) or Commercial (C) zoning districts may be reduced to comply with the minimum required set­backs mandated for principal builidngs, accessory buildings, and parking lots within these districts. 
Greater setbacks may be required when abutting or facing residentially zoned properties. 
D. 	Screening: Landscape screening meeting the standards set forth in Section 12.02 shall be provided where a hospital abuts a residentially zoned parcel. Ambulance, waste disposal/recycling, and de­livery areas shall be screened from the view of adjacent residentially zoned properties as required by the Zoning Administrator. 
E. 	Hazardous Materials:  Hazardous materials proposed to be stored or used on site shall be disclosed by the applicant at the time the Special Land Use Permit application is submitted. All such storage and use shall be conducted in accordance with applicable Township, State and federal requirements. 
SECTION 8.34 HOTELS/MOTELS IN OFFICE DISTRICTS 
A. 	Setbacks/Parking: The Township Board may impose greater building and parking lot setbacks for hotels/motels in the office district than specified in Table 4.13-C.1. in order to ensure compatibility with adjacent properties. 
B. 	Landscaping/Screening:  The Township Board may require screening and/or landscaping related 
to outdoor facilities such as swimming pools, patios, etc. when located adjacent to a residentially 





zoned property. 
SECTION 8.35 KENNELS/VETERINARY CARE/PET DAY CARE 
A. 	Application of Regulations: 
1. 	Special Land Use Permit required. 
a. 	Training classes shall be permitted only if specifically authorized by the Special Land Use Permit. 
b. 	In districts other than the AG1 and AG2 districts, a kennel shall not be operated for breeding purposes unless specifically authorized by the Special Land Use Permit. 
2. 	
The Special Land Use Permit shall establish a limit on the number of animals that may be boarded at one time. 

3. 	
The Special Land Use Permit may limit the specific species of animals that are permitted. 

4. 	
The Special Land Use Permit may specify other measures to address the intensity of use. 


B. 	Standards: 
1. 	
Kennels shall be subject to the permit and operational requirements of State and County agencies. 

2. 	
Pet grooming, including bathing, fur and nail trimming, brushing, flea and tick treatment, and similar services shall be permitted if specifically authorized by the Special Land Use 


Permit. 
3. 	
The sale of pet and veterinary products shall be incidental to the kennel unless specifically authorized by the Special Land Use Permit. 

4. 	
Veterinary care shall be incidental to the kennel unless specifically authorized by the Spe­cial Land Use Permit. 

5. 	
Buildings in which animals are kept, animal runs, and exercise areas shall not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any dwelling unit, a residential lot line, and shall not be located in any required yard area. 


C. 	Operations: 
1. 	
All animals shall be kept in an enclosed structure, except for walking and outdoor exercise when accompanied by a kennel employee. 

2. 	
An operations and maintenance plan shall be submitted with the Special Land Use Permit application that addresses how noise will be attenuated, waste handled, and days/hours of operation. 







3. 	In districts other than AG1 and AG2, kennels must be connected to public water and sanitary sewer services. 
SECTION 8.36 LARGE-SCALE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT 
A. 	Building Design and Materials: 
1. 	Facades and Exterior Walls. Building facades greater than fifty (50) feet in length shall incorporate recesses and projections with a minimum depth of five (5) feet along at least 
twenty percent (20%) of the length of the facade.  This requirement shall pertain to building facades which face a public street and is intended to ensure that the building is not monoto­nous in appearance. 
2. 	Roofs. There shall be variations in rooflines to reduce the massive scale of the structure and add visual interest.  Roofs which face a public street shall have at least two (2) of the fol­
lowing features: parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment, overhanging eaves a minimum of three (3) feet past the supporting walls, sloped roofs, and three (3) or more 
roof slope planes. 
B. 	Site Design: 
1. 	
Parking Lot Location: No more than fifty percent (50%) of the off-street parking area de­voted to the large-scale retail establishment shall be located within the required front yard. 

2. 	
Primary Entrance: The primary building entrance shall be clearly identifiable, useable, and located facing the road right of way. 

3. 	
Pedestrian Connection: A pedestrian connection shall be provided between the primary street upon which the building fronts and the building. The connection shall be hard sur­faced, not less than five (5) feet in width, and shall be designed so that parked vehicles do 


not overhang the walkway. 
4. 	Ancillary Functions: Loading docks, trash collection, outdoor storage, cart corrals, and simi­lar functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and landscaping. 
SECTION 8.37 LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION FACILITIES 
A. 	GAAMPS Compliance: Livestock production facilities must follow and be in conformance with all Generally Accepted Agricultural Management Practices (GAAMPs) for Site Selection and Odor Con­trol for New and Expanding Livestock Production Facilities as provided by the Michigan Department of Agriculture (MDA). 
1. 	
A livestock production facility must contact the administrators of the MDA’s Right to Farm Program. 

2. 	
All information and approvals obtained through the MDA shall be provided to the Township for proof of MDA review and verification for conformance to appropriate GAAMPs for Site Selection and Odor Control for a livestock production facility. 







SECTION 8.38 MANUFACTURED HOUSING COMMUNITIES 

A. 

B. 
C. 
D. 
Uses:  The following uses shall be permitted within manufactured housing communities: 
1. 	
Mobile/manufactured homes. 

2. 	
One (1) office building to be used exclusively for conducting the business operations of the manufactured housing community. 

3. 	
Recreation areas, community buildings, playgrounds, and open space areas. 

4. 	
Utility buildings for laundry facilities, including laundromats, and auxiliary storage space. 

5. 	
Child care centers developed in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.14. 

6. 	
Such additional accessory buildings and uses as are customarily incidental to manufac­tured housing communities. 



Site Plan Standards: 
1. 	
The minimum size for a manufactured housing community shall be twenty (20) contiguous acres exclusive of road rights-of-ways. 

2. 	
Manufactured housing communities shall provide for underground installation of all utili­ties. 

3. 	
Manufactured housing communities shall be served by public water and sanitary sewer service. 


Manufactured Home Site Standards: Seventy-five percent (75%) of all mobile/manufactured home sites shall have a minimum area of at least five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet and a minimum lot width of fifty (50) feet. Twenty-five percent (25%) of all mobile/manufactured housing sites shall have a minimum of at least four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet and a minimum lot width of forty (40) feet. 

Manufactured Home Standards: 
1. 	
All mobile/manufactured homes which are placed on lots within manufactured housing communities shall be required to have U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Develop­ment (HUD) mobile/manufactured home certification. 

2. 	
All mobile/manufactured homes placed within manufactured housing communities shall have a minimum of seven hundred twenty (720) square feet of floor area exclusive of ga­rage, basement, or porch. 

3. 	
Prior to occupancy, the mobile/manufactured home shall be connected to a public sani­tary sewer and public water supply. 

4. 	
All mobile/manufactured homes and additions thereto, are required to obtain a Delta Char­ter Township building permit prior to placement on a lot. 

5. 	
Skirting shall be installed around the entire periphery of a mobile/manufactured home. 









E. 	Streets and Parking: 
1. 	All one-way roads within a manufactured housing community shall have a minimum width 
of eighteen (18) feet, with no parking permitted on the roadway. 
2. 	
All two-way roads within a manufactured housing community shall have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet, with no parking on the roadway. 

3. 	
Parking shall be permitted on the roadway if the minimum road width is extended an ad­ditional six (6) feet on each side of the street on which parking is to be permitted. 


F. 	Open Space: 
1. 	At least one (1) open space area shall contain an area which is not less than ten thousand 
(10,000) contiguous square feet. 
2. 	
In order to be eligible as an open space area, a site shall be at least fifteen (15) feet in every dimension and shall contain not less than five hundred (500) contiguous square feet. 

3. 	
Open space areas shall not include existing or proposed street rights of way, parking areas, mobile/manufactured homes, mobile/manufactured home lots, or non-recreational build­ings. 

4. 	
Open space areas may be located within a 100-year flood plain. 


G. 	Variances Granted:  If the Delta Charter Township Zoning Board of Appeals grants a variance as per Chapter 15 herein, which is contrary to the State of Michigan minimum design and construction standards, the Township shall notify the appropriate State agencies within fifteen (15) days of the granting of a variance. 
SECTION 8.39 MIXED USE BUILDINGS 
Mixed use buildings permit a vertical mix of commercial, office, and residential uses within the same build­ing. The following regulations shall apply to mixed use buildings: 
A. 	Minimum Floor Area:  The minimum floor area for a dwelling unit shall be five hundred fifty (550) square feet regardless of the dwelling unit type. 
B. 	Density:  The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be four thousand three hundred (4,300) square feet. 
C. 	Parking:  A minimum of one and one-half (1.5) parking spaces shall be required for each dwelling unit. The minimum required parking for non-residential uses shall be as stipulated by Chapter 11. 





For mixed uses in the same building, the total required parking shall be the sum of the require­ments for the individual uses computed separately. 
D. 	Building Setbacks and Height:  Minimum building setbacks and maximum building heights shall be as stipulated for the zoning district in which the building is located. 
E. 	Lot Area and Width:  Minimum lot area and lot width shall be as stipulated for the zoning district in which the building is located. 
F. 	Lot Coverage:  The maximum lot coverage shall be fifty percent (50%). 
G. 	Open Space: Properties on which a mixed use building(s) is located must reserve a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the gross site area as open space. Open space shall typically include: cultivated landscaping; plazas; parks and recreation space; and stormwater detention areas. A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of all open areas may be hard-surfaced. Streets, parking lots, driveways, concreted-lined detention areas, and private yards shall not be considered open space. Areas mandated by this Ordinance as required buffer zones, greenbelts, and parking lot landscape areas shall not be credited towards the fifteen percent (15%) requirement. 
H. 	Permitted Use Locations: Residential dwellings are only permitted when they are located on an upper floor of a building in which the first floor is devoted entirely to office or retail uses. Residen­tial dwellings shall not be permitted as freestanding buildings on a commercially-zoned property. Office uses may be permitted on any floor of a mixed use building. 
I. 	Prohibited Retail Uses:  The following uses shall be prohibited in a mixed use building: 
1. 	Adult Use Businesses 
2. 	
Massage Parlor/School 

3. 	
Veterinary Establishments 

4. 	
Kennels 

5. 	
Vehicle Repair 


SECTION 8.40 OPEN AIR BUSINESS 
A. 	No outdoor storage, display, and/or sales shall be permitted in any required yard. 
B. 	The use of amplifiers, banners, and other attention gathering devices shall be prohibited. 
C. 	The open air business area shall be paved. 
SECTION 8.41 OUTDOOR DISPLAYS AND SALES 
A. 	Accessory Use:  Outdoor displays shall be conducted by and be considered as an accessory use to the principal use conducted on the premises within Commercial and Industrial districts. 





B. 	Nuisance Abatement: The premises shall be kept clean and orderly. 
C. 	Off-Season Use:  Outdoor display areas shall not be used for storage of goods, materials, displays, 
layaways, and equipment during the off-season. 
D. 	Setbacks:  Outdoor displays shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from a front lot line. 
E. 	Location of Outdoor Display Areas:  An outdoor display shall not occupy or obstruct the use of any 
fire lane, off-street parking, or landscaped area required to meet the standards of this Ordinance. 
F. 	Screening: Outdoor display areas abutting residentially zoned properties shall be screened in ac­cordance with Section 12.02 H. 
G. 	Discontinuance of Use: Upon discontinuance of a seasonal use, any temporary structures shall be removed. 
SECTION 8.42 OUTDOOR SEATING AND SERVICE 
A. 	Accessory Use: Outdoor seating and service areas operated by a restaurant or bar shall be permit­ted in Commercial and Office districts. 
B. 	Application: An application depicting the location and layout of an outdoor seating area shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. Administrative site plan approval in accordance with Section 
6.05 shall be required. 
C. 	Design Standards: 
1. 	
Outdoor seating areas shall be located on the same property as the principal establishment. 

2. 	
Outdoor seating areas shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from a front lot line. 

3. 	
Outdoor seating shall comply with the parking requirements of Section 11.03. 

4. 	
If alcoholic beverages are served in the outdoor seating area, the fencing requirements im­posed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission shall be met. 


SECTION 8.43 OUTDOOR STORAGE 
A. 	Site Plan Details:  The location and size of storage areas, including the nature of items to be stored, the details of the enclosure which includes the description of materials and height, shall be depicted 
on a site plan. 
B. 	Setbacks: Such storage shall not be located within the area between the front face of the building, as extended across the entire width of the property, and to the right of way; in any required side or rear yard; or in any required buffer strip. 
C. 	Parking Spaces:  Such storage shall not be located in any required parking space. 





D. 	Screening: The storage area shall be screened from view on all sides. Screening shall be construct­ed of wood or masonry materials, a minimum of six (6) feet in height.  Wire fences with inserted strips of metal, plastic, and similar materials shall not be substituted for the required screening. Materials shall not be stored above the height of the fence. 
SECTION 8.44 PLACES OF ASSEMBLY 
A. 	Utilities: The site shall be served by public water, sanitary sewer, and adequate storm drainage 
facilities. 
B. 	Setback: No portion of the assembly seating shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of a property line. 
C. 	Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be installed in such a manner that it is deflected away from any adjacent residential properties and so that it does not impede the vision of traffic along adjacent streets in accordance with Section 12.05. 
D. 	Property Maintenance:  The site shall be periodically cleared of debris so that litter does not ac­cumulate on adjacent properties. 
E. 	Nuisance Prevention: Measures shall be taken as necessary by the Zoning Administrator to en­sure that excessive dust, noise, traffic, lighting glare, and trespassing are not inflicted on adjacent properties. 
F. 	Traffic Study:  A traffic impact study shall be prepared in accordance with Section 10.03. 
G. 	Access: The site shall be accessed via a county Class A, all season roadway. 
SECTION 8.45 PLACES OF WORSHIP 
A. 	Access:  Primary access to the subject parcel shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or on a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
B. 	Incidental Facilities:  Facilities incidental to the main religious sanctuary must be used for church, worship, or religious education purposes in a manner which is compatible with adjacent residen­tial uses. Associated uses on the subject parcel, such as: bookstores, recreation centers, retreat facilities, conference centers, health services, schools, convents, and other uses shall meet all re­quirements of this Ordinance for such uses. 
C. 	Maximum Height:  Building heights of greater than the maximum allowed in the district in which a place of worship is located, may be allowed provided that the front, side, and rear yards are in­creased one (1)-foot for each foot of building height which exceeds the maximum height allowed. Structural appurtenances, such as steeples and domes, shall be permitted to exceed maximum building height requirements as per Section 4.17.F.1. 
D. 	Setbacks:  The minimum front setback for any principal or accessory building from a property line shall be fifty (50) feet, and the minimum side and rear setbacks shall be forty (40) feet. Parking ar­





eas shall provide a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet. Places of Worship located completely within the Office (O) or Commercial (C) zoning districts may be reduced to comply with the minimum re­quired setbacks mandated for principal buildings, accessory buildings, and parking lots within these 
districts. Greater setbacks may be required when abutting or facing residentially zoned properties. 
E. 	Traffic Control: Traffic from events including worship services and other large assemblies, shall be controlled so as not to create congestion or unreasonable delays on adjacent streets. 
SECTION 8.46 POST-SECONDARY SCHOOLS 
A. 	Accessory Uses: Accessory uses such as a cafeteria, book store, recreation center, child care facili­ties, etc. shall be permitted in conjunction with a post-secondary school. 
B. 	Ingress and Egress:  Primary access to the subject parcel shall be on a county primary road, as clas­sified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or on a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
C. 	Setbacks:  The minimum front setback for any principal or accessory building from a property line shall be fifty (50) feet, and the minimum side and rear setbacks shall be forty (40) feet. Parking areas shall provide a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet. Post-Secondary Schools located com­pletely within the Office (O) or Commercial (C) zoning districts may be reduced to comply with the minimum required setbacks mandated for principal buildings, accessory buildings, and parking lots within these districts. Greater setbacks may be required when abutting or facing residentially zoned properties. 
D. 	Parking.  Parking areas shall not be located in any required setback areas. 
E. 	Service and Maintenance Buildings: Buildings used for servicing or maintenance, such as heating 
plants, garages, and storage structures shall be screened from residentially-zoned properties in ac­cordance with the standards of Section 12.02 H. herein. 
SECTION 8.47 PRIMARY/SECONDARY SCHOOLS 
A. 	Ingress and Egress:  Primary access to the subject parcel shall be on a county primary road, as clas­sified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or on a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
B. 	Setbacks:  The minimum front setback for any principal or accessory building from a property line shall be fifty (50) feet, and the minimum side and rear setbacks shall be forty (40) feet. Parking areas shall provide a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet. Primary/Secondary Schools located com­pletely within the Office (O) or Commercial (C) zoning districts may be reduced to comply with the minimum required setbacks mandated for principal buildings, accessory buildings, and parking lots within these districts. Greater setbacks may be required when abutting or facing residentially zoned properties. 
C. 	Parking:  Parking areas shall not be located in any required setback areas. 
D. 	Play Areas:  Outdoor play areas shall not be permitted in the required front setback area. 





E. 	Service and Maintenance Buildings: Buildings used for servicing or maintenance, such as heating plants, garages, and storage structures, shall be screened from residentially-zoned properties in accordance with the standards of Section 12.02 herein. 
SECTION 8.48 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS 
A. 	Authorizations. The establishment and operation of a public or private campground shall be in compliance with the following: 
1. 	The Michigan Public Health Code, being P.A. 368 of 1978, as amended, and the administra­
tive rules adopted pursuant to the Act. 
2. 	
The campground shall obtain a license to operate from the Michigan Department of Envi­ronmental Quality. 

3. 	
The campground shall be in compliance with the applicable regulations of the Barry-Eaton District Health Department. 


SECTION 8.49 RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCAST TOWERS 
A. 	Application Requirements. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Chapter 6, showing the loca­tion, size, screening, and design of all buildings and structures shall be submitted with the Special Land Use Permit application for radio and television broadcast towers. 
B. 	Site and Development Requirements. 
1. 	
Principal or Accessory Use.  Broadcast towers may be considered either a principal or accessory use. An existing use on the same parcel shall not preclude the installation of a broadcast tower on said parcel. 

2. 	
Exemptions From Lot Area, Width, and Coverage Requirements.  Broadcast towers shall not be required to comply with the minimum lot area, lot width, and lot coverage require­ments for the district in which they are located. 

3. 	
Setbacks. Broadcast towers and any supporting wires or structures, shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a property line. 

4. 	
Screening. The Township Board may require screening, such as: solid fencing, a wall, or landscaping in order to ensure compatibility between broadcast towers and adjacent properties. 

5. 	
State and Federal Requirements.  Broadcast towers shall meet the standards of the Fed­


eral Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission, and any other agency of the State of Michigan or the federal government with authority to regulate tow­ers and antennas.  Broadcast tower applicants shall submit statements, permits, and/or li­
censes from the applicable agencies attesting to compliance with the applicable standards prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance by the Zoning Administrator. 
6. 	Certification by Structural Engineer.  The plans for the tower construction shall be certi­





fied by a registered structural engineer. The tower shall be designed to withstand a uniform 
wind loading as prescribed in the Township’s Building Code, as amended. 
7. 	Cessation of Operation.  The property owner or user of the broadcast tower shall be subject to the cessation of operation regulations in Section 8.67 C.12. 
SECTION 8.50 RECYCLING CENTER – LARGE COLLECTION FACILITY 
A. 	Submittal of Data: Special Land Use Permit applications for the establishment of a Recycling Center 
– Large Collection Facility shall also require submission of a written detailed description identifying the types of recyclables to be received; the methods of collection and storage; and the ultimate disposition of the collected materials. The applicant shall be required to submit written materials 
outlining measures taken to comply with all applicable federal, state, county, and local laws. 
B. 	Standards: 
1. 	
Primary access to the subject parcel shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 

2. 	
No recycling units, collection areas, or storage areas shall be located within five hundred 

(500) feet of any residential zoning district. 

3. 	
Recyclable collection and storage areas shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall con­structed of a sturdy, durable material and sufficiently high and opaque to ensure that the units and stored materials are not visible from adjoining properties or public roads. In no 


case shall the fence or wall be less than six (6) feet in height, nor more than twelve (12) feet 
high. Said fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. 
4. 	
Stored materials shall not be stored in a manner so as to be visible from adjoining properties or rights-of-way. In no case shall materials be stored at a height exceeding the height of the storage area fence or wall. 

5. 	
Recycling units shall not be located within the required front setback area, or within any required buffer zones or greenbelts on a site. 

6. 	
The collection and storage areas, as well as access drives shall be hard-surfaced with as­phalt, concrete, or porous pavement materials designed to support the weight of the recy­cling units and any associated transport vehicles. 

7. 	
Conditions within the collection and storage areas shall be monitored, maintained, and con­trolled to minimize the hazards of fire and other threats to health and safety. 

8. 	
All portions of the storage area shall be accessible to emergency vehicles. 

9. 	
The facility shall be maintained free of litter and any other unsanitary materials and shall be cleaned of debris on a daily basis. 

10. 
The recycling units shall be clearly marked to identify the type of materials allowed to be 







deposited. 
11. The facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility opera­
tor and the hours of operation. An employee of the operator shall be on-site at all times during operating hours. 
C. Prohibited Activities: 
1. 
Incineration or open burning in any building or on the site. 

2. 
Overnight storage of any refuse material, other than recyclable materials, in any building. 

3. 
Dumping or storage of material on the site outside the buildings at any time. 


SECTION 8.51 RECYCLING CENTER – SMALL COLLECTION FACILITY 
A. Standards: 
1. 	
The facility shall be located on a site that is a minimum of two (2) acres in size. 

2. 	
The facility shall be located within a contiguous area on a site and there shall be not more than one (1) facility on any particular site. 

3. 	
The facility and its access drives shall be hard-surfaced with asphalt, concrete, or porous pavement materials designed to support the weight of recycling units and any associated transport vehicles. 

4. 	
Recycling units shall not be located within the required front setback area, or within any required buffer zones or greenbelts on a site.  In no case shall a recycling unit be located closer than forty (40) feet to a property line. 

5. 	
Recycling units shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet. 

6. 	
Those portions of the facility that are visible from public thoroughfares or residences shall be screened by an opaque fence, wall, or landscaped screen, which is not less than six (6) feet in height. 

7. 	
The recycling units shall be clearly marked to identify the type of materials allowed to be deposited. 

8. 	
Yard waste, motor oil, gasoline, and hazardous waste shall be prohibited from being de­


posited at small collection facilities. 
9. 	The facility shall be maintained free of litter and any other unsanitary materials and shall be cleared of debris. 
10. Recycling units shall be covered and contained in such a manner that they do not present a danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. 





SECTION 8.52 REFUSE AND GARBAGE INCINERATORS 

A. 	Submittal of Data: Special Land Use Permit applications for refuse and/or garbage incinerators shall provide documentation identifying the types and quantities of waste and the intended service area; the proposed method of on-site storage of materials intended for incineration; an estimation of vehicular traffic to and from the site; and the identification of the types and quantities of materials 
deposited in the sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems.  The Township Board may require the 
preparation of an environmental assessment by an independent environmental consultant. 
B. 	Access: Access to the site shall be on a county primary road as classified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transporta­tion. 
C. 	Street Cleaning: Public streets within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of vehicular access points to the site shall be kept reasonably clear of mud, dirt, debris, and trash deposited from ve­
hicles entering or exiting the site. 
D. 	Setbacks: No portion of the incinerator building/structure or the corresponding storage area shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residential zoning district. 
E. 	Fencing:  All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall constructed of a sturdy, durable material.   The fence or wall enclosing the storage area shall meet the applicable building setback requirements. 
F. 	Storage of Materials. Stored materials shall be positioned in a manner so as not to be visible from adjoining properties. Conditions within the storage area shall be controlled to minimize hazards to the public health, safety and welfare. All portions of the storage area shall be accessible to emer­gency vehicles. 
SECTION 8.53 SALVAGE YARDS 
A. 	Applications: Special Land Use Permit applications for a salvage yard shall include the submission of a detailed proposal identifying the predominate type of salvage to be received; the methods of separation and/or recycling; and the ultimate destination of waste materials. The applicant shall be required to submit written materials outlining measures taken to comply with applicable state, 
county, and local laws. 
B. 	Site Development Standards: 
1. 	
Access to the site shall be on a county primary road classified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 

2. 	
No portion of the processing or storage area shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residential zoning district. 

3. 	
All outdoor storage areas shall be completely enclosed by a fence or wall constructed of a sturdy, durable material.  The fence or wall shall have a minimum of two (2) gates providing access to the storage area for vehicles. 







4. 	
Stored materials shall be positioned in a manner so as not to be visible from adjoining properties. The fence or wall enclosing the storage area shall meet the applicable building setback requirements. 

5. 	
A management office shall be provided on site. A residence may be permitted on site for security personnel or an on-site operator. 

6. 	
Conditions within the storage area shall be controlled to minimize hazards to the public health, safety, and welfare. 

7. 	
All portions of the storage area shall be accessible to emergency vehicles. 


SECTION 8.54 SCRAP TIRE COLLECTION/PROCESSING 
A. 	Submittal of Data: Special Land Use Permit applications for scrap tire collection/processing fa­cilities shall provide documentation identifying the estimated quantity of tires to be stored and processed on a monthly basis; the proposed method of processing the tires; and an emergency procedures plan shall be submitted for the Township Fire Chief’s approval, which must be posted 
on site. 
B. 	Access: Access to the site shall be on a county primary road as classified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transpor­tation. 
C. 	Storage Requirements: 
1. 	
Tires cannot be stored within fifty (50) feet of a property line or building. 

2. 	
The tire storage area must be enclosed by a fence at least six (6) feet in height.  The fence shall be constructed of a sturdy, durable material and shall be sufficiently opaque to en­sure that tires are not visible from outside the storage area. Wire fences with inserted strips of metal, plastic and similar materials are prohibited. 

3. 	
Tires cannot be in piles greater than fifteen (15) feet in height. Individual tire storage piles shall not occupy an area greater than forty (40) feet by two hundred (200) feet (or eight thousand (8,000) square feet). 

4. 	
A minimum distance of twenty (20) feet must be maintained between tire piles which shall be kept free of trash, equipment, and vehicles. 

5. 	
Tire piles must either be covered by plastic sheets or other impermeable barriers, be chemically or biologically treated, or be shredded or chipped into pieces no larger than four (4) inches by six (6) inches (or twenty-four (24) square inches), and stored in pieces that will allow water drainage. 

6. 
Tire storage areas shall be regularly mowed, or kept free of weeds, vegetation, and other growth at all times. 








SECTION 8.56 SIT-DOWN RESTAURANTS IN OFFICE DISTRICTS 
A. 	A sit-down restaurant shall only be permitted in an office district when located on the same par­cel as a hotel or an office building with a gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more. 
B. 	A drive-in/drive-through operation shall not be conducted in conjunction with a sit-down restau­rant in an office district. 
SECTION 8.57 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS (SES) 
A. 	Intent: It is the intent of this section to regulate the safe, effective, and efficient use of solar en­ergy systems (SES) in order to reduce or replace the consumption of electricity supplied by utility companies. 
B. 	Applicability: 
1. 	
The requirements of this Section shall apply to all SES installed after the effective date of this ordinance.  

2. 	
SES which were installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Section except for modifications to an existing SES that increase the SES area by more than ten percent (10%) of the original footprint or that change the solar panel type. Only the modification or alteration is subject to this ordi­nance. 


C. 	Types of Solar Energy Systems: 
1. 	Level 1 Solar Energy Systems:  Level 1 Solar Energy Systems generally provide energy pri­marily for on-site uses.  Level 1 systems may be comprised of the following: 
a. 	Rooftop solar energy systems on any structure. 
b. 	Rooftop solar thermal systems on any structure. 
c. 	Ground-mounted solar energy systems may occupy an area up to fifty percent (50%) of the footprint of the principal structure on the parcel, but shall in no case exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet in area on any residentially-zoned par­cel, or ten thousand (10,000) square feet on parcels located in all other zoning districts. 






2. 
3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 


be subject to review and approval by the Zoning Administrator. Exceptions to Zoning Ad­ministrator review shall be a single solar panel less than ten (10) square feet in area or the repair and replacement of equipment related to an existing solar energy system which does not increase the size of the system. Applicants for Zoning Administrator review shall submit a plot plan to the Zoning Administrator providing the setbacks and height of the equipment including a data sheet from the equipment manufacturer. 
Setbacks: On a residentially-zoned parcel, ground-mounted SES shall not be located in the required front yard, and shall have a minimum setback of five (5) feet from the side and rear property lines. In all other zoning districts ground mounted SES shall not be located in the required front, side or rear yard with the exception that the Township Board may approve a Level 3 system in a required side or rear yard during its approval of the Special Land Use Permit. Security fencing, poles, and access roads for Level 2 and Level 3 systems shall be exempt from setback requirements. 

Height. 
a. 	Ground Mounted:  Ground mounted solar energy collectors shall not exceed six­teen (16) feet in height as measured from ground level to the top of the solar col­
lectors when oriented at maximum tilt. 
b. 	Rooftop Mounted: Rooftop mounted SES shall not project more than five (5) feet above the highest point of the roof, but, in any event, shall not exceed the maxi­mum building height for the zoning district in which it is located.  Roof-mounted 
SES shall not project beyond the eaves of the roof. 
Wall Mounted SES: Solar energy collectors that are wall-mounted shall not exceed the height of the building wall to which they are attached.  
Solar Thermal Systems: Solar thermal systems shall be a permitted use by-right in all zon­ing districts. 
Lot Coverage:  The surface area of ground-mounted solar collectors shall not be included in the calculation of the maximum permitted lot coverage requirement for any parcel of land. 
Accessory Use: Level 1 and 2 SES shall be an accessory use, not the principal use, on a residentially-zoned parcel. 
Buffering: Buffer zones around the perimeter of an SES shall be required in accordance with Section 12.02 H. herein as they pertain to the zoning district in which they are lo­cated. 
Buried Power Lines: On-site power lines related to SES shall be buried except where nec­essary to connect to existing overhead transmission lines or where prohibited by natural features. 





10. 	Security: Special Land Use Permit applicants for a level 3 SES shall submit a security plan detailing on-site security provisions which could include fencing, full-time security guards, 
video surveillance, etc. 
11. 	Construction Waste Management Plan: The initial construction of Level 2 or Level 3 SES can produce large quantities of cardboard, wood, scrap metal, and scrap wire. Applicants for a Level 2 or Level 3 SES shall submit a Construction Waste Management Plan describing the 
methods of waste disposal.  
12. 	Decommissioning: At the time a Special Land Use Permit is filed for a Level 2 or Level 3 SES, as required by Table 8.57-D.1, a decommissioning plan shall be submitted as follows: 
a. 	
Defined conditions upon which decommissioning will be initiated (i.e., end of land lease, no power production for twelve (12) months, etc.) 

b. 	
Removal of all non-utility owned equipment, conduit, structures, fencing, roads, and building foundations to a depth of three (3) feet below grade. 

c. 	
Restoration of property to the condition prior to development of the SES. 

d. 	
The timeframe for completion of decommissioning activities. 

e. 	
An engineer’s cost estimate for all aspects of the decommissioning plan. 

f. 	
Description of any agreement (e.g., lease) with the landowner regarding decommis­sioning. 

g. 	
Provisions for updating the decommissioning plan. 


h. 	
A statement signed by the owner or operator that they take full responsibility for reclaiming the site in accordance with the decommissioning plan and the Special Land Use Permit upon cessation of use. 

i. 	
The Township Board may mandate that the owner or operator provide a financial guarantee to cover the costs of decommissioning the site. 

j. 	
The decommissioning plan shall be recorded with the Eaton County Register of Deeds. 


k. 	The Delta Township Electrical Inspector shall conduct a final inspection to confirm that the SES has been decommissioned consistent with the provisions of the de­commissioning plan. 
F. 	Other Approvals Required: 
1. 	
Building/Electrical Permits: Nothing in this ordinance modifies the building code and elec­trical code standards, as amended, to construct a SES. 

2. 	
Onsite Wastewater System Avoidance: Nothing in this ordinance modifies the regulations 








B. 	Ancillary Service Setbacks: Ancillary services and equipment, including but not limited to: vacuums, air hoses, propane tank sales/exchanges, vending machines, etc. shall not be located within the re­quired front setback area and shall be situated on the site in such a manner that does not impede 
vehicular traffic. 
C. 	Parking: Vehicle fueling sites which have multiple uses, such as convenience stores, shall meet the minimum parking requirements as per Chapter 11 herein. 
D. 	Vehicle Washes: If a vehicle wash is proposed, it must comply with the standards set forth in Sec­tion 8.64. 
SECTION 8.61 VEHICLE REPAIR 
A. 	Access:  Primary access to the subject parcel shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Depart­ment of Transportation. 
B. 	Outdoor Storage: Dismantled, wrecked, or inoperable vehicles awaiting repair stored outdoors shall be within an area enclosed by an opaque fence or wall a minimum of six (6) feet in height.  Wire 
fences with inserted strips of metal, plastic, and similar materials shall not be permitted. 
C. 	Screening: The Township Board may require screening, including but not limited to: solid fencing, a masonry wall, an earthen berm, and/or landscaping to ensure compatibility between vehicle repair establishments and adjacent properties. 
D. 	Disposal Containers: Suitable containers shall be provided and used for disposal of used and dam­aged parts.  Trash, tires, and supplies shall not be stored outside of an enclosed building. 
E. 	Repair and Maintenance Activities: Repair and maintenance activities, including hydraulic hoists, lubrication pits, and similar activities shall be performed entirely within an enclosed building. 
F. 	Front Setback Restrictions: Ancillary services and equipment including but not limited to: vacuums, air hoses, propane tank sales/exchanges, vending machines, etc. shall not be located within the re­quired front setback area and shall be situated on the site in such a manner that does not impede 
vehicular traffic. 
G. 	Vehicle Sales and Leasing: Vehicle sales and leasing shall be permitted in conjunction with a vehicle repair facility.  Vehicle sales and leasing shall comply with the standards contained in Section 8.62. 
H. 	Prohibited Uses: The following uses and activities shall be prohibited in conjunction with a vehicle repair facility: 
1. 	Convenience stores. 
2. 	
Salvage yards. 

3. 	
Auction sales. 



SECTION 8.62 
VEHICLE SALES / LEASING AND SERVICE FACILITIES 



A. 	Uses Permitted: Vehicle sales and leasing shall include, but shall not be limited to: the sales and leasing of new and used motor vehicles; recreation vehicles; motorcycles; snowmobiles; water­craft; and open/enclosed trailers. 
B. 	Access:  Primary access to the subject parcel shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the Eaton County Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
C. 	Setbacks: No vehicles shall be parked or displayed within twenty (20) feet of any road right-of-way. 
D. 	Paving of Display Areas:  Areas used for the display of vehicles shall be paved. 
E. 	Lighting of Display Areas: If areas used for the display of vehicles are illuminated, the lighting shall be deflected away from adjacent properties and streets in accordance with Section 12.05. 
F. 	Noise: Loud speakers broadcasting voice or music outside of a building shall not be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of a residential property line. 
G. 	Repair and Maintenance: All repair and maintenance activities shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 8.61. 
H. 	Vehicle Deliveries: Vehicle deliveries shall take place on the premises and shall not interfere with 
vehicular traffic on a public road. 
SECTION 8.63 VEHICLE/EQUIPMENT STORAGE YARDS 
A. 	Submittal of Data: Special Land Use Permit applications for vehicle storage yards shall provide documentation of the predominate type of vehicles/equipment to be received; modifications to the vehicles/equipment while on site; the ultimate destination of the vehicles/equipment; the maximum number of vehicles to be stored on site; and an estimate as to the typical length of stor­age time. 
B. 	Access: Access to the site shall be on a county primary road, as classified by the Eaton Coun­ty Road Commission, or a state trunk line under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
C. 	Storage Requirements: 
1. 	
No portion of a vehicle storage yard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any residential zoning district. 

2. 	
The vehicle storage area must be enclosed by a fence at least six (6) feet in height. The fence shall be constructed of a sturdy, durable material. 

3. 	
Vehicles shall not be stored so as to exceed the height of the fence surrounding the stor­age yard. 


D. 	Environmental Protection: Improvements may be required to ensure environmental protection 





including but not limited to: oil separators on storm drains, containment areas around fuel/oil stor­age areas, etc. 
E. 	Security: Security may be required by the Township Board for the storage yard via a private service or a watchman’s on-site quarters. 
SECTION 8.64 VEHICLE WASH 
A. 	Siting of Activities: All washing activities shall be carried on within a building. Vacuuming activi­ties shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from a residential lot line. Wash bays for self-serve washes shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from a residential lot line. 
B. 	Stacking Spaces:  Stacking spaces for vehicle washes shall be as required by Table 8.23-C.1. 
C. 	Mechanical Dryer: Automatic Vehicle Washes shall provide a mechanical dryer operation at the end of the wash cycle. 
D. 	Ancillary Services: Ancillary services and equipment including, but not limited to: air hoses, vacu­ums, water stations, shall not be located within the required front setback area(s) and shall be situ­ated as not to impede vehicular traffic. 
E. 	Exiting Vehicles: All automatic vehicle wash facilities must provide a demonstrated means at the site exit to prevent the pooling and/or freezing of water on the adjacent public roadway(s). 
F. 	Screening: Self-serve wash bays located with openings parallel to an adjacent street shall be screened or buffered as required by the Zoning Administrator. 


SECTION 8.65 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS) – LARGE 
A. 	Submittal of Plans and Data: Special Land Use Permit applications shall be accompanied by a site plan that includes the following information: 
1. 	
Topographic contours at two (2)-foot intervals. 

2. 	
Location, elevation, and height of any proposed tower. 

3. 	
Location and dimensions (including height) of all existing structures located on the pro­posed WECS site. 

4. 	
Location and design of all access roads intended to be constructed for access to the WECS site. Access roads for WECS shall be exempt from the requirements of the Township’s Pri­vate Road Ordinance. 

5. 	
Current land use and zoning classification for all adjacent parcels. 

6. 	
Location and dimensions (including height) of all existing structures located within five hun­dred (500) feet of any proposed tower location. 







B. 

C. 
D. 
7. 	Location and height of any tree, pole, antennae, or other similar structure over thirty-five 
(35) feet in height within five hundred (500) feet of any proposed tower location. 
Submittal of Impact Analysis:  The applicant shall submit an Impact Analysis as part of the Special Land Use Permit application, prepared by a registered structural engineer, evaluating the likely impacts of the proposed facility regarding: 
1. 	
Anticipated noise and vibration levels at all property lines. 

2. 	
Potential impacts on wildlife, including native and migrating birds. 

3. 	
“Shadow flicker” and glare impacts on all adjacent properties. 

4. 	
Radio and/or television interference. 

5. 	
Aesthetic impacts of the WECS, especially on adjacent properties. 


Principal or Accessory Use: Large WECS may be considered as either a principal or accessory use. An existing use on the same parcel(s) shall not preclude the installation of a large WECS. 
Site Development Requirements: 
1. 	
Large WECS shall maintain a minimum setback of a least two (2) times the tower and blade height from any public road right of way line or property line. 

2. 	
Large WECS shall maintain a minimum distance of at least the combined tower and blade height from any habitable structure. 

3. 	
Large WECS shall be constructed such that the minimum height of the lowest position of the blade is at least thirty (30) feet above the ground. 

4. 	
Large WECS shall be exempt from the height restrictions in the zoning district in which it is located. 

5. 	
Large WECS and supporting structures shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted and maintain a neutral color intended to reduce visual obtrusiveness to the greatest extent feasible. 

6. 	
Large WECS shall meet the standards of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission, and any other agency of the State of Michigan or federal 


government with authority to regulate towers and tall structures. The applicant shall sub­mit statements, permits, and/or licenses from the applicable agencies attesting to compli­ance with the applicable standards prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compli­ance by the Zoning Administrator. 
7. 	The towers and other structures associated with a large WECS shall not be artificially light­ed by any means or in any fashion unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 





8. 	No advertising or identification may be displayed on any tower, structure, or other compo­nent of a large WECS except for safety/emergency purposes as required by this ordinance. 
E. 	Safety Measures: 
1. 	The large WECS shall be designed and certified by a registered engineer to withstand wind loading and other conditions experienced in severe weather, as required by the Michigan 
Building Code. 
2. 	A registered engineer shall certify that the large WECS is equipped with both manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the rotor blade so it does not exceed the 
design limits of the rotor. 
3. 	
All components of a large WECS shall be properly grounded to safely sustain natural light­ning strikes in conformance with the Michigan Building Code and Michigan Electrical Code. 

4. 	
A registered engineer shall certify that the large WECS is designed and constructed to not cause radio and/or television interference. 

5. 	
All large WECS facilities shall be equipped with anti-climbing devices and features. No tower climbing apparatus shall be permitted to be located within twelve (12) feet of the ground. 

6. 	
The base of all large WECS facilities, including towers, wire cable supports, and accessory buildings shall be enclosed by a locked protective chain link fence a minimum six (6) feet in height. The Township Board may specify additional fencing requirements relative to the height and type of fencing as deemed necessary. 

7. 	
All large WECS structures shall be posted with at least one (1) safety/warning sign. The Zon­


ing Administrator shall determine the location and placement of the signs. Each sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in size, and shall contain the following information: 
a. 	“Warning: High Voltage”. 
b. 	
Manufacturer’s name. 

c. 	
Operator’s name. 

d. 	
Emergency phone number. 

e. 	
Emergency shutdown procedures. 


F. 	Abandonment: 
1. 	Any time a WECS remains non-functional or inoperative for a period of at least three hun­dred sixty-five (365) continuous days, the owner shall notify the Zoning Administrator and supply him/her with a written plan for the future usage and future maintenance of the WECS. 





2. 	
Upon failure of the owner to supply the Zoning Administrator with an acceptable plan for the future maintenance and/or future use of the WECS, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the WECS to be a public nuisance, and require the demolition/removal of the WECS along with restoration of the grounds to the condition which existed prior to the construction of the WECS. 

3. 	
If deemed a public nuisance and a safety hazard, the WECS shall be subject to the Danger­ous Buildings Ordinance. Demolition, removal, and restoration of the property to the con­dition that existed prior to the construction of the WECS may then proceed in compliance 


with the Dangerous Building Ordinance. 
4. 	
If, after notification of the Township’s intent to demolish or remove and restore the WECS pursuant to the Dangerous Buildings Ordinance, the WECS has not been removed within sixty (60) days of the applicable deadline, and after at least thirty (30) days written no­tice, the Township may remove or secure the removal of the WECS with the actual costs and reasonable administration charges to be billed directly to the property owner and/ or user of the WECS. The property owner or WECS user shall be responsible for demoli­tion, removal, and restoring the condition of the property to that which existed prior to the construction of the large WECS, as well as any costs and attorney fees incurred by the Township in securing the removal. 

5. 	
Notwithstanding the requirement of an acceptable written plan for future use and main­tenance, if at any time the Zoning Administrator determines that the WECS or its facilities or grounds have become a public nuisance or a safety hazard, the WECS and/or its grounds 


shall be subject to the Township’s Dangerous Building Ordinance. 
SECTION 8.66 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS) – SMALL 
A. 	Intent: It is the intent of this section to regulate the safe, effective, and efficient use of small wind energy conversion systems (WECS) installed to reduce or replace the on-site consumption of elec­tricity supplied by utility companies. 
B. 	Permitted Locations: Small WECS shall be permitted as an accessory structure in every zoning district provided that they comply with the standards and requirements of this section. In the RA, RB, RC, and RM zoning districts, a principal structure must first be established on the parcel before a small WECS may be constructed/installed. Where two (2) or more abutting lots are held under single ownership, the owner may construct a small WECS on the abutting but separate lot from that on which the principal building is located. 
C. 	Additional Turbines: Small WECS may include more than one (1) turbine and/or tower on any non-residentially zoned property provided that all other requirements of this ordinance are met, and provided that the total of all turbines on any one (1) parcel or site does not exceed ten (10) kilowatts (kW) rating. On parcels zoned RA, RB, RC or RM only one (1) free standing turbine and/ or tower may be permitted. Multiple rooftop mounted turbines are permitted provided that all other requirements are met. 
D. 	Height/Towers: 





E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
I. 
1. 	For any parcel located in the RA, RB, RC, or RM zoning district, the maximum height for a 
free standing small WECS shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. Rooftop mounted turbines located 
in the RA, RB, RC, or RM zoning district shall have a maximum height of ten (10) feet above 
the existing roof peak, as measured from the peak of the roof to the rotor (the center point 
of the blades). 
2. 	For any parcel located in the NR, AG1, AG2, O, or C zoning districts, the maximum height for 
a small WECS shall not exceed seventy (70) feet. 
3. 	
For any parcel located in the I zoning district there shall be no height limit for a WECS. 

4. 	
The height of a freestanding WECS shall be measured from the ground level to the rotor (the center point of the blades), or the top of the tower, whichever is higher.  Ground level shall be the average grade measured within twenty-five (25) feet of the base of the tower or supporting structure. 

5. 	
The minimum required ground clearance between the lowest point of the blades and the average grade shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 

6. 	
Towers and supporting structures shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish, or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted and maintain a neutral color intended to reduce visual obtrusiveness to the greatest extent feasible. 



Setbacks: 
1. 	
The base of the tower shall be setback from all property lines at least the combined height of the entire structure (tower + blades). 

2. 	
No component of the small WECS, including tower, guy wires, and/or anchors etc. may be located in the required front setback area for the zoning district in which the WECS is lo­cated. 

3. 	
No component of the small WECS, including guy wires and anchors, may extend over or beyond the property lines on which the WECS is located. 


Noise: A small WECS shall comply with the requirements of the Delta Township Noise Control Ordi­nance. The small WECS shall be exempt from this requirement during rare short term events such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms or other unique weather events. 
Certification Required:  In order to be constructed, erected, or installed in Delta Charter Township, 
a small WECS must be approved by a certification program recognized by the U.S. Department of Energy or the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA). 

Compliance with Michigan Building Code & Michigan Electrical Code:  Building & electrical permits 
are required for small WECS. 
FAA Compliance: Small WECS shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations, including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports. 





J. 	Lighting: The towers and other structures associated with a small WECS shall not be artificially lighted by any means or in any fashion unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). 
K. 	Utility Interconnection: No small WECS shall be installed until evidence is provided that the utility company has approved the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer owned gen­erator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. 
L. 	Abandonment: Any small WECS that remains non-functional or inoperative for a period of at least three hundred sixty-five (365) continuous days shall be deemed abandoned, and the Zoning Ad­ministrator may order the removal of the turbine, tower, and any associated equipment. 
SECTION 8.67 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
A. 	Application Requirements: A site plan, prepared in accordance with Chapter 6, showing the loca­tion, size, screening, and design of all buildings and structures shall be submitted with the Special Land Use Permit application for a wireless communication facility. 
B. 	Exceptions: The following facilities shall be exempt from the regulations herein: towers less than fifty (50) feet in height; citizen band radio antennas; short wave antennas; ham and amateur radio antennas; satellite dishes; and personal television receiving antennas. 
C. 	Site and Development Requirements: 
1. 	
Principal or Accessory Use. Wireless communication facilities may be considered either a principal or accessory use. An existing use on the same parcel shall not preclude the installation of a tower on said parcel. 

2. 	
Exemptions from Lot Area, Width & Coverage Requirements: Wireless communication facilities shall not be required to comply with the minimum lot area, lot width, and lot coverage requirements for the district in which they are located. 

3. 	
Height Limitations: The height of a freestanding wireless communication facility shall not exceed two-hundred (200) feet when located in an RA, RB, RC, or RM zoning district. 

4. 	
Setbacks:  When located in an RA, RB, RC, or RM zoning district, the freestanding wireless 


communication facility shall be located on the lot such that the distance from the base of the tower to any adjoining property line is a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the pro­posed tower height.  Freestanding wireless communication facilities in any other zoning district shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a property line. 
5. 	
Separation: A minimum separation distance of one thousand (1,000) feet shall be pro­vided between existing and proposed towers. The separation distance shall be measured by drawing a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. Attached antennas and towers less than fifty (50) feet in height shall be exempt from the separation requirement.  

6. 
Screening: The Township Board may require screening, such as solid fencing, a wall/berm, 







7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 


or landscaping in order to ensure compatibility between towers and adjacent properties. 
State & Federal Requirements: All wireless communication facilities shall meet the stan­dards of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission, and any other agency of the State of Michigan or federal government with authority to regulate 
towers and antennas.  The tower/antenna applicants shall submit statements, permits, and/ or licenses from the applicable agencies attesting to compliance with the applicable stan­dards prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance by the Zoning Administra­tor. 
Certification by Structural Engineer: The plans for the tower construction shall be certified by a registered structural engineer.  The tower shall be designed to withstand a uniform wind loading as prescribed in the Township’s Building Code, as amended. 
Fencing:  The base of the tower, wire cable supports, and accessory buildings shall be en­closed with a minimum six (6)-foot high chain link fence. 
Lighting & Color: Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the Federal Avia­tion Administration (FAA). There shall not be any advertising or identification displayed on 
the tower, except as required for emergency purposes.  Towers shall either maintain a gal­
vanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral 
color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
Electromagnetic Exposure Standards:  All antennas on wireless communication facilities shall meet the electromagnetic exposure standards adopted by the Federal Communica­tions Commission (FCC). Documentation shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator verifying compliance with the FCC standards prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. 
Cessation of Operation: When use of a tower or antenna has ceased for three hundred sixty-five (365) continuous days, the property owner or user of the tower or antenna shall immediately notify the Zoning Administrator, and supply him/her with a written plan for the 
future usage and future maintenance of the grounds and structures. 
a. 	Failure of the user or property owner to supply the Zoning Administrator with a plan for the future maintenance, and/or future use of the tower or antenna shall subject 
the tower or antenna to demolition/removal along with restoration of the grounds to the condition which existed prior to the construction of the tower or antenna. The tower or antenna at this point shall be deemed a public nuisance, and a safety hazard, and will be subject to the Dangerous Buildings Ordinance. Demolition/re­moval and restoration of the condition of the property to that which existed prior to the construction of the tower or antenna may then proceed in compliance with the Dangerous Building Ordinance. If, after notification of the Township’s intent to 
demolish or remove and restore the tower or antenna pursuant to the Dangerous Buildings Ordinance, the tower or antenna has not been removed within sixty (60) 
days of the applicable deadline, and after at least thirty (30) days written notice, 
the Township may remove or secure the removal of the tower or antenna with its 





actual costs and reasonable administration charges to be billed directly to the 
property owner and/or user of the tower or antenna.  The property owner or 
tower/antenna user shall be responsible for demolition, removal, and restoring the condition of the property to that which existed prior to the construction of the tower or antenna, as well as any costs and attorney fees incurred by the Township 
in securing the removal. 
b. 	Notwithstanding the requirement of a written plan for future use and mainte­nance, if at any time the Township should determine that the tower or antenna 
or its grounds has become a public nuisance or a safety hazard, the tower or an­tenna and/or its grounds shall be subject to the Township’s Dangerous Building Ordinance. 
13. 	Co-location: If co-location is proposed in which the antenna is attached to an existing building, structure, light/utility pole, or water tower, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for Site Plan approval and the Special Land Use Permit requirement shall be waived. 
a. 	Height: The antenna shall not extend more than thirty (30) feet above the high­est point of the structure. An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed thirty (30) feet over the tower’s existing height, to replace the tower or to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna. The height change may only occur one (1) time per communication tower. 
b. 	State & Federal Requirements: All towers and antennas shall meet the standards 
of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission and any other agency of the State of Michigan or federal government with author­ity to regulate towers and antennas. 
c. 	Certification by Structural Engineer: A licensed professional engineer shall certify that the tower, building, or structure can structurally accommodate the number of antennas proposed. 








This page is intentionally left blank. 




CHAPTER 9 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
SECTION 9.01 PURPOSE 
It is the purpose of this Article to provide regulations that are generally applicable to all uses regardless of 
zoning district. 
SECTION 9.02 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS 
A. 	When an accessory building is structurally attached to a principal building, it shall be subject to, and must conform with, all regulations of this ordinance applicable to principal buildings.  
B. 	Maximum size, maximum height, and minimum setback standards for accessory buildings and structures are as listed in Table 9.02-A.1. herein. 
C. 	For uses in the residential, office, and commercial zoning districts; accessory buildings; and struc­tures shall not be erected on a lot or parcel prior to the establishment of a principal building upon the premises, except as provided in Table 9.02-A.1. herein. Where two (2) or more abutting lots are held under one (1) ownership, the owner may erect an accessory building on a lot separate from that on which the principal building is located. 
D. 	For the purpose of this section, the height of an accessory building or structure shall be deter­mined as the distance between the peak and the ground floor of the accessory building. 
E. 	Accessory buildings and structures shall not occupy any portion of the required setback areas. 
F. 	Accessory buildings and structures which are portable in nature shall comply with the regulations in Table 9.02-A.1. This shall include, but not be limited to, buildings and structures constructed on 
skids and/or frames and those without attachment to a foundation. 






TABLE 9.02-A.1. SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS 

Accessory Building Site Development Standard Zoning Districts Natural Resources/ Agricultural Residential Office/Commercial/ Industrial NR A1 A2 RA RB RC RM O C I  
Maximum Building Size of any Detached Building Accessory To:  Single-Family Dwelling  None  1,200 Sq.Ft.  770 Sq.Ft.  Not Appli­cable  Not Applicable  
Two-Family Dwelling  Not Applicable  770 Sq. Ft.  
Multiple-Family Dwelling  Not Applicable  1,200 Sq.Ft.  
Maximum Combined Square Footage of all Detached Accessory Buildings Permitted on a Property  None  1,600 Sq.Ft  1,000 Sq.Ft  None  
Maximum Square Footage of Attached Accessory Buildings  None  1,200 Sq. Ft.  None  
Minimum Required Setbacks for Detached Accessory Buildings4  Front  100 feet  50 feet  30 feet  40 feet  50 feet  75 feet1  75 feet  
Each Side  25 feet  15 feet  12 feet  5 feet  10 feet total both sides3  Bldgs. 0-1200sq. ft. = 12 ft. Bldgs. >1200 sq.ft. = 25 ft  
Rear  25 feet  Bldgs. 0-150 sq.ft.= 0 ft2,3 Bldgs.151-770 sq.ft.= 5 ft3 Bldgs. >770sq. ft.= 10 ft3  Bldgs. 0-1200sq. ft. = 25 ft Bldgs. >1200 sq.ft. = 50 ft  
Maximum Detached Accessory Building Height  None  18 feet  45 feet  None 
Maximum Attached Accessory Building Height  40 feet  
150-foot front setback and 25-foot rear setbacks for lots in industrial zoned subdivisions which were platted prior to December 14, 1990. 25-foot setback required from a lot line abutting land in the NR or A1 zoning districts. 3Accessory buildings shall not be located in any buffer zone required by Chapter 12 herein. 4The minimum required building setbacks for attached accessory buildings shall be the same as for principal buildings in their respective zoning districts.  






SECTION 9.03 WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SERVICE 
No structure for human occupancy shall, after the effective date of this Ordinance, be erected, altered, or moved upon any lot or premises and used in whole or part for dwelling, business, industrial or recreation purposes unless provided with a safe, sanitary and potable water supply; and with a safe and effective means of collection, treatment, and disposal of human excreta and domestic, commercial and industrial waste. Such installations and facilities shall conform with the minimum requirements for such facilities set forth by the Barry-Eaton District Health Department, the State of Michigan Health Department, and the Subdivision Regulations, Building Code, and water and sewer ordinances of Delta Charter Township. 
SECTION 9.04 EXCAVATIONS OR HOLES 
The construction, maintenance, or existence within the Township of any unprotected, un-barricaded, open, or dangerous excavations, holes, pits, or wells, which constitute a danger or menace to the public health, safety, or welfare are hereby prohibited; provided, however, this section shall not prevent any ex­cavation under a permit issued by the Building Official or where such excavations are properly protected and posted with warning signs in such manner as approved by the Building Official. Provided further, that this Section shall not apply to excavations, ponds, and other such bodies of water created or existing by 
authority of governmental units or agencies. 
SECTION 9.05 FENCES, WALLS, AND SCREENS 
No fence, wall, or screen of any material other than plant material shall be erected to a height greater than 
eight (8) feet in the RA, RB, RC, RM, Office, and Commercial districts. 
SECTION 9.06 CLEAR VISION AREA 
A. 	No fence, wall, screen, or any planting shall be erected or maintained in such a way as to obstruct vision between a height of three (3) and ten (10) feet within the triangular area formed by the intersection of the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting two points which are located on those intersecting right-of-way lines thirty (30) feet from the point of the intersection of the right­
of-way lines. 
B. 	No fence, wall, screen, or any planting shall be erected or maintained in such a way as to obstruct vision between a height of three (3) and ten (10) feet within the triangular area formed by the intersection of a street right-of-way line and a driveway and a line connecting two points which are located on the right-of-way line and the driveway twenty (20) feet from the point of intersec­
tion of the right-of-way line and driveway. The three (3)-foot height limit shall be measured from the lowest elevation of the segment of the intersecting road and driveway’s centerlines which lies between the point of intersection of the centerlines and the extension of the line drawn through the points twenty (20) feet from the intersection of the right-of-way line and driveway.  






FIGURE 9.06-B.1.  CLEAR VISION AREA 
CLEAR VISION AREAS - STREET INTERSECTION 
depending on a variety of factors 
including road speed and grade. 
Driveways shall be located to provide 
safe sight distances, as determined by

 
the applicable road agency.

CLEAR VISION AREAS - STREET-DRIVEWAY INTERSECTION 
20’ 
20’ 


SECTION 9.07 SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS 

A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 

Intent: It is the intent of this section to regulate the placement, size, height, and installation of satellite dish antennas in agricultural and residential zoning districts in order to preserve the character, scale, and aesthetics of residential areas, and to protect the public health, safety, and 
welfare. 
Location Standards: 
1. 	Minimum Required Setbacks: 
a. 	
Front: No portion of a satellite dish antenna, including its concrete base, slab, or other substructure, shall be located in the area extending the full lot width be­tween the principal building and a street right-of-way. 

b. 	
Side: No portion of a satellite dish antenna, including its concrete base, slab, or other substructure, shall be located within the required setback area. In addition, no portion of an antenna shall be located between the principal building and a side lot line. In no case shall the antenna be located less than five (5) feet from a side lot line. 


c. 	Rear: No portion of a satellite dish antenna, including its concrete base, slab, or other substructure shall be located within five (5) feet of a rear property line. 
Maximum Height:  No portion of a satellite dish antenna shall exceed a height of eighteen (18) feet from ground level.  Ground level shall be the average natural grade measured within twenty-
five (25) feet of the base of the antenna. Satellite dish antenna height shall be measured vertically from the highest point of the antenna, when positioned for operation, to the bottom of the base which supports the antenna. Satellite dish antennas mounted to towers or poles shall not exceed 
the maximum height requirement. 
Maximum Size:  The diameter of a satellite dish antenna shall not exceed twelve (12) feet. 

Roof Mounted: 
a. 	Satellite dish antennas mounted upon the roof of a primary or accessory structure shall not be attached or anchored to appurtenances such as chimneys or spires. 
b. 	A roof mounted satellite dish antenna shall not exceed a diameter of three (3) feet. 
c. 	No portion of a satellite dish antenna shall exceed a height of more than five (5) feet above the peak of the roof upon which it is mounted. 
General Standards: 
1. 	Only one (1) satellite dish antenna shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the princi­pal building except for RM zoned properties. 





2. 	
No advertising or identification display shall be placed on any portion of a satellite dish an­tenna. 

3. 	
No satellite dish antenna shall be linked, physically or electronically, to a receiver which is not located on the same lot or parcel of land as is the antenna. 


SECTION 9.08 TEMPORARY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
A. 	Temporary buildings and structures, including trailers, may be placed on a lot or parcel and occupied 
only under the following conditions: 
1. 	
During renovation of a permanent building damaged by fire, flood, wind, or other Acts of God.  The temporary building or structure shall be removed when repair is complete, but in no case shall it be located on the lot or parcel for more than one hundred eighty (180) days unless authorized by the Zoning Administrator. 

2. 	
Temporary buildings and structures incidental to construction work, except work related to detached single-family residences shall be removed within fifteen (15) days after construc­tion is complete, but in no case shall the building or structure be allowed for more than twelve (12) months, unless authorized by the Zoning Administrator. 

3. 	
Temporary buildings and structures serving a hospital, school, college, or place of worship shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator following review and approval by the ap­propriate Township personnel.  Temporary buildings and structures shall be removed within one (1) year unless an extension has been granted by the Zoning Administrator. 

4. 	
Temporary buildings and structures used as a sales office or model for a new or renovated development. Said building or structure shall be located on the property which is under development unless authorized otherwise by the Zoning Administrator. These temporary buildings and structures shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator following review and approval by the appropriate Township personnel.  Temporary buildings and structures shall be removed within one (1) year unless an extension has been granted by the Zoning Administrator. 


B. 	
The following regulations shall apply to the installation of temporary buildings and structures: 

1. 	
All buildings shall have smoke detectors and fire extinguishers. 

2. 	
The buildings shall not be located such that they block or infringe on existing parking spaces which result in non-compliance with the minimum parking requirements. 

3. 	
Temporary buildings shall meet all permanent building setbacks. 

4. 	
Temporary buildings shall be anchored against the wind. 

5. 	
Toilet facilities shall be provided at some location if not provided in the temporary building. 



6. 	
Skirting shall be required around the entire perimeter of trailers within thirty (30) days of 







the placement of the trailers on the site. The skirting shall be ventilated, constructed of non-combustible materials, and provide at least one (1) access panel.  
SECTION 9.09 ESSENTIAL SERVICE 
Minor essential service installations shall be exempt from compliance with the minimum setback, height, lot area, and lot coverage standards for the zoning district in which they are located. 
SECTION 9.10 KEEPING OF ANIMALS 
A. 	Household Pets: 
1. 	
The keeping of household pets, including dogs, cats, fish, birds, hamsters, rabbits, and ferrets is permitted as an accessory use in any agricultural or residential zoning district. 

2. 	
Except for single family dwellings in the NR, AG1 and AG2 Districts, no more than three (3) dogs, six (6) months of age and older, shall be kept or housed in or at one (1) dwelling unit. 

3. 	
The keeping of service animals, as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended, shall be permitted in any household in an agricultural or residential zoning district. Service animals shall not be included in the three (3) dog limitation. 


B. 	Horses: 
1. 	
Horses may be kept or housed on a non-commercial basis only in the NR, AG1 and AG2 Districts.  

2. 	
Areas in which the horses are kept shall be completely enclosed by a fence meeting the requirements of Section 9.05, Fences, Walls, and Screens. Said fence shall be kept in rea­sonable repair so as to prevent the horses from exiting the fenced-in area. 

3. 	
Section 2.02 herein provides definitions for riding academy, hobby stable, and commercial stable under the title of equestrian facilities. Section 4.18 herein specifies the zoning dis­tricts in which equestrian facilities are permitted. 


C. 	Keeping of Wild Animals: The keeping of wild animals, as defined in this Ordinance, shall be pro­hibited in any agricultural or residential zoning district. 
D. 	The limited raising of chickens and bee keeping in residential zoning districts are regulated by Chapter 45 of the Delta Charter Township Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
SECTION 9.11 PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS 
A. 	Portable Storage Units shall be permitted in the RA, RB, and RC residential zoning districts subject to the following regulations: 





1. 	
The maximum allowable size for a Portable Storage Unit is two hundred (200) square feet. 

2. 	
No more than two (2) Portable Storage Units shall be permitted on a property at any time. 

3. 	
Portable Storage Units shall not be on a property for more than ninety (90) days within any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period regardless of the number of Portable Storage 


Units. The Zoning Administrator may grant an extension, not to exceed thirty (30) days, for 
extenuating circumstances which would include, but not be limited to natural disasters, fire, 
or Acts of God. 
4. 	Portable Storage Units shall not be placed such that they obstruct pedestrian or vehicular movements nor shall they be located in a clear vision area as defined herein. 
B. 	The above regulations shall apply to Portable Storage Units in all other zoning districts, other than the RA, RB, and RC districts, except that the units shall not be on a property for more than one hundred eighty (180) days within any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period regardless of the number of Portable Storage Units. The Zoning Administrator may grant an extension, not to exceed thirty (30) days, for extenuating circumstances which would include, but not be limited to natural disasters, fire or Acts of God. 
SECTION 9.12 STORAGE CONTAINERS 
A. 	Storage containers shall not be located in the required front setback area. 
B. 	Storage containers may be permitted on site during new construction, repair of fire damage or acts of God, and remodeling of a building or structure. 
C. 	Storage containers not related to an activity in Section 9.12 B, may be permitted on a temporary basis as follows: 
1. 	No more than three (3) storage containers shall be permitted per business for a single ninety 
(90) day period per calendar year. 
2. A permit for temporary storage containers shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator. 
D. 	Storage containers may be permitted on a permanent basis subject to the following requirements: 
1. 	The storage container must be located in an area screened by an opaque fence or wall not less than seven (7) feet in height. The fence or wall shall be constructed of durable material, 
such as wood or masonry. Wire fencing or fencing with plastic, aluminum, or other filler 
strips shall not be used. 
2. 	
The storage containers shall not block ingress or egress doors, fire department hose connec­tions, utility pedestals/wall mounts, access aisles, etc. 

3. 	
At no time shall there be more than three (3) storage containers on the premises. 

4. 	
Storage containers shall not be stacked nor shall anything be stored on top of the containers. 







5. Storage containers shall not occupy parking spaces to the extent that the premises are no 

longer in compliance with the minimum parking requirements herein. 
6. 	Storage containers no longer in use shall be removed from the premises. 
SECTION 9.13 	TEMPORARY DUMPSTERS SERVING SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS 
A. 	Temporary dumpsters shall be permitted in the AG1, AG2, RA, RB, and RC zoning districts subject to the following: 
1. 	
No more than one (1) temporary dumpster shall be permitted on a property at any time. 

2. 	
Temporary dumpsters shall not be on a property for more than thirty (30) days within any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period. The Zoning Administrator may grant an exten­sion, not to exceed thirty (30) days, for extenuating circumstances which would include, but not be limited to natural disasters, fire, or Acts of God. 

3. 	
Temporary dumpsters shall not be placed such that they obstruct pedestrian or vehicular 


movements nor shall they be located in clear vision areas as defined herein. 










This page is intentionally left blank. 




CHAPTER 10 
ROADS, TRAFFIC & SIDEWALKS 
SECTION 10.01 	WEST SAGINAW HIGHWAY (M-43) ACCESS MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS 
A. 	Applicability & Intent. The regulations and standards of this Section shall apply to all properties along West Saginaw Highway (M-43), which is a regional arterial street, with the intent of optimiz­ing through-traffic operations and improving public safety along West Saginaw Highway (M-43) by minimizing congestion and accident potential, while still providing property owners with reason­able access. The Eaton County Road Commission and the Michigan Department of Transportation have jurisdiction over the public roads in Delta Township. The construction and maintenance of the public roads are subject to the requirements of these agencies.  The requirements and stan­dards of this Section shall be applied in addition to, and where permissible, shall supersede the requirements of the Michigan Department of Transportation, Eaton County Road Commission, or other requirements of this ordinance. Any project involving the construction or reconstruction of a roadway shall also be subject to the provisions of the Delta Township Complete Streets Ordi­nance. 
B. 	Exceptions. It is recognized that existing development may not be able to meet all the standards contained in this Section upon expansion or redevelopment. In such cases, the standards con­tained herein shall be applied to the maximum extent possible.  Where the standards herein can­not be met, suitable alternatives, documented by a registered traffic engineer, and substantially achieving the intent of the chapter may be accepted by the Zoning Administrator, provided that all of the following apply: 
1. 	
The use will generate less than five hundred (500) vehicle trips per day, based on rates developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 

2. 	
The use has insufficient size to meet the dimensional standards. 

3. 	
Adjacent development renders adherence to these standards economically unfeasible. 

4. 	
There is no other reasonable access. 


C. 	General Access Requirements. The following standards shall apply to all uses with frontage on or access to West Saginaw Highway (M-43) which require Site Plan Review.  Approval of a site plan by the Township and compliance with these standards does not negate the requirement for securing access permits from the appropriate road authority, either the Michigan Department of Transpor­
tation or the Eaton County Road Commission, following site plan approval by the Township. 
1. 	Number of Driveways. 
a. 	Access to West Saginaw Highway (M-43) for an individual parcel or to contiguous 





parcels under the same ownership, shall consist of either a single two-way driveway or a paired driveway system wherein one (1) driveway is designed, and appropri­
ately marked, to accommodate ingress traffic and the other egress traffic.  
b. 	
For developments that can demonstrate that their combined driveway approach volumes (entering and exiting) will exceed three thousand (3,000) vehicle trips dur­ing an average day (or will be used by three hundred (300) vehicles during the peak hour of traffic for either West Saginaw Highway (M-43) or the use), and lacking ac­cess to a secondary street, a second driveway may be allowed along West Saginaw Highway (M-43), provided that the additional driveway can meet the spacing stan­dards of Section 10.01 F. Driveway Spacing and Location. 

c. 	
For parcels with West Saginaw Highway (M-43) frontage of at least three hundred 

(300) feet an additional driveway may be allowed, with another driveway allowed for each three hundred (300) feet of frontage thereafter, provided that these drive­ways meet the standards of Section 10.01 F. Driveway Spacing and Location. 

d. 	
Where parcels have dual frontage on both a side (cross) street and West Saginaw Highway (M-43), access may be required to be provided solely off the secondary 


street.  If the parcel has a minimum of three hundred (300) feet of frontage on West 
Saginaw Highway (M-43), additional access may be allowed along West Saginaw Highway (M-43), provided that the access meets the standards of Section 10.01 F. Driveway Spacing and Location. 
D. 	Shared Driveways, Frontage Roads, Parking Lot Connections, and Rear Service Drives. 
1. Alternative access shall be encouraged.  One (1) or more of the following may apply. 
a. 	Shared Driveways. Sharing or joint use of a driveway by two (2) or more property owners shall be encouraged.  In cases where access is restricted by the driveway spacing requirements of Section 10.01 F. Driveway Spacing and Location, a shared driveway may be the only access design allowed.  The shared driveway shall be 
constructed along the midpoint between the two (2) properties unless a written easement is provided which allows traffic to travel across one(1) parcel to access another, and/or access the public street. 
b. 	Frontage Roads.  Where a frontage road exists or is proposed on an approved site plan for an adjoining lot or parcel, access shall be provided via the frontage road, rather than by direct connection to West Saginaw Highway, when reasonably pos­sible. 
c. 	Parking Lot Connections. Where a proposed parking lot is adjacent to an existing parking lot of a similar use, there shall be a vehicular connection between the two 
(2) parking lots where possible, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. For 
developments adjacent to vacant properties, the site shall be designed to provide for a future connection. 






FIGURE 10.01-F.1.  TYPICAL DRIVEWAY SPACING 


TABLE 10.01-F.2.  DRIVEWAY SPACING ALONG SIDE STREETS INTERSECTING WITH 

WEST SAGINAW HIGHWAY (M-43) 

c. 	If the amount of street frontage is not sufficient to meet the above criterion, the driveway shall be constructed along the property line farthest from the intersection to encourage future shared use, and/or a frontage road or rear access service drive shall be developed. 
d. 	For parcels which are only allowed a channelized “right-turn-in, right-turn-out” driveway, and alternative means of access (shared driveway, frontage road, service drive or connected parking lots) are not feasible due to parcel size or existing ad­jacent development, the Zoning Administrator may allow a non-channelized, full 
movement driveway provided that: 




i. 	The driveway is spaced no closer to the intersection than the minimum spacing allowed for a right-turn-in, right-turn-out driveway. 
ii. 	A traffic study, conducted by a registered traffic engineer, provides substan­tial justification that the driveway operation will not result in conflicts with vehicles at the adjacent intersection. 
2. 	Driveway Spacing from Other Driveways (refer to Figure 10.01-F.1.) 
a. 	There shall be a minimum spacing of twenty-five (25) feet between the centerline of a driveway and the adjacent property line, not including the right-turn lane and/or taper.  The centerline for channelized driveways is measured at the street right-of-way line. This requirement does not apply to shared driveways. 
b. 	If a driveway curb radius extends beyond the frontage of the property, written consent from the affected adjacent property owner(s) allowing the design shall be 
provided, as required by the road authority. 
c. 	Minimum driveway spacing requirements shall be determined based on posted speed limits along the parcel frontage, as indicated in Table 10.01-F.3. Driveway spacing shall be measured from the centerline of each driveway.  The distances in Table 10.01-F.3. are considered minimums based on the distances required to 
avoid conflicts between vehicles turning right or left from adjacent driveways. 
TABLE 10.01-F.3.  MINIMUM SPACING BETWEEN DRIVEWAYS 

d. 	
In order to prevent left-turn conflicts, where possible driveways shall be aligned with those across the street or offset a sufficient distance from driveways across the street, in accordance with the minimum spacing standards listed in Table 10.01-F.3. 

e. 	
In the case of expansion, alteration, or redesign of an existing development where it can be demonstrated that pre-existing conditions prohibit adherence to the 


minimum driveway spacing standards, the Zoning Administrator shall have the 




authority to modify the driveway spacing requirements. Such modifications shall 
be of the minimum amount necessary, but in no case shall driveway spacing of less than sixty (60) feet be permitted by the Zoning Administrator. 
G. 	Driveway Design and Construction Standards. 
1. 	Driveway Width. 
a. 	The typical driveway design shall include one (1) ingress lane and one (1) egress lane with a combined maximum throat width of thirty (30) feet, measured from face to face of curb (see Figure 10.01-G.1.a.). 
b. 	Where exit traffic volumes are expected to exceed one thousand (1,000) vehicles per day, one hundred (100) vehicles per peak hour, or in areas where congestion along West Saginaw Highway (M-43) may create significant delays, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, two (2) exit lanes shall be required.  The total width of such a driveway shall be thirty-seven (37) feet, with one (1) fifteen (15)-foot wide in­gress lane and two (2) eleven (11)-foot wide egress lanes (see Figure 10.01-G.1.b.). 
c. 	For access systems which include a pair of one-way driveways, each driveway shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet wide, measured perpendicularly (see Figure 10.01-G.1.c.). 
d. 	As an alternative to paragraph c. above, the driveway may be designed with a me­dian dividing the ingress and egress driveways, with a maximum median width of ten (10) feet.  Where median driveways are located across the street from each other, the left-turn egress lanes shall be aligned to minimize left turn conflicts (See Figure 10.01-G.1.d.). Boulevard driveways should not be constructed at existing or future traffic signal locations. 






FIGURE 10.01-G.1. TYPICAL CONFIGURATIONS FOR DRIVEWAYS 







2. 	Restricted Access Driveways. Left- and right-turn movements on and off roadways typically have the greatest impact on traffic flow and accident frequency. Therefore, where drive­ways are proposed in areas which have a high accident rate or significant traffic congestion/ delays, or where left-turn access is available through alternative means of access, the Zoning Administrator may require driveway design and signing which discourages certain turning movements. Where driveways are intended to control specific left- and/or right-turn in­gress and egress, the designs shown in Figure 10.01-G.2. shall apply. Similar designs shall be accepted, provided that they are approved by the Michigan Department of Transportation 
and the Eaton County Road Commission, if applicable. 






FIGURE 10.01-G.2. CHANNELIZATION ISLAND OPTIONS FOR CONTROLLING TURNS 






3. Construction Standards. 
a. 
Curb Radii. 

i. 	Driveways shall be designed with minimum twenty-five (25)-foot radii where primarily passenger vehicle traffic is expected. 
ii. 	For sites where truck traffic is expected, the driveways shall be designed with minimum thirty (30)-foot radii. 

b. 
Deceleration Lanes & Tapers. 


i. 	Where it can be demonstrated that daily driveway volumes are expected to exceed one thousand (1,000) vehicles per day or where volumes on the street are over the capacity (level of service D, as defined by the Institute of Transpor­tation Engineers), a right-turn taper, deceleration lane and/or left-turn bypass 
lane may be required. 
ii. 	Where site frontage allows, a twelve (12)-foot wide deceleration lane with a fif­ty (50)- to seventy-five (75)-foot taper and a minimum one hundred (100)-foot 
long parallel storage lane shall be constructed as shown in Figure 10.01-G.3.a. 
iii. 	Where the amount of frontage precludes the construction of a deceleration lane and taper combination entirely within the property lines of a parcel, a re­quest shall be made to the owner of the adjacent parcel to allow the installation of a right-turn bay and taper which extends beyond the property line.  If per­mission cannot be obtained from the adjacent property owner for an extension onto that parcel, a taper of at least seventy-five (75) feet shall be constructed as shown in Figure 10.01-G.3.b. 
iv. 	A continuous right-turn lane, as shown in Figure 10.01-G.3.c. may be required where driveway spacing requirements restrict the use of consecutive turn bays 
and tapers. 
v. 	For driveways located along streets without an exclusive left-turn lane, a bypass lane may be required. Such a lane shall be designed to the standards set forth in the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and as shown in Fig­ure 10.01-G.3.d. 






FIGURE 10.01-G.3. DECELERATION LANES AND TAPERS 







c. 	Grades and Drainage. 
i. 	Driveways shall be constructed such that the grade for the twenty-five (25) feet nearest the pavement edge or shoulder does not exceed one and one-half percent (1.5%), where feasible.  In no case shall the driveway grade between the pavement edge and right-of-way exceed seven percent (7%).  The driveway grade thereafter shall not exceed the values in Table 10.01-G.1. 
TABLE 10.01-G.1. DRIVEWAY GRADE STANDARDS 

DRIVEWAY GRADE1 
Desirable 
Maximum 
High Volume Driveway 
7% 
10% 

Low Volume Driveway 
10% 
13% 
1Based on standards accepted by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
ii. 	Vertical curves, with a minimum length of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided on driveway approaches at a change in grade of four percent (4%) or more. 
iii. 	Driveways shall be constructed such that drainage from impervious areas lo­cated outside of the public right-of-way, which are determined to be in excess 
of existing drainage from these areas shall not be discharged into the highway 
drainage system absent the approval of the responsible agency. 
d. 	Surface and Curb Construction. Driveways shall be constructed of a permanent asphalt or concrete material and shall be paved and curbed from the edge of pave­ment to either the right-of-way line or point of curvature of the radius returns. 
e. 	Maintenance of Directional Signs and Pavement Markings.  In order to ensure 
smooth traffic circulation on the site, direction signs and pavement markings shall 
be installed at the driveway(s) as required by the Township as part of the site plan 
review process and approved by the Michigan Department of Transportation and 
Eaton County Road Commission, and shall be maintained on a permanent basis by the property owner. 
H. 	Design of Frontage Roads or Service Drives 
1. 	Frontage roads and service drives required by other sections of this ordinance shall be con­structed to the following standards: 
a. 	Frontage roads and service drives shall be designed at a width of thirty (30) to thir­ty-six (36) feet, measured face-to-face of curb with an approach width of thirty-nine 


(39) feet at intersections. 



b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

f. 

g. 


Frontage road and service drive intersections shall be designed according to the same minimum standards as described for driveways in Section 10.01 G. 
Frontage roads shall have a minimum setback of thirty (30) feet from the right­of-way with a minimum of sixty (60) feet of storage at the intersection for en­tering and exiting vehicles as measured from the pavement edge (see Figure 10.01-H.1.a.). At driveways where it can be demonstrated that traffic volumes will exceed one thousand (1,000) vehicle trips per day, a minimum of eighty (80) feet of stacking space shall be required. 
The frontage road intersections shall be located a minimum distance of one hun­dred fifty (150) feet from the centerline of the nearest intersecting public street, as shown in Figure 10.01-H.1.a. 
Intersections for rear access service drives should be located at least three hun­dred (300) feet from the street that the adjacent buildings have frontage on, as shown in Figure 10.01-H.1.b. 
Parking shall be prohibited along two-way frontage roads and service drives that are constructed at the minimum thirty (30)-foot width.  One-way roads or two-
way roads designed with additional width for parallel parking may be allowed if it can be demonstrated through traffic studies that on-street parking will not sig­nificantly affect the capacity, safety, or operation of the frontage road or service drive.  Perpendicular or angle parking along either side of a designated frontage road or service drive shall be prohibited. 
In the case of expansion, alteration, or redesign of existing development where it can be demonstrated that pre-existing conditions prohibit installation of a front­age road or service drive in accordance with the aforementioned standards, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to allow alternative cross access between adjacent parking areas through the interconnection of main circulation aisles. Under these conditions, the aisles serving the parking stalls shall be aligned 
perpendicularly to the access aisle, as shown in Figure 10.01-H.1.c., with islands, curbing and/or signage to further delineate the edges of the route to be used by 
through traffic. 









FIGURE 10.01-H.1. DESIGN OF FRONTAGE ROADS AND SERVICE DRIVES 







SECTION 10.02 PRIVATE ROADS 
A. 	Intent: It is the intent of this section to provide zoning regulations for the establishment of pri­vate roads, and thereby insure a permanent means of access to properties. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued for the placement of buildings/structures on lots and/or parcels with frontage on and primary access from a private road in compliance with this section. 
B. 	Private Roads Serving Single-Family Dwellings. 
1. 	
Private roads serving single family dwellings shall comply with the provisions of the Delta Charter Township Private Road Ordinance, as amended. 

2. 	
A Certificate of Zoning Compliance for the placement of buildings/structures on lots and/ or parcels on a private road shall only be issued if the following criteria are met: 

a. 	
The lot shall have width on the private road which is at least equal to the mini­mum lot width required herein for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 

b. 	
The lot created on a private road, along with accompanying buildings, shall com­ply with all site development standards applicable to the zoning district in which it is located. 




C. 	Private Roads Serving Two-Family and Multiple-Family Dwellings. 
1. 	Private roads providing access to two-family and multiple-family dwellings shall comply with the following standards and requirements: 
a. 	Design Standards 
i. 	Driving Surface. The private road shall consist of at least two (2) lanes (two 
directions) with a minimum lane width of ten (10) feet each.  
ii. 	Crown.  The road surface shall have a minimum crown of two-tenths of one foot (0.2) from the centerline of the private road to the outside edge of the pavement. 
iii. 	Base Materials.  The driving surface shall have a minimum of six (6) inches of bank run gravel and two (2) inches minimum of processed gravel over a compacted base. Where the road is being constructed in impervious soils, a twelve (12) inch sand sub-base with a sub-base drainage system shall be required. 
iv. 	Shoulder.  A road shoulder shall be provided on each side of the private road surface with a minimum width of two (2) feet containing a slope of twenty-two hundredths of a foot (0.22) from the outside edge of the road surface to 
the toe of the slope. A shoulder shall not be required where curb and gutter 
has been installed. 





v. 	Turnaround. The end of the private road shall have a turnaround and the ease­ment shall allow enough land for a thirty (30)-foot inside radius or a forty-eight (48)-foot outside radius or a second means of ingress and egress. The cul-de­sac shall be constructed in accordance with the standards set forth herein. 
vi. 	Culverts.  Culverts shall be placed at all natural drainage courses or other water­ways.  Culvert sizes, materials, and grades shall be determined using the Eaton County Road Commission standards. 
vii. 	Drainage. Drainage provisions for private roads shall be in compliance with the 
regulations of the Eaton County Drain Commissioner’s Office. 
viii. Slope.  Street grades shall not exceed ten percent (10%). 
b. 	General Requirements. 
i. 	Easement. An easement, a minimum of forty (40) feet in width, shall be dedi­cated for the private road. The road shall be located within the easement such 
that a five (5) foot wide sidewalk can be constructed along at least one side of the road entirely within the easement with a minimum separation of five (5) 
feet between the road edge (or back of curb) and the sidewalk edge.  The width of the private road easement shall be expanded to meet this minimum road/ 
sidewalk separation requirement as necessary, or to accommodate sidewalks 
on both sides of the private road, if desired.  
ii. 	Road Name.  A road name shall be approved by the Tri-County Regional Plan­ning Commission and the Eaton County 911 Central Dispatch. 
iii. 	Signage.  A road name sign of a type approved by the Eaton County Road Com­mission shall be placed at the intersection(s) of the private road and public or private roads. The bottom of the sign face shall be placed a minimum of six (6) 
feet above the adjacent road surface. 
iv. 	
Erosion. All private roads are subject to regulation under Eaton County’s Soil Erosion Program as administered by the Eaton County Drain Commissioner. 

v. 	
Maintenance. All private roads, including those existing prior to adoption of this ordinance, shall be maintained in a safe manner.  Maintenance, repair, and liability for private roads shall not be the responsibility of the Township. 


D. 	Service Drives. 
1. 	Properties within commercial, office, or industrial zoning districts shall not utilize anything other than a public road under the jurisdiction of the Eaton County Road Commission or the Michigan Department of Transportation for access except for private service drives as developed in accordance with the following: 





a. 	An easement or right-of-way shall be recorded with the Eaton County Register of 
Deeds Office. 
b. 	
The service drive shall be parallel to a county road. 

c. 	
The service drive shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet in width, prohibit parking on either side, and be open to the general public. 


d. 	The service drive shall serve two (2) or more properties. 
SECTION 10.03 TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDIES 
A. 	Intent. Delta Township recognizes the direct correlation between land development and traffic operations. The intent of this section is to permit accurate evaluation of expected impacts of a proposed project to assist in decision-making. This section is further intended to help achieve the following objectives: 
1. 	
Provide a standard set of analytic tools and a format for preparing traffic impact studies. 

2. 	
Allow the Township to assess the effects that a proposed project may have on the com­munity by outlining information needed and evaluation procedures to be used. 

3. 	
Help ensure safe and reasonable traffic operating conditions on streets and intersections after development of the proposed project. 

4. 	
Reduce the negative traffic impacts created by individual developments by helping to en­sure that the transportation system can safely and efficiently accommodate the projected traffic increases. 

5. 	
Realize a comprehensive approach to the overall impacts of various developments along a corridor or within part of the Township rather than a piecemeal approach. 

6. 	
Provide direction to Township decision makers, transportation agencies, and developers of the expected impacts of a project. 

7. 	
Alert the Township, transportation agencies, and developers of improvements or modifi­cations needed to the roadway, access, or site design. 

8. 	
Protect the substantial public investment in the existing street system. 


B. 	Applicability. 
1. 	A traffic impact study shall be required and shall be submitted by a petitioner for rezon­ing, special land use permit, site plan review, or condominium subdivision requests which could generate at least one hundred (100) directional trips during the peak hour of the traffic generator, or the peak hour on the adjacent streets, or over one thousand (1,000) 
trips in an average day. 





2. 	Forecasted trip generation shall be based upon equations/rates outlined in the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineer’s (ITE) Trip Generation Manual or other authoritative studies available. 
C. 	Study Area Determination. The Zoning Administrator and the applicant shall meet to determine the study area boundaries.  Other issues which shall be discussed include the availability of data, background rates to be used, horizon (design) year, acceptable trip generation rates and reduction factors, trip distribution, as well as the need to evaluate other issues. Generally the larger the proj­ect, the larger the study area will be and the more detailed the traffic study will be. 
D. 	Traffic Impact Study Contents. 
1. 	
Description of the Site and Surroundings. Illustrations and a narrative shall describe the characteristics of the site and adjacent roadway system (functional classification, lanes, speed limits, etc.). This description shall include surrounding land uses, expected develop­ment in the vicinity which could influence future traffic conditions, special site features, and a description of any committed roadway improvements. 

2. 	
Description of the Requested Zoning or Use. 


a. 	For a rezoning request, a general description of the proposed use shall be provided. 
b. 	For a site plan review, condominium subdivision, and special land use permit re­
quests, a description of factors including, but not limited to: the number and types of dwelling units; the gross and usable floor area; and the number of employees shall be provided.  Any intended phasing or potential expansion shall be noted. 
3. 	Description of Traffic Conditions. 
a. 	Traffic Counts. Describe existing conditions including existing daily and peak hour traffic volumes on adjacent streets(s) and intersections in the vicinity which are ex­pected to be impacted. Traffic count data shall not be over two (2) years old, ex­cept the Zoning Administrator may permit twenty-four (24) hour counts up to three 
(3) years old to be increased by a factor supported by documentation that traffic 
has increased at a rate of no more than two percent (2%) in the past three (3) to 
five (5) years. Traffic counts shall be taken Monday through Friday on non-holiday weeks under normal driving conditions. Additional counts (i.e. on a Saturday for a 
proposed commercial development) may also be required in some cases.  The indi­
vidual preparing the impact study shall obtain the traffic counts during average or higher than average volume conditions for the area under study. 
b. 	Roadway Characteristics. Roadway characteristics shall be described and illustrated, as appropriate. Features to be addressed include lane configurations, geometrics, signal timing traffic control devices, posted speed limits, average running speeds, gaps in the traffic flow, and any sight distance limitations. Existing levels of service shall be calculated for intersections included within the study area. 





4. 
5. 

6. 


c. 	Existing driveways and turning movement conflicts shall be illustrated and de­scribed. 
d. 	The existing right-of-way shall be identified and any planned or desired expansion of the right-of-way request by the applicable road agency. 
e. 	Traffic accident data covering the most recent three (3) years for intersections analyzed in the impact study may be required, particularly for sites along corridors identified as critical or congested corridors. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for obtaining traffic accident data if it is required. 
Trip Generation. 
a. 	The impact study shall include forecasted trip generation of the proposed use for the a.m. and p.m. peak hours and the average daily traffic generated. The 
forecasts shall be based on the data and procedures outlined in the most recent 
edition of the Trip Generation Manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or other authoritative studies available. 
b. 	
When a traffic study is required for a rezoning request, the study shall contrast the traffic impacts of the proposed use, or of a typical use permitted in the requested zoning district, with uses permitted in the current zoning district. 

c. 	
Any trip reduction for pass-by trips, transit, ride-sharing, other modes, internal capture rates, etc. shall be based both on ITE recommendations and documenta­tion for the specific uses. 


d. 	For projects intended to be developed in phases, the trip generation phase shall be described in order to determine the need for improvements at the various stages of development. 
Trip Distribution. The projected traffic generated shall be distributed (inbound v. out­bound, left-turn v. right-turn) onto the existing street network to project turning move­ments at site access points and nearby intersections where required. Projected turning movements shall be illustrated in the report. A description of the application of standard engineering procedures for determining the distribution shall also be attached (gravity model, market studies, counts at existing driveways, etc.). For projects of regional signifi­cance, a network model projection may be required. 
Impact Analysis. 
a. 	For any project with a completion date beyond one (1) year at the time of the traffic study, the analysis shall also include a scenario analyzing forecasted traffic at date of completion along the adjacent street network using a forecast based 
on a network model (if available), historic annual percentage increases, and/or on expected development in the area. Traffic impact assessments shall acknowledge the traffic impacts of other uses approved, but not yet constructed, which may 





7. 
8. 

9. 


affect traffic operations for the subject site as determined by the Zoning Administra­tor. 
b.  The impact study shall include capacity analysis (level of service) at the proposed access points using the procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the High­way Capacity Manual published by the Transportation Research Board. Before and after capacity analyses shall also be performed at all street intersections where the expected traffic generated at the site will comprise at least five percent (5%) of the existing intersection capacity, and/or for roadway sections and intersections experi­encing congestion or a relatively high accident rate, as determined by the applicable road agency.  
c.  The impact study shall include gap studies for un-signalized intersections.  
d.  The Township may require that the impact of the street network be evaluated for a project of regional significance if a network model is available.  

Access Design/Access Management Standards. The impact study shall include a map and description of the location and design of proposed access (driveways or new street inter­sections), including any sight distance limitations, dimensions from adjacent driveways, and intersections within three hundred fifty (350) feet on either side of the main roadway, other 
data to demonstrate that the design and number of access points proposed will provide safe 
and efficient traffic operation and be in accordance with the standards of this Ordinance and 
the standards of the applicable road agency. 

Other Study Items. 
a. 	The traffic impact study shall describe the need for, or provision of, any additional right-of-way where required. 
b. 	The study shall note changes which should be considered to the site plan layout. 
c. 	The study shall include a description of any non-motorized facilities. 
d. 	
If the use involves a drive-thru facility, the adequacy of the queuing (stacking) area shall be evaluated. 

e. 	
If a median crossover is desired, separate analysis shall be provided. 


f. 	If a traffic signal is being requested, the relationship of anticipated traffic to traffic signal warrants in the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devises shall be reviewed. Analysis shall also be provided on the impacts to traffic progression along the roadway through coordinated timing, etc. 
Mitigation/Alternatives. The study shall outline mitigation measures and demonstrate any changes to the level of service achieved by these measures. Any alternatives or suggested phasing of improvements shall be described. The mitigation measures may include items such as roadway widening, need for bypass lanes or deceleration tapers/lanes, changes to signalization, use of access management techniques or a reduction in the proposed inten­sity of use. Any mitigation measure shall include correspondence from the applicable road agency.  The responsibility for and timing of roadway improvements shall be described. 





10. 	Preparer’s Qualifications. A required traffic impact study shall be prepared under the direction of a traffic/transportation engineer registered in Michigan (PE) with a history of completing impact studies and other traffic engineering analyses. The preparer’s resume 
shall accompany the study. 
E. 	Submittal. 
1. 	
A traffic impact study shall be submitted at the time an application is filed for a rezoning, special land use permit, condominium subdivision, and/or a site plan. 

2. 	
The Township shall distribute the traffic impact study to the appropriate road agencies. A copy shall also be submitted to the Tri-Regional Planning Commission for projects of regional significance. 

3. 	
The road agencies shall provide the Township with comments prior to any action on the 


project. The Zoning Administrator shall review and comment on the traffic impact study and prepare a report for the Planning Commission. 
F. 	Appeals. Appeals for a waiver from the requirement of a traffic impact study shall be made to the Township Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the procedures contained in the Zoning Board of Appeals Chapter herein.  Factors which the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider when reviewing a variance request include: 
1. 	
Are roadway improvements scheduled which are expected to mitigate any impacts associ­ated with the proposed project? 

2. 	
Is the existing level of service along the roadway not expected to drop to level C due to the proposed project? 

3. 	
Is the existing level of service not expected to be significantly impacted by the proposed project due to specific conditions at the subject location? 

4. 	
Has a similar traffic study been previously prepared for the site and is it still considered applicable? 


SECTION 10.04 SIDEWALKS 
Sidewalks shall be installed along all public and private roads as required by the Delta Charter Township Code of Ordinances, as amended. In addition, all sidewalks shall meet the following standards of develop­ment: 
A. 	Internal sidewalks within a development shall be located and aligned to directly and continuously connect areas or points of pedestrian origin and destination. 





B. 	Sidewalks shall interconnect the development’s internal pedestrian system to existing or future side­walk locations along a public right-of-way. 
C. 	Where sidewalks abut a parking lot, the sidewalk’s minimum width shall be seven (7) feet. 
D. 	Sidewalks adjacent to commercial buildings shall have a minimum clear width of five (5) feet from pedestrian access which is not obstructed by product displays, vending machines, etc. 





CHAPTER 11 
OFF-STREET PARKING 



SECTION 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
A. 	Scope of Regulations. 
1. 	At the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged or increased in capacity, or uses or occupancy established or changed, off-street parking shall be provided in all zoning 
districts according to the requirements of this Chapter. 
2. 	
No parking space which exists at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance shall thereaf­ter be relinquished or reduced in any manner below the requirements established by this Chapter, except as provided for in Section 11.01 C.8. 

3. 	
Parking areas must have the same zoning classification as the property on which the prin­cipal use is located which they are serving. 


B. 	Location of Parking. Off-street parking facilities required by this Chapter shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the use for which the parking is required or on an abutting lot or parcel under the same ownership. This requirement does not apply to joint parking facilities developed in ac­
cordance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
1. 	
One and Two-Family Dwellings. The off-street parking facilities required for single- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the building they are intended to serve, but shall not be considered a parking facility under the provisions of this Chapter. 

2. 	
All Other Uses. Off-street parking facilities, other than single- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the building or buildings they are intended to 


serve, and within five hundred (500) feet of the main entrance of the building intended to be served, unless otherwise modified by the Zoning Administrator. 
C. 	Units and Methods of Measurement. 
1. 	Floor Area. Where floor area is the unit for determining the required number of off-street parking spaces, said unit shall mean the gross floor area, except as noted in Section 11.01 
C.2. 
2. 	Where the floor area measurement is specified as net floor area, parking requirements shall apply to all building areas except that floor area used for incidental service, storage, installations of mechanical equipment, heating systems, and similar uses and other areas 
where service to the general public is not provided.  For buildings where use areas are not 
yet defined, the gross floor area may be reduced by fifteen percent (15%) for calculating 





3. 
4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 


net floor area. When use areas are defined, the actual net floor area shall be used to com­pute parking requirements. 
Places of Assembly. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches, and other places of assembly 
in which any portion of the seating consists of benches, pews, or other such seating each twenty-four (24) inches of such seating shall be counted as one (1) seat. In cases where a place of assembly has both fixed seats and open assembly area, requirements shall be com­puted separately for each type and added together. 
Employees. For requirements stated in terms of employees, the calculation shall be based 
upon the maximum number of employees likely to be on the premises during the largest 
shift. 
Fractions.  When units of measurement determining the number of required parking spaces 
result in a fractional space, any fraction shall be counted as one (1) additional space. 
Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
a.  New Uses or Buildings. The amount of required off-street parking spaces for new uses shall be in accordance with the schedule set forth in Section 11.03 except for adjustments made to reflect the maximum permitted parking in Section 11.01 C.7., permitted parking reductions in Section 11.01 C.8., and shared parking in Section 11.02.  
b.  Similar Uses and Requirements. When a use is not specifically listed in Section 11.03, the requirements of off-street parking for a similar use shall apply as deter­ 
mined by the Zoning Administrator.  

Maximum Permitted Parking.  The number of parking spaces provided on any development site, with the exception of single-family residential developments, schools, colleges, child care centers, hospitals, and places of worship and assembly, shall not exceed the minimum 
standards of this Chapter by more than twenty percent (20%). This limitation is intended to limit excess amounts of impervious surface which result in increased stormwater run-off, prevent the unwarranted conversion of green space to paved areas, and promote improved 
aesthetics. 
Permitted Parking Reductions. The Zoning Administrator may permit a reduction from the parking standards in this chapter, not to exceed twenty percent (20%). The reduction shall be subject to the following: 
a. 	
An applicant may request a parking reduction at any time, as part of a current site plan, special land use, or rezoning application, or may request a reduction as a sepa­rate and distinct action with no other concurrent request. 

b. 	
The applicant shall provide a parking study with adequate information to assist the Zoning Administrator in determining the appropriateness of the request. 

c. 	
Sufficient area shall be reserved on the subject parcel to meet the minimum parking 







standard if required by the Zoning Administrator in the future. The reserved area shall be suitable for development and not possess characteristics such as exces­sive slope, poor soils, wetlands, etc. 
d. 	The Zoning Administrator may attach conditions to the approval of a parking re­duction that bind such approval to the specific use in question. 
e. 	All of the parking spaces, including the spaces installed initially as well as those installed at a later date, shall comply with all applicable standards herein includ­ing, but not limited to, dimensions, setbacks, landscaping, buffer strips, access aisles, etc. 
f. 	At any time following the approval of a site plan permitting a parking reduction, the Zoning Administrator may require that the additional parking be provided. The actions necessitating the additional parking would include, but not be limited to: unauthorized parking on adjacent properties; traffic congestion resulting from 
a lack of parking; a building expansion; and/or a change in land use on the subject parcel.  The Zoning Administrator shall provide the property owner with docu­
mentation substantiating the need for the additional parking. 
SECTION 11.02 MIXED USE/SHARED PARKING FACILITIES 
A. 	Shared Parking for Separate Parcels. The Zoning Administrator may approve shared parking for 
separate parcels subject to the following conditions: 
1. 	The following documentation shall be provided by all parties participating in a shared parking arrangement: 
a. 	
A description of the land uses identifying their respective peak parking demands. 

b. 	
The hours of operation and the days of the week during which each use operates. 

c. 	
The location of the parking area intended for joint use and its proximity to the uses. 

d. 	
An analysis of the potential impact a joint parking area would have on the sur­rounding area, particularly residential neighborhoods. 


2. 	
A signed and notarized agreement shall be provided by the property owners acknowl­edging their consent to the shared parking arrangement.  The signed agreement shall be recorded at the Eaton County Register of Deeds Office for each parcel. 

3. 	
To demonstrate shared parking compatibility, the applicants shall use a recognized indus­try standard such as the Urban Land Institute’s Shared Parking Report. The underlying parking requirements for each use shall be based on the parking requirements in Section 

11.03. 

4. 	
Sufficient area shall be reserved to provide the required parking for all of the individual uses computed separately on each parcel in the event that one party abrogates/with­







draws from the agreement. Should the shared parking agreement be withdrawn by either 
party, the Zoning Administrator shall mandate that each property provide the parking as required herein. 
B. 	Shared Parking for Mixed Use Developments on the Same Parcel. Shared parking for Mixed Use De­velopments on the same parcel may be reduced by the Zoning Administrator, as set forth in Section 
11.01 C.8., subject to the following requirements: 
1. 	The following documentation shall be provided for the Mixed Use Development: 
a. 	
A description of the land uses identifying their respective peak parking demands. 

b. 	
The hours of operation and days of the week during which each use operates. 

c. 	
An analysis of the potential impact shared parking would have on the surrounding area, particularly residential neighborhoods. 


2. 	To demonstrate shared parking compatibility, the applicant shall use a recognized industry standard such as the Urban Land Institute Shared Parking Report. Underlying parking space requirements for each use shall be based on the parking requirements outlined in Section 
11.03. 
3. 	Sufficient area shall be reserved to provide the required parking for all of the individual uses computed separately on the property in the event that one (1) party abrogates/withdraws 
from the agreement. Should the shared parking agreement be withdrawn by either party, 
the Zoning Administrator shall mandate that each property provide the parking as required herein. 
SECTION 11.03 SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

USE A. RESIDENTIAL  REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES  
1. Dormitories  One (1) per three (3) beds.  
2. Fraternities /Sororities  One (1) for each two (2) occupants of the building. Front yard parking is prohibited.  
3. Functional Family  One (1) for each person over the age of 18 occupying the building.  
4. Manufactured Housing Development  Two (2) for each manufactured home or manufactured home site.  
5. Multiple-Family Dwelling  Two (2) for each two (2) or more bedroom unit and one and one-half (1.5) for each one (1) bedroom unit. One (1) for each effi­ciency unit.  
6. Senior Housing  Independent Living Units – 0.65 for each unit. Interim or Intermediate Care Units – one (1) for each two (2) beds, plus one (1) per employee.  







7. Single-or Two Family Dwell­ing  Two (2) per each dwelling unit.  
B. INSTITUTIONAL  
1. Child Care Centers  Two (2) spaces, plus one (1) for every eight (8) children licensed capacity.  
2. Colleges and Universities  One (1) for each five (5) classroom seats, plus one (1) for each three (3) seats for auditoriums/gymnasiums/assembly halls, plus one (1) for each two (2) employees.  
3. Convalescent Centers  One (1) for each four (4) beds or two (2) rooms, whichever is less; plus one (1) for each employee.  
4. Dance and Union Halls, Civic Clubs, Fraternal Orders, Exhibit Halls, Ballrooms, Banquet Halls, Conference Centers, or similar uses  One (1) for every four (4) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load determined by the Uniform Building Code.  
5. Elementary and Middle Schools  One (1) per employee, plus the requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall provided at a rate of fifty percent (50%) of the requirements for assembly use as provided herein.  
6. High Schools  One (1) for each teacher, plus one (1) for each ten (10) students, plus the requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall pro­vided at a rate of fifty percent (50%) of the requirements for the assembly use as provided herein.  
7. Hospitals  One (1) for each bed.  
8. Places of Worship  One (1) for each five (5) seats.  
9. Private Tennis Clubs, or simi­lar uses  One (1) for every four (4) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load determined by the Uniform Building Code.  
10. Public Golf Courses  Five (5) for each hole, plus one (1) for each employee.  
11. Stadiums, sports arenas or similar places of outdoor as­sembly  One (1) for each three (3) seats.  
12. Theaters, Auditoriums and Assembly Halls  One (1) for each four (4) seats, plus one (1) for every two (2) employees.  
C. OFFICES  
1. Banks, Credit Unions  One (1) for each 300 square feet of usable floor area.  
2. General Offices  One (1) for each 300 square feet of usable floor area.  
D. BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL  
1. Amusement Center  One (1) for each game table, plus one (1) for each employee.  
2. Athletic Facilities  One (1) for each four (4) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy as determined by the Uniform Building Code, plus one (1) for each employee.  







3. Barber Shops and Beauty Salons  One and one-half (1.5) for each chair/station, plus one (1) for each two (2) employees.  
4. Blood Plasma Centers  One (1) for each collection station, plus one (1) space for occu­pancy of waiting area, plus one (1) space for each employee in the largest shift.  
5. Bowling Alley  Four (4) for each lane.  
6. Freestanding and other retail not otherwise specified herein  Four (4) per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area.  
7. Funeral Home or mortuary  One (1) for each 50 square feet.  
8. Furniture and home furnish­ing stores (not including ap­pliance and carpet stores)  One (1) for each 800 square feet of usable floor area.  
9. Gas Station, Full-Service  One (1) for each service bay, plus one (1) for each employee.  
10. Gas Station, Self-Service  One (1) per each 200 square feet of NUA, plus one (1) for each employee.  
11. Health Clubs.  One (1) for each four (4) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load determined by the Uniform Building Code, plus one (1) for each employee.  
12. Hotel, motel or other Lodg­ing.  One (1) for each guest room, plus one (1) for each employee.  
13. Laundromats and Coin Oper­ated Dry Cleaners  One (1) for each two (2) washing machines.  
14. Miniature or Par 3 Golf Course  Two (2) for each hole, plus one (1) for each two (2) employees.  
15. Nail Salons  One (1) for each chair/station, plus one (1) for each two (2) em­ployees.  
16. Outdoor Sales Areas  One (1) for each 1,000 square feet of outdoor sales area.  
17. Outdoor Seating Areas for Restaurants and Bars 18. Recreational Vehicles, Boat, Motorcycle, Mobile Home, and similar sales & service uses.  One (1) for each six (6) seats provided. One (1) for each 1,000 square feet of usable floor area show­room, plus one (1) for each employee, plus the requirements of any on-site repair facility as specified herein.  
19. Restaurants (sit down), Bars and Lounges.  One (1) for each three (3) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load determined by the Uniform Building Code, plus one (1) for every three (3) employees.  
20. Restaurants, Carry-out, Drive-in, Drive-through, and Fast Food  One (1) for each two and one-half (2.5) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy determined by the Uniform Building Code, plus one (1) for each employee.  
21. Retail Centers  Four (4) per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area.  







4. 	Parking may be permitted within any required yard with the exception that the parking area shall have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from all front property lines and a minimum setback of five (5) feet from all side and rear property lines except where shared driveways and/or cross-access between adjoining sites is required. 
5. 	Off-street parking areas shall not encroach upon any required greenbelt or buffer zone. 
6. 	Concrete curbing shall be shall be installed around the entire periphery of all off-street park­ing areas. The curbing shall be installed in accordance with the specifications for either raised or rolled concrete curbing herein illustrated in Figure 11.04-A.1. The following are ex­empted from the curbing requirement: parking areas on industrially zoned properties which do not serve the general public, and are not visible from a public road, parking areas which serve public or private forest preserve areas, game refuge areas, parks, or similar recreation areas; or serve public and private conservation areas and structures for the development, protection and conservation of open space, watersheds, water, soils, forests, and wildlife resources, playgrounds or athletic fields. 
7. 	
Adequate ingress and egress to the parking facility, by means of clearly defined drives, shall be provided for all vehicles. 

8. 	
All parking spaces shall be striped with paint or a material approved by the Zoning Admin­istrator. Striping shall be at least four (4) inches in width. The striping shall be maintained at all times. 

9. 	
Landscaping shall comply with Section 12.02. 

10. 	
Plans for the layout of parking facilities shall be in accordance with the minimum regulations provided in Table 11.04-A.1. and Figure 11.04-A.2. 

11. 	
Barrier-Free Parking. Off-street barrier-free parking facilities shall be provided in accor­dance with Table 11.04-A.2. 







FIGURE 11.04-A.1.  MINIMUM PARKING AREA CURB SPECIFICATIONS 
Rolled Curb 


Raised Curb 







TABLE 11.04-A.1.  PARKING LAYOUT 


Parking Pattern  One-Way  Two-Way  Width  Length  
0-Parallel  12  24  9  23  
45°  12  NA  9  18  
60°  15  NA  9  18  
90°  15  24  9  18  








FIGURE 11.04-A.2.  PARKING LAYOUT 








b. 	Adequate vehicle charging stations protection, such as concrete-filled steel bol­lards, shall be used.  Curbing may be used in lieu of bollards, if the vehicle charging station is setback a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches from the face of the curb. 
4. 	Signage and Notification of Station Specifics. 
a. 	
Each electric vehicle changing station space may be posted with signage indicating the space is only for electric vehicle charging purposes. 

b. 	
Notification shall be placed on the unit to identify voltage and amperage levels, time of use, fees, safety information and other pertinent information. 


5. 	Installation and Maintenance. 
a. 	All necessary electrical permits must be obtained. 
b. 	Electric vehicle charging stations shall be maintained in all respects, including the functioning of the equipment. A phone number or other contact information shall be provided on the equipment for reporting when it is not functioning or 
other problems are encountered. 
SECTION 11.05 PARKING RESTRICTIONS 
A. 	Vehicle Parking in Residential Zoning Districts. 
1. 	The parking or storage of the following upon private property shall be prohibited in Resi­
dential zoning districts: 
a. 	
A vehicle with three (3) or more axles. 

b. 	
A vehicle which exceeds twelve (12) feet in height or twenty-four (24) feet in total length. 


c. 	Vehicles including, but not limited to: a construction vehicle, truck tractor, semi­trailer, garbage truck, crane, tow truck, flatbed car hauler, dump truck, backhoe, 
loader/excavator, tree trimming equipment, vehicles designed to transport six­teen (16) or more people (including the driver), and vehicles for hire designed to carry eight (8) or more people (including the driver). 
d. 	Vehicles that are being used in the normal course of making routine service calls are exempt from the parking prohibition, as well as equipment temporarily per­forming construction work. 
B. 	Semi-Truck Trailer Parking. The parking of semi-truck trailers for more than a forty-eight (48) hour period in any off-street parking area in an Office or Commercial zoning district is prohibited with the exception of deliveries or construction activities. 





C. 	Parking of Recreational Vehicles and Equipment. No mobile homes; tent and travel trailers; motor homes; boats, jet-skis, snowmobiles and trailers designed for them; general purpose trailers; and similar equipment, shall be parked or stored within the front yard in the area extending the full width of the lot situated between the front lot line and the nearest point of the building wall of the principal building in excess of forty-eight (48) hours, either consecutively or cumulatively, within a seven (7) day consecutive period. If a lot is located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, the parking and storage prohibition shall also include that the space on the lot, extending the full width 
or length of the lot which is situated between all other front lot lines and the nearest point of the 
building wall of the principal building. It is the intent of this section to provide clear vision areas in 
front of buildings, to ensure adequate emergency vehicle access to buildings, and to maintain the 
character of existing neighborhoods. 
D. 	Lawn Parking. The parking of motor vehicles on lawn areas in the required front yard on proper­
ties zoned RA, RB and RC shall be prohibited. Further, no more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the 
required front yard shall be paved with concrete, bituminous, or concrete unit/brick pavers. 





CHAPTER 12 


SITE DESIGN STANDARDS 
SECTION 12.01 INTENT 
It is the intent of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and welfare and improve the site design and visual appearance of the Township by requiring consistent standards for such site elements as land­scaping, refuse, and recycling receptacles, equipment screening, and lighting. 

SECTION 12.02 LANDSCAPING 
A. 	Purpose. Landscaping is the organization of outdoor space and shall be treated as an important design element.  The landscape plan shall be designed to achieve the following purposes: 
1. 	
To preserve and enhance the identity or character of the site. 

2. 	
To screen or filter views, buffer incompatible land uses, and blend inharmonious land uses. 

3. 	
To integrate and unify various parts of the site. 

4. 	
To improve the local environment by controlling soil erosion; moderating harsh or un­pleasant sounds; removing air pollutants; controlling light trespass and reflection; moder­ating winds and the effects of climate; and promoting stormwater infiltration. 

5. 	
To preserve and enhance existing environmental systems and wildlife habitat, including woodlands, wetlands, and grasslands. 


B. 	Landscape Plan. A separate, detailed landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the site plan review as set forth in Chapter 6. 
C. 	General Landscaping Requirements. 
1. 	Plant materials shall be of generally acceptable varieties and species, free from insects and diseases, and hardy to Eaton County. Artificial plant materials cannot be used to meet the 
landscaping requirements herein. 
2. 	A mixture of live plant materials, such as evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs, is 
required as a protective measure against insect and disease infestation. One (1) species 
shall not exceed thirty-three percent (33%) of the total number of trees or shrubs. 
3. 	All parts of a site that will not be covered by buildings or other structures, streets, parking 
lots, or other paved areas, or planting beds, shall be stabilized with grass or ground covers. 
Margins between sidewalks and streets, islands in parking lots, medians in boulevards, streets, or driveways and similar areas shall be landscaped.  The surfaces of islands and medians shall be stabilized with grass, ground covers, and/or low growing shrubs. The use 





D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
of mulch as the sole ground cover is prohibited.  The use of small diameter loose stone shall be minimized since it can trespass into drains and public streets. 
Coordination with Utilities. Landscape installers shall make provisions to coordinate with existing and proposed underground and overhead utility lines so as to avoid interference with plant growth and so as not to damage any utility or interrupt any utility service. 
Existing Plantings. The preservation and incorporation of existing plant materials in a landscape plan is encouraged.  The Zoning Administrator may credit existing plant materials so as to meet the minimum landscaping requirements herein. 
Stormwater Retention and Detention Ponds.  The installation of stormwater management systems including bio-swales, rain gardens, and retention and detention ponds in the overall landscape is encouraged. Stormwater management systems replicating natural design and appearance are also encouraged. Detention/retention areas shall be permitted within buffer zones provided they do not hamper the screening intent of the buffer or jeopardize the survival of plant materials. The installa­tion and use of stormwater retention and detention ponds shall be constructed and regulated as per the applicable standards of the Eaton County Drain Commissioner’s Office. 
Installation, Maintenance, and Completion of Landscaping. 
1. 	
All landscaping required by this Ordinance shall be planted prior to occupancy, or the sub­mission of the appropriate financial surety as required in Sections 3.03 and/or 3.05. 

2. 	
Plant materials shall be installed in such a manner so as not to negatively impact drainage patterns on site or on adjacent properties or to obstruct vision for traffic movements. 

3. 	
Failure to install and maintain approved landscaping shall constitute a violation of this Or­dinance. 


Buffer Zones Required. 
1. 	The use of physical barriers and landscape screening within buffer zones is to provide for the transition from one (1) zoning district to another contrasting zoning district. This practice promotes compatibility between land uses; preserves the character of existing residential 
neighborhoods; and helps protect property values. 
a. 	
A landscape screen or a physical barrier such as a wall or fence within a buffer zone shall be installed on the property to be developed in order to create a visual screen along all adjoining boundaries as set forth in Table 12.02-H.1. 

b. 	
A landscape screen or a physical barrier within a buffer zone shall be required on the property to be developed, even if the adjacent property is unimproved or vacant land. 

c. 	
If a developed property changes to a more intense land use, a landscape screen or physical barrier within a buffer zone shall be installed on the property as set forth in Table 12.02-H.1. 







2. 	Buffer Zone Matrix.  Table 12.02-H.1. specifies the required buffer zone type required to be installed on the subject site to be developed based on the site’s zoning classification and that of adjacent land. The zoning classification of the subject site is indicated in the left column of the table. The zoning classification of adjacent land is indicated across the 
top of the table.  


TABLE 12.02-H.1.  BUFFER ZONE MATRIX 

NR  
AG1 & AG2  
RA, RB & RC  
RM  Buffer Zone C  Buffer Zone C  
O & C  Buffer Zone B  Buffer Zone B  Buffer Zone B  
I  Buffer Zone A  Buffer Zone A  Buffer Zone A  Buffer Zone A  

3. 	Requirements for Plantings within Buffer Zones. 
a. 	The minimum size and maximum spacing of the plantings shall be as specified in Table 12.02-L.1. 
b. 	
The width of the landscaped area and the density of plantings shall be as specified in the requirements for Buffer Zones A, B, and C herein. 

c. 	
Any one (1) species of the required trees may not exceed thirty-three percent (33%) of the total number of required trees. 


d. 	
Plants shall typically be arranged in a staggered pattern to create a continuous screen. 

e. 	
Existing vegetation on the property to be developed, which is within the required landscaped area, may be credited toward meeting the screening requirement by the Zoning Administrator if the vegetation is healthy and meets the size and type requirements of Table 12.02-L.1. 


4. 	Requirements for Berms within Buffer Zones. 
a. 	Berms shall be installed with slopes not to exceed a one to three (1:3) ratio. Berms shall generally have a flat top which is at least two (2) feet wide. 




b. 	Berm height shall be measured from the nearest adjacent top of the curb (parking 
lot), or nearest adjacent crown of the road, or the nearest adjacent finished first floor elevation; whichever is higher. Uniform berm heights and shapes should be avoided. 
c. 	Berm slopes shall be protected with sod, seed, or other forms of natural ground cover.  Berms shall be constructed in such a manner so as not to alter drainage pat­
terns on-site or on adjacent properties, or obstruct motorists’ vision. 
d. 	If a berm is constructed with a retaining wall or by terracing, the earthen slope shall face the exterior of the site. 
5. 	Requirements for Walls or Fences within Buffer Zones. 
a. 	Required screen walls and fences shall be constructed with new, durable, weather 
resistant materials.  Chain-link and barbed-wire fences shall not be permitted. 
b. 	The wall or fence may be constructed with openings that do not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the wall surface.  The openings shall not reduce the intended ob­
scuring effect of the wall. 
c. 	Screen walls or fences shall not be constructed so as to alter drainage on site or adjacent properties or obstruct motorist’s vision. 
6. 	Buffer Zone Widths and Development Standards. 
a. 	Minimum Required Buffer Zone Widths. Buffer Zone A shall have a minimum width of fifty (50) feet. Buffer Zone B shall have a minimum width of thirty (30) feet. Buffer 
Zone C shall have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. 
b. 	Buffer Zone Development Standards. 
i. 	The buffer zone shall contain one (1) tree for each thirty (30) linear feet or frac­tion of buffer zone length. At least one-half (0.5) of the total number of trees required within the buffer zone shall be deciduous trees. 
ii. 	The buffer zone shall contain a three (3)-foot high screen comprised of plant material, berming, screen walls and/or fences, or any combination of these ele­ments. 
iii. 	If berming is used for all or part of the buffer zone screen, the berm shall con­tain a minimum of one (1) shrub for each ten (10) linear feet or fraction of berm 
length.  All required plant material shall be placed on the top and exterior side slope of the berm. 
iv. 	If a screen wall or fence is used for all or part of the buffer zone screen, a mini­mum of one (1) shrub for each ten (10) linear feet or fraction of wall or fence shall be placed on the exterior side of the wall or fence. 





v. 	If shrubs are used for all or part of the required buffer zone screen, the screen shall consist of a minimum of one (1) shrub for each five (5) linear feet or frac­tion of screen length. 
vi. All applicable standards in Table 12.02-L.1. shall be complied with. 
7. 	Phasing of Buffer Zones. If the project is constructed in phases, the required buffer zone 
may also be constructed in phases. The Zoning Administrator shall determine the extent 
of each phase taking into consideration the adjacent land uses; the distance between land uses; building heights; and the physical characteristics of the site such as topography, ex­isting vegetation, etc. 
8. 	Buffer Zone Waivers.  Should the Zoning Administrator determine, upon inspection, that an adequate landscaping screen on a site already exists, or that such landscaping screen shall not be required, the buffer zone requirements may be waived in whole or in part. The criteria which shall be used when considering a landscape screen waiver shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
a. 	
Variations in topography. 

b. 	
Existence of natural vegetation. 

c. 	
Existing and proposed building and parking lot placement. 

d. 	
Sight distances. 


e. 	
Adjacent land uses. 

f. 	
Existence of floodplains, wetlands, and poor soils areas. 


g. 	
Existing buffer zones. 

h. 	
Existing or required greenbelts along thoroughfares. 


9. 	Buffer Zones along Thoroughfares. If a buffer zone is required between zoning districts separated by a thoroughfare, the design of the buffer zone shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator based on the criteria contained in Section 12.02 H.8. 






FIGURE 12.02-H.1.  BUFFER ZONE A 





PLAN VIEW 
Screening Wall 
Evergreen Trees 


ELEVATION 
Deciduous or Evergreen Shrubs Evergreen Trees Screening Wall 
SECTION 

FIGURE 12.02-H.2.  BUFFER ZONE B 

PLAN VIEW 
ELEVATION 
SECTION 


FIGURE 12.02-H.3.  BUFFER ZONE C 

PLAN VIEW 

ELEVATION 

SECTION 


FIGURE 12.02-H.4. BERMS 


I. 	Parking Lot Landscaping. 
1. 	
Separate landscape areas shall be provided within and at the perimeter of parking lots so as to improve aesthetics, guide the circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and provide opportunities for stormwater detention/retention. 

2. 	
Landscaping Standards within Parking Lots. 

a. 	
Off-street parking areas containing six (6) or more parking spaces shall provide one (1) large deciduous tree and two hundred (200) square feet of landscaped area per six (6) spaces. 

b. 	
At least one-half (0.5) of the required parking lot trees shall be installed in the 




interior of the parking lot. The interior of the parking lot is defined as any point, a 
minimum of ten (10) feet from the outside boundary of the parking lot. 
c. 	
Landscape islands shall be curbed islands in the parking lot not less than one hun­dred (100) square feet in area, with a minimum width of eight (8) feet. Modifica­tions in curbing may be permitted when islands are used as part of the stormwa­ter management system. 

d. 	
In residential zoning districts, not more than fifteen (15) spaces shall be permitted in a bay without a break. In office and commercial zoning districts, the number of 


spaces in a bay shall not exceed twenty (20) spaces without a break.  The required breaks shall be provided by curbed, landscaped islands.  Parking lots in industrial districts are not required to provide parking bay breaks. 





e.  In no case shall the buffer zones or greenbelts required in Sections 12.02 H. and J. be  
considered as satisfying a portion of the off-street parking landscape requirements.  
f.  Exemptions from Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. Off-street parking areas  
located on industrially zoned properties which do not serve the general public and  
are not visible from a public road; or off-street parking areas in any zoning district  
that serve public or private forest preserve areas, game refuge areas, parks, or simi­ 
lar recreation areas; or that serve public and private conservation areas and struc­ 
tures for the development, protection and conservation of open space, watersheds,  
water, soil, forests and wildlife resources; or that serve playgrounds and playfields;  
shall be exempt from the off-street parking area landscaping requirements.  

FIGURE 12.02-I.1. PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING/GREENBELTS 







J. Greenbelts. 
1. 	
Greenbelts shall be required where any developed parcel abuts or faces a public thor­oughfare in the RM, O, C, or I districts, in accordance with the standards set forth in this section. The greenbelt shall be located on the parcel to be developed and shall abut the road right-of-way unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator. 

2. 	
If a buffer zone is required along a thoroughfare, the greenbelt may serve as a replace­ment for the buffer zone as determined by the Zoning Administrator under the provisions of Section 12.02 H.9., herein. 

3. 	
Greenbelt Standards.  All greenbelts shall comply with the following standards: 

a. 	
Greenbelts shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. 

b. 	
Greenbelts shall be landscaped with a minimum of one (1) tree for each forty 

(40) linear feet or fraction of frontage abutting a public or private road right of way.  Required trees within a greenbelt shall meet the minimum size and spacing requirements stipulated in Table 12.02-L.1. At least fifty percent (50%) of the re­quired trees within the greenbelt shall be deciduous trees.  One (1) species of the required trees may not exceed more than thirty-three (33%) of the total number of required trees. 

c. 	
The greenbelt shall be landscaped with a minimum of one (1) shrub for each ten 

(10) linear feet or fraction of frontage abutting a public or private road right of way.  Required shrubs within a greenbelt shall meet the minimum size and spacing requirements stipulated in Table 12.02-L.1. 

d. 	
In addition to the required trees and shrubs within the greenbelt, the remain­der of the greenbelt shall be landscaped with grasses, ground covers, shrubs, and other natural landscape materials approved by the Zoning Administrator. 




e. 	Creative placement of the trees and shrubs, such as staggering, clustering, and/or other methods, is encouraged. 
f. 	Access drives from public rights-of-ways through required greenbelts shall be per­
mitted, but such drives shall not be subtracted from the lineal dimension used to 
determine the minimum required number of trees and shrubs. 
K. 	Site Landscaping. 
1. 	
Properties in the RM, O, and C zoning districts shall provide a minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the gross site area in landscape material. Buffer zone, greenbelt, and parking lot landscaping may be counted toward compliance with the 20% requirement. 

2. 	
Site area landscaping may include a combination of grasses and ground covers; existing tree cover; planting of new trees and plant materials; landscape plazas; gardens; required 







buffer zones and greenbelts; landscaped islands in parking lots; building foundation planting beds; detention/retention basins; ponds; and areas inundated with water. 
3. 	
Site area landscaping shall be provided to screen potentially objectionable site features such as, but not limited to, loading/unloading areas, electrical transformers, refuse, and recycling areas. 

4. 	
The landscaping design shall promote compatibility, and preserve the character of the site, in relation to the immediately surrounding area. 


L. 	Minimum Size and Spacing Requirements.  Where landscaping is required, the minimum size and spacing requirements set forth in Table 12.02-L.1. for representative landscape materials shall be applicable, unless otherwise specified in this Section. 
TABLE 12.02-L.1.  MINIMUM SIZE AND SPACE OF LANDSCAPE PLANTINGS 

MAXIMUM ON-CENTER
MINIMUM SIZE ALLOWABLE 
SPACING* 
CALIPER/
HEIGHT 
FEET
SPREAD 24–
6’-7’ 5’-6’ 3’-4’ 2’-3’ 2” 2 gal 
25 
15 
6 
5 
4 
3 
1
36” 
Large Evergreen Trees, such as: 
Fir (Abies) 
Spruce (Picea) 
Pine (Pinus) 
Hemlock (Tsuga) 
Douglas Fir (Psudotsuga) 
Tamarack; Larch (Larix) 


Narrow Evergreen Trees, such as: 

Arborvitae (Thuja) 
Juniper (Juniperus) 


Large Evergreen Shrubs, such as: 
Hicks Yew (Taxus) Upright Yew (Taxus) 
Spreading Yew (Taxus) 
Upright Juniper (Juniperus) 
Spreading Juniper (Juniperus) 
Mugho Pine (Pinus) 

Small Evergreen Shrubs, such as: 




TYPE OF PLANTING MINIMUM SIZHEIGHT 6’-7’ 5’-6’ 3’-4’ 2’-3’ Spreading (Ward) Yew E A CALIPER/ SPREAD 2” 24– 36” 2 gal LLOWABLE  MAXIMUM ON-CENTER SPACING* FEET 25 15 6 5 4 3 1  
Upright (Brown) Yew  
Dwarf Spreading Juniper  
Dwarf Mugho Pine  
Euonymus varieties Vines, such as: Euonymus varieties  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Virginia Creeper  
Wisteria  
Riverbank Grape  
American Bittersweet Large Deciduous Trees, such as: Oak (Quercus)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maple (Acer)  
Beech (Fagus)  
Linden or Basswood (Tilia)  
Sweetgum (Liquidambar)  
Ginkgo (Male Only) (Ginkgo)  
Honeylocust (Gleditsia)  
Birch (Betula)  
Sycamore (Plantanus)  
Hickory (Carya)  
Black Cherry (Prunus)  
Tulip Tree (Liriodendron)  
Blackgum (Nyssa) Small Deciduous Trees (OrnamDogwood  
ental) 
, such  
as:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Flowering Cherry, Plum, Pear  
Hawthorn  
Redbud  






TYPE OF PLANTING 6’-7’ Magnolia  MINIMUM SIZHEIGHT 5’-6’ 3’-4’ 2’-3’ E A CALIPER/ SPREAD 2” 24– 36” 2 gal LLOWABLE  MAXIMUM ON-CENTER SPACING* FEET 25 15 6 5 4 3 1  
Flowering Crabapple  
Mountain Ash  
Hornbeam  
Sassafras  
Ironwood  
Serviceberry; Juneberry Ground Cover, such as: Euonymus varieties  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wild Strawberry  
Wild Ginger Large Deciduous Shrubs, such Lilac  as:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sumac  
Pyrancantha  
Weigela  
Flowering Quince  
Cotoneaster  
Sargent Crabapple  
Dogwood (Red Osier, Grey, Silky)  
Euonymus varieties  
Viburnum varieties  
Witch-hazel  
Ninebark  
Vaccinium (Blueberry)  
Holly  
Spicebush  
Hazelnut  
Chokeberry  






TYPE OF PLANTING MINIMUM SIZHEIGHT 6’-7’ 5’-6’ 3’-4’ 2’-3’ Chokecherry E A CALIPER/ SPREAD 2” 24– 36” 2 gal LLOWABLE  MAXIMUM ON-CENTER SPACING* FEET 25 15 6 5 4 3 1  
Buttonbush  
American Elder Small Deciduous Shrubs, such Fragrant Sumac  as:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cotoneaster  
 
Potentilla  
 
Meadowsweet  
 
Leatherleaf  
 
Rubus/Ribus varieties  
 
* “Maximum on-center” spacing refers to the largest space allowed between the centers of plants of the same species/variety.  

FIGURE 12.02-L.1. TREE CALIPER 


Caliper = Diameter of Trunk 






FIGURE 12.02-L.2. PLANT SIZES 








SECTION 12.04 EQUIPMENT SCREENING 

A. 	Where Required. The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses located within the office and commercial zoning districts for which mechanical equipment including, but not limited to: generators, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning, is placed upon a roof of any building or on the ground outside of the building. These standards shall also apply to non-residential uses located within the Township’s residential zoning districts. Uses located within the Township’s industrial zon­ing district shall be exempt from these standards. 
B. 	Screening Requirements.  All equipment shall be screened as follows: 
1. 	Screening of Roof Mounted Equipment. 
a. 	
Screens provided to obscure mechanical equipment shall be an opaque barrier at least as high as the equipment being screened. 

b. 	
Rooftop equipment shall be located on the side or rear of a pitched-roof building, screened from public view. 


2. 	Screening of Ground Mounted Equipment. 
a. 	
Ground mounted equipment may be screened by landscape materials.  The land­scape materials shall be evergreen species in order to provide a screen year-round. 

b. 	
Ground mounted equipment may be screened by fences or walls which shall be opaque at least as high as the equipment being screened. 

c. 	
Ground mounted equipment shall not be located in a required front yard. 



SECTION 12.05 LIGHTING 
A. 	Where Required. The standards set forth in this Section shall apply to all uses in the RM, O, and C districts for which exterior lighting is provided. Lighting shall be provided to illuminate pedestrian areas and parking lots for all new developments. Table 6.06-A.1., Data Required for Site Plans, speci­
fies the lighting related details required on site plans. 
1. 	Freestanding Pole Lighting.  
a. 	
Exterior lighting shall be a full cut-off fixture as defined by IESNA or other suitably shielded fixture, downward directed. 

b. 	
Decorative or historic light fixtures may be approved by the Zoning Administrator as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be shown that there will be limited off-site light trespass through the use of low wattage lamps and the proposed fix­tures will be more consistent with the character of the site. 


2. 	Lighting Levels. 





a. 	The intensity of light at the base of a light fixture pole shall not exceed ten (10) foot-candles. 
b. 	Light shall not exceed one-tenth (0.1) foot-candle along any property line which is 
adjacent to a residentially zoned property and one-half (0.5) foot-candle along all non-residential property lines. 
c. 	Light levels shall be measured on the horizontal plane at grade level within the 
site, and on the vertical plane of any property line or street right of way line at a height of five (5) feet above grade level. 
3. 	Height.  
a. 	
The maximum height of a fixture shall be no more than twenty (20) feet above grade in the RM district. 

b. 	
The maximum height of a fixture shall be not more than thirty (30) feet above grade in commercial or office districts and twenty (20) feet in these districts if the subject parcel is abutting a residentially zoned property.  


4. 	Light Pole Location. Light poles shall be located not less than five (5) feet from the edge of a drive or parking space, where feasible, and not interfere with traffic flow, access to fire hydrants or other utilities.  
B. 	Non-Residential Building-Mounted Lighting. Building-mounted lighting fixtures for the purpose of lighting entrances, adjacent sidewalks, parking areas and loading areas is permitted subject to the following restrictions:  
1. 	
Building-mounted lighting shall be a full cutoff fixture or fully shielded and directed down­ward to prevent light trespass.  The intensity of light shall not exceed ten (10) foot-candles at grade for any building mounted fixture. Maximum fixture height shall be twenty (20) feet. 

2. 	
Light shall not exceed one-tenth (0.1) foot-candle at residential property lines and one-half (0.5) foot-candle at non-residential property lines. 


C. 	Exemptions. The following are exempt from the lighting requirements of this Section, except that the Zoning Administrator may require a lighting and photometric plan when deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare:  
1. 	
Sports fields. 

2. 	
Swimming pools serving the public or private club members. 

3. 	
Holiday decorations. 

4. 	
Pedestrian walkway lighting less than three (3) feet in height. 

5. 	
Carnivals or other temporary commercial activities. 







This page is intentionally left blank. 




CHAPTER 13 

ENVIRONMENTAL PROVISIONS 
SECTION 13.01 PURPOSE 
Environmental standards are established in order to preserve the short-term and long-term environmental 
health, safety and quality of the Township. No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted in any district that 
does not conform to the environmental standards set forth in this Chapter 
SECTION 13.02 PRESERVATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
The preservation and enhancement of natural features is essential to maintaining Delta Township’s charac­ter, ecological diversity and stability, economic well-being, and quality of life. For purposes of this section, “natural features” shall include wetlands, watercourses, floodplains, and woodlands and trees. When natural features exist on a site proposed to be developed, the applicant shall do the following: 
A. 	Federal, State, and Local Permits. Development in or affecting natural features may be regulated by the federal, state, county or Township governments, and require licenses, permits, or approv­als.  Permits and approvals required by Delta Charter Township shall not relieve a person from 
obtaining applicable permits or approvals from other relevant jurisdictions. Similarly, obtaining 
permits from the federal, state or county government does not relieve a person from obtaining the required permits from Delta CharterTownship. 
B. 	Protected Natural Features.  In any zoning district, none of the following natural features shall be 
obstructed, removed, altered, transformed, or otherwise impacted in any way at any time by any person except as may be permitted by the applicable regulating agency: 
1. 	
Area, water level, vegetation, edge, bank, shore or natural condition of a river, stream, watercourse, drainage way, lake, or pond, whether filled or partly filled with water or dry in certain seasons. 

2. 	
Area, water level, vegetation or natural conditions of a marsh, swamp or regulated wetland. 

3. 	
Living tree(s). 


Site plans to be reviewed by the Township Planning Commission shall be accompanied by the in­formation described in 13.02 C. and D. below. Any such alterations shall be made in conformance to applicable local, state, and federal requirements. 
C. 	Natural Features Impact Statement.  As part of the Site Plan Review process, as set forth in this or­dinance, the applicant is required to determine if natural features exist on the site.  If one natural feature is determined to exist on a site, then the applicant shall submit a Natural Features Impact 
Statement containing the following information:    





1. 	Site inventory map clearly showing locations and types of natural features both on-site and those within one hundred (100) feet beyond the property lines. The drawing shall delineate: 
a. 	Edges of woodlands, and description of plant community type, but not to include an inventory of individual tree species, sizes, and locations.  
b. 	Edges of wetlands, watercourse stream banks, ordinary pond and high water marks of water features, floodways, floodplains, areas of hydric soils, and highly perme­able soils. 
2. 	
A written description that illustrates the quality, character, and health of the natural fea­tures. 

3. 	
The following standards are intended to protect large mature trees on the periphery of office, commercial, and industrial zoned properties, as well as preserve the natural appear­ance of properties from a roadway. 


a. 	A plan shall be provided identifying the species, size, and location of living trees with a Diameter at Breast Height (4.5 ft. above grade) of eight (8) inches or greater in required front and rear setback areas abutting a roadway. These trees shall be preserved. 
b. 	Tree trimming and tree removal necessary to provide vehicular drives, sidewalks/ paths, clear vision areas, utilities, drainage systems, etc. shall be permitted. The removal of diseased, storm damaged, and invasive trees such as box elders, poplars, 
and cottonwoods shall be permitted. 
4. 	Developers of residential subdivisions should refer to the Delta Charter Township Subdivi­sion Regulations to determine any applicable tree protection regulations. 
D. 	Natural Features Protection Plan. In addition to the Natural Features Impact Statement, the ap­plicant shall provide a Natural Features Protection Plan as part of the Site Plan Review process, showing: 
1. 	
Natural features on the subject parcel that are excluded from development. 

2. 	
Natural features that are to be retained as part of the development, and the measures taken to sustain the natural features.  


SECTION 13.03 FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS 
A. 	Purpose: The Federal Emergency Management Agency has identified flood hazard areas in Delta Charter Township. It is the purpose of this section to reduce hazards to persons and damage to property in such areas and to comply with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, and subsequent regulations enacted by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Such regulations, while permitting reasonable economic use of said lands, will help protect the public safety and health, and prevent or minimize public and private economic losses caused by periodic flooding, and preserve the ability of flood plains to carry and discharge a base flood. 





B. 
C. 
D. 
Applicability:  All land and land uses within the designated flood hazard area shall be subject to the terms specified herein and the provisions and requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, as constituted in accord with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended, and subsequent enactments and rules and regulations promulgated in furtherance of this program 
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, as published in the Federal Register, Vd. 41,207, October 26, 1976, as amended. 
Flood Plain Delineation: 
1. 	The boundaries of the flood hazard area within Delta Charter Township shall be as de­termined by the report entitled The Flood Insurance Study, Delta Charter Township, as amended, Federal Emergency Management Agency, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Flood Boundary Maps and Floodway Maps.  Within the flood hazard area, a regulatory floodway shall coincide with the floodway boundaries indicated on the Flood 
Boundary and Floodway Map.  
2. 	
Where disputes arise as to the exact boundary of the 100-year flood plain, the Township Engineer shall resolve the dispute, and establish the boundary location. In all cases, the decision of the Township Engineer shall modify the boundary of the 100-year flood plain studies issued by the Federal Insurance Administration. 

3. 	
Where a dispute involves an allegation that the boundary is incorrect as mapped and Federal Insurance Administration flood plain studies are being questioned, the Township Engineer shall modify the boundary of the 100-year flood plain only upon receipt of an official letter of map amendment issued by the Federal Insurance Administration. 


Site Development Requirements for Flood Plain Areas:  All lands, buildings, structures, and uses within the flood hazard area shall be subject to the following site development requirements: 
1. 	
No building or structure shall be constructed, placed, or substantially improved so as to extend its use within the flood hazard area. 

2. 	
Filling within the flood hazard area with any material in any manner is prohibited unless: 


a. 	A measure such as compensating excavation and shaping of the flood plain, the flow, and impoundment capacity of the flood plain will be maintained or im­proved; and 
b. 	Such action is approved by the Department of Natural Resources. In areas where the Department of Natural Resources has no authority to grant such approval, 
applicants shall submit a registered engineer’s determination that Section 13.03 
D.2.a. will be met. 
3. 	Uses which, by their construction, operation, or use of physical structures impede the abil­ity of the flood plain to carry and discharge a base flood shall be prohibited.  Applicants shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a registered engineer’s determination that flood carrying capacity shall be maintained or a permit for approval from the Department of Natural Resources. 





4. 	In any zoning district, the 100-year flood plain area shall not be included in determination of net buildable lot area for the purposes for computing densities, except within Planned Unit Developments, as per the provisions herein. 
E. 	100-Year Flood Plain Application Information: 
1. 	In addition to the information required with an application for a certificate of zoning compli­ance, variance, or any other type of development permission required under this Ordinance, 
the following information shall be submitted as a part of an application for permission to commence any type of development within the 100-year flood plain: 
a. 	
A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and where such watercourse is not subject to state and federal regulations designed to insure flood carrying capacity, the ap­plicant shall provide a registered engineer’s determination that the flood carrying capacity will be maintained. 

b. 	
Proof of development permission from appropriate local, state, and federal agen­cies, including a flood plain permit, approval, or letter certifying a lack of authority from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources under authority of Act 245, Public Acts of 1929, as amended by Act 167, Public Acts of 1968, the Flood Plain Regulatory Authority. 


c. 	Base flood elevation data where the proposed development is subject to the Land Division Act, as amended, or greater than five (5) acres in size.  
d. 	Additional information which the Zoning Administrator or Township Engineer deems reasonably necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
2. 	Upon request of the Zoning Administrator, applicants for certificates of zoning compliance and variances shall furnish to the Zoning Administrator a certified land survey indicating the elevation and location of the flood hazard area, and appropriate additional site information 
as deemed necessary. 
F. 	Variance from Flood Plain Regulations: 
1. 	
Variances from the provisions of Section 13.03, Flood Hazard Regulations, shall only be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals upon a determination of compliance with the stan­dards for variances contained in this Ordinance. 

2. 	
A variance shall not be granted within the 100-year flood plain where the result would be an increase in flood levels during a base flood discharge. 

3. 	
The variance granted shall be the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to af­ford relief to the applicant. 

4. 	
In granting a variance within the 100-year flood plain the Board of Appeals shall require the 







following flood hazard reduction standards be complied with. 
a.  All new construction of, or substantial improvements to, any structure or building shall be:  
i.  Designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.  
ii.  Constructed with materials and utility equipment (electrical, heating, ventila­tion, plumbing, air conditioning, etc.) resistant to, or located to avoid, flood damage.  
iii.  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.  
iv.  Have the lowest floor of buildings (including basement) elevated at or above the 100-year flood plain elevation.  
v.  Have any enclosed areas below a lowest floor or basement ventilated with at least two (2) openings (within one (1)-foot above grade) having a total net area of at least one (1) square foot per one hundred forty-four (144) square feet of enclosed floor area.  
b.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltra­tion of flood waters into the system.  
c.  All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall minimize or eliminate in­filtration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding.  
d.  All public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed, and located to mini­mize or eliminate flood damage.  
e.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.  
f.  The applicant shall provide appropriate site and building plans and engineering data to demonstrate compliance with the above standards.  This data shall be prepared by a qualified professional and submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review by the appropriate Township officials.  
g.  A permit of approval shall be obtained from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, as amended, prior to the granting of such variance.  

G. 	Disclaimer of Liability: 
1. 	The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger 





floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natu­ral causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris.  
2. 	Approval of the use of land under this Section shall not be considered a guarantee or war­ranty of safety from flood damage.  This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the 100-year flood plain will be free from flood damage. This Ordinance does not create liabil­ity on the part of Delta Charter Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully 
made thereunder. 
H. 	Duties of the Zoning Administrator: With regard to the National Flood Insurance Program, and the regulation of development within the flood hazard area zone as described in this Section, the duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include but are not limited to: 
1. 	
Notification to adjacent communities and the Department of Natural Resources of the pro­posed alteration or relocation of any watercourse, and the submission of such notifications to the Federal Insurance Administration. 

2. 	
Verification and recording of the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level of the low­est floor, including basement, of substantially improved structures constructed within the flood hazard area, and in the case of flood-proofed structures, the elevation to which the structure was flood-proofed. 

3. 	
All records and maps pertaining to the National Flood Insurance Program shall be main­tained in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 

4. 	
It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to obtain from the applicant the best available flood hazard data for purposes of administering this Ordinance in the absence of data from the Federal Insurance Administration. 







CHAPTER 14 
NON-CONFORMITIES 
SECTION 14.01 PURPOSE 
A. 	It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide regulations governing lots, buildings, structures and the uses thereof, which were legal before this Ordinance was adopted, or amended, including legal nonconforming lots, uses, buildings, and structures, that would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the provisions of this Ordinance.  It is the intent of this Chapter to permit these buildings and structures, herein referred to as nonconformities, to remain until the nonconformity is abandoned, discontinued, significantly damaged, destroyed, or removed. 
B. 	These nonconformities are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with the uses and build­ings and structures lawfully permitted by this Ordinance. The regulations contained in this Chap­ter are designed to ensure that such nonconformities will be properly regulated so as to result in a minimum of disharmony in the districts in which they are located. 
C. 	It is the intent of these regulations to gradually eliminate nonconforming uses and structures over time. 
D. 	The tenancy, ownership, or management of any nonconforming use or nonconforming structure 
may change without altering the legal status of the nonconforming use or nonconforming struc­ture. 
SECTION 14.02 NON-CONFORMING USES 
A. 	Non-Conforming Uses on Parcels and Lots. 
1. 	Where, on the date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, a lawful use of a parcel or lot, such use not involving any buildings or structures or upon which parcel, or lot a building or structure is accessory to such principal use, exists that is no longer permissible under the provisions of this Ordinance, such principal use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions: 
a. 	
No such non-conforming use of a parcel or lot shall be enlarged, expanded, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on the date of adop­tion or amendment of this Ordinance and no accessory use, building, or structure shall be established therewith. 

b. 	
No such non-conforming use of a parcel or lot shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of such parcel or lot not occupied on the date of adoption of this Ordinance. 


2. 	If such non-conforming use of a parcel or lot has been discontinued for the continuous period of one (1) year or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period, such 





discontinuation shall be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to legally abandon 
the non-conforming use of a parcel or lot.  At the end of this period of abandonment, the non-conforming use of a parcel or lot shall not be re-established, and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3. 	Prior to termination of a non-conforming use of a parcel or lot due to abandonment or dis­continuation, the Township Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice of the Town­ship’s intent to terminate such non-conforming use to the property owner identified in the Township’s most recent property tax rolls, by personal delivery, or by first class mail. Said notice shall provide the date, time, and place when the Township Board will hold a public hearing on the question of such abandonment or discontinuance with a final determination 
being made by the Township Board.  Factors that the Township Board shall consider when determining whether there was intent to abandon the non-conforming use include, but 
shall not be limited to: 
a. 	
The length of time the use has ceased. 

b. 	
The disconnection of utility services. 


c. 	
The removal of buildings and structures. 

d. 	
The lack of normal maintenance of buildings and grounds. 


B. 	Non-Conforming Uses of Buildings and Structures. 
1. 	
Where, on the date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, a lawful use of a build­ing or structure exists that is no longer permissible under the regulations of this Ordinance, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful. 

2. 	
If such non-conforming use of a building or structure has been discontinued for the continu­ous period of one (1) year or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period, such 


discontinuation shall be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to legally abandon 
the nonconforming use.  At the end of this period of abandonment, the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished, and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3. 	Prior to termination of a non-conforming use of a structure or building due to abandon­ment or discontinuation, the Township Zoning Administrator shall provide written notice of the Township’s intent to terminate such non-conforming use of a structure or building to 
the property owner identified in the Township’s most recent property tax rolls, by personal delivery, or by first class mail. Said notice shall provide the date, time, and place when the Township Board will hold a public hearing on the question of such abandonment or discon­tinuance with a final determination being made by the Township Board. Factors that the 
Township Board shall consider when determining whether there was intent to abandon the 
non-conforming use include, but shall not be limited to: 
a. 	The length of time the use has ceased. 





b. The disconnection of utility services. 
c. 	
The removal of buildings and structures. 

d. 	
The lack of normal maintenance of buildings and grounds. 


4. 	
Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the dis­trict, and the non-conforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 

5. 	
Where a non-conforming status applies to a structure and premises in combination, re­moval, or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-conforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of greater than the structure’s state equalized value (SEV), as determined by the Township Assessor at the time of the destruction. 


SECTION 14.03 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
A. 	Continuance.  Use of a non-conforming building or structure may continue after the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. Any nonconforming building or structure that is damaged by fire, flood, wind, or other Acts of God in excess of the structure’s precatastrophe state equalized value (SEV), as determined by the Township Assessor, shall not be rebuilt, repaired, or reconstructed, except in complete conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.  In the event that the damage is less than the structure’s precatastrophe SEV, as determined by the Township Assessor, the structure may be restored to its precatastrophe status. Such restoration shall take place only upon approval of the Building Official and all construction shall be in full compliance with applicable provisions of this Ordinance and applicable Township codes which is commenced within two (2) years of the date of damage, and is diligently pursued to completion.  
B. 	Moved.  A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to another Township location unless such building or structure complies with all of the applicable site devel­opment standards and other provisions of this Ordinance.  
C. 	Repairs and Maintenance.  Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the repair or maintenance of a nonconforming building or structure to correct deterioration, obsolescence, depreciation, and wear.  
D. 	Unsafe or Unlawful. If a non-conforming building or structure, or a portion of a building or struc­ture containing a non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by the building official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
SECTION 14.04 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD 
A. 	Where the owner of a single, non-conforming lot of record in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance does not own sufficient land to enable them to conform to the requirements of this Ordinance relating to minimum lot area or width, or both, such lot of record may be used as 





a building site, provided that the other provisions and requirements of this Ordinance are complied with, except as provided in Section 14.04 B. below. 
B. 	The minimum side yard setback requirements for lots of record in the AG1, AG2, RA, RB, RC, and RM zoning districts which are non-conforming due to inadequate lot width shall be ten percent (10%) of the lot width, but in no case shall the side setback be less than five (5) feet. In all other zoning districts, minimum side yard setback requirements specified herein shall be complied with.  





CHAPTER 15 

ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 
SECTION 15.01 GENERAL REGULATIONS 
A. 	Membership. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members: a member of the Township Board, a member of the Township Planning Commission, and five (5) residents of the Township appointed by majority vote of the Township Board who shall be representative of the various interests and population distribution of the Township. An employee or contractor of the Township Board may not serve as a Zoning Board of Appeals member.  
B. 	Terms of Office: 
1. 	
The members of the Township Board and Planning Commission shall serve three (3) year terms, except that such terms shall be concurrent with service on the Board and Commis­sion. 

2. 	
The five (5) additional members shall serve for a three (3) year term.  

3. 	
Should a vacancy occur, a successor shall be appointed not more than one (1) month after the vacancy has occurred. All such vacancies or unexpired terms shall be filled for the 


remainder of the term of the member being succeeded. 
C. 	Continuation. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as presently constituted, shall continue in the manner and for the terms heretofore established. 
D. 	Alternates. The Township Board may appoint not more than two (2) alternate members for the same term as regular members to the Zoning Board of Appeals. An alternate member may serve as a regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the absence of a regular member if the regular member will be unable to attend one (1) or more meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals. An alternate member may also be called upon to serve as a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest.  The alternate member appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision is made. The alternate member has the same voting rights as a regular member of the Zoning Board of Ap­peals.  The alternate member(s) shall serve at the call of the Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
E. 	Removal.  Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be removed by the Township Board for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hear­ing. 
F. 	Conflict of Interest.  A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself constitutes malfea­sance in office. 





G. 	Quorum. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals are present. 
H. 	Rules and Regulations. In addition to the procedural requirements set forth in the Zoning Enabling Act, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix rules and regulations to govern its procedures, including: 
1. 	The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt rules and regulations not otherwise inconsistent with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act to govern its procedures and shall determine its own officers, 
except that the member from the Township Board shall not serve as Chairperson. 
2. 	
Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may specify in its rules of procedure. 

3. 	
A member of the Zoning Board of Appeals who is also a member of the Planning Commission, or the Township Board shall not participate in a public hearing on or vote on the same matter that the member voted on as a member of the Planning Commission or the Township Board.  Howev­


er, the member may consider and vote on other unrelated matters involving the same property. 
4. 	All meetings and records shall be open to the public. All minutes shall be filed in the office of the Township Clerk and shall be made available to interested parties upon request and pursuant 
to the rules established by the Clerk therefore.  
I. 	Notice. Following receipt of a written request concerning a request for a variance, the Zoning Board Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the request, not to exceed forty-five (45) days, and give notice as provided in Section 3.04, Notices. 
J. 	Stay. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals that a stay would, in their opinion, cause immi­nent peril to life or property, in which case, the proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restrain­
ing order which may be granted by the Circuit Court on application, and on due cause shown. 
K. 	Decisions.  Decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be in the form of a resolution stating the find­ings of fact determined by the Board, the decision, and any conditions attached to the decision. The decision shall be in writing and signed by the chairperson. 
SECTION 15.02 POWERS AND DUTIES 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall perform it duties and exercise its powers as provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act in such a way that the objectives of this Ordinance shall be attained; the public health, welfare, and safety secured; and substantial justice done. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide only those mat­ters which it is specifically authorized to hear and decide as provided in this Ordinance. 
SECTION 15.03 REVERSE OR AFFIRM ZONING ADMINISTRATOR 
A. 	Appeals. An appeal of an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Zoning Administrator to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken from a person aggrieved or from an officer, department, board, or bureau of the state, county, or Township. 





B. 	Power and Duty. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals where there is an error alleged in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Adminis­trator in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
C. 	Reverse or Affirm Zoning Administrator. In exercising the above mentioned powers, the Zoning Board of Appeals may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken. 
SECTION 15.04 VARIANCE 
A. 	Power and Duty. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power and duty to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such non-use variances from the provisions of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would result in practical difficulty. 
B. 	Application Required. An application for a variance shall be with the Zoning Administrator or their designee. The application shall consist of a completed application form, required fee, and docu­mentation demonstrating all of the following: 
1. 	That the variance request is due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not 
to the general neighborhood conditions. 
2. 	
That the variance would not cause a substantial adverse effect on properties in the imme­diate vicinity of the subject parcel or be contrary to the public interest. 

3. 	
That the need for the variance is not self-created. 

4. 	
That the variance is not contrary to the purposes of this Ordinance. 

5. 	
That no non-conforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 


C. 	Findings. Prior to granting a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall find that one (1) of the following requirements have been met by the applicant for the variance: 
1. 	
Where there are practical difficulties preventing an applicant from strict compliance with the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, or density which would unreasonably prevent the applicant from using the property for a permitted purpose, or would render conformity with such regulations unnecessarily burdensome. 

2. 	
That the granting of a variance would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district, or whether a lesser relaxation than that applied for would give substantial relief to the applicant, and be more consistent with justice to other 


property owners. 





3. 	That the plight of the applicant is due to unique circumstances of the property and not to 
general conditions in the area. 
4. 	That the variance observes the spirit of the Ordinance, secures public safety, and does sub­
stantial justice. 
D. 	Conditions and Safeguards. In granting any variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance provided said conditions: 
1. 	
Are designed to protect natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 

2. 	
Are necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, are related to the 


standards established in the Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and 
are necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
E. 	Violations. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance, and punishable under Section 3.07 of this Ordinance. 
F. 	Limitations of Authority. Under no circumstances shall the Zoning Board of Appeals grant a variance 
as follows: 
1. 	
To allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the District involved. 

2. 	
Alter or change the zoning classification of a property. 

3. 	
Make any changes to the regulations herein or take any action which results, in effect, in making a legislative change. 


SECTION 15.05 VOIDING AND REAPPLICATION FOR VARIANCE 
A. 	Time Limit for Variances Granted: 
1. 	
Each variance granted under the provisions of this Ordinance shall become null and void unless the construction, occupancy, or other actions authorized by such variance have com­menced within two (2) years of the granting of such variance. 

2. 	
Upon written application filed with the Zoning Administrator or their designee prior to the termination of the two (2) year time period, the Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize a single extension of the time limit for an additional period of not more than one (1) year upon the finding by the Zoning Board of Appeals that the project has a reasonable expecta­tion of being continued to construction. 


B. 	Reapplication for Variances Denied: No application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be resubmitted within one (1) year from the date of the original filing of an application for the variance, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions relating to the reasons for the denial of the original appeal found by the Zoning 
Board of Appeals to be valid. 





SECTION 15.06 APPEALS OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEAL DECISIONS 
The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final. A party aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal to Eaton County Circuit Court, as provided by law. 





This page is intentionally left blank. 




CHAPTER 16 

AMENDMENTS 
SECTION 16.01 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS 
The Township Board may, from time to time, amend, modify, supplement, or revise the zoning district boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map or the provisions of this Ordinance. Amendments to the provisions of this Ordinance may be initiated by the Township Board, the Planning Commission, or by petition of one (1) or more residents of the Township. An amendment to the zoning district boundaries contained on the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by the Township Board, the Planning Commission, 
or by the owner or owners of property which is the subject of the proposed amendment.  All proposed amendments to the provisions of this Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map shall be referred to the Plan­ning Commission for public hearing and recommendation to the Township Board, prior to consideration 
thereof by the Township Board. 
SECTION 16.02 APPLICATION PROCEDURE 
A. 	An amendment to this Ordinance or the Official Zoning Map, except those initiated by the Town­ship Board or Planning Commission, shall be initiated by submission of a completed application on a form supplied by the Township, including an application fee, which shall be established from time to time by resolution of the Township Board. Fees shall not be required for amendments 
proposed by the Township Board or Planning Commission. 
B. 	In the case of an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, the following information shall accom­pany the application form: 
1. 	
A legal description and street address of the subject property. 

2. 	
The name and address of the owner of the subject property, and a statement of the ap­


plicant’s interest in the subject property if not the owner in fee simple title. 
3. 	The existing and proposed zoning district designation of the subject property. 
C. 	In the case of an amendment to this Ordinance, other than an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, the specific text of the proposed amendment shall accompany the application form. 
SECTION 16.03 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE; PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE 
A. 	Upon initiation of an amendment, a public hearing on the proposed amendment shall be sched­uled before the Planning Commission. All applications for an amendment shall be processed and the required public hearing shall be noticed and conducted in compliance with the Michigan Zon­ing Enabling Act, as amended. 





B. 	Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall identify and evaluate all factors rel­evant to the petition and shall report its findings and recommendation to the Township Board. In the case of an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, the Planning Commission shall consider the criteria contained in Section 16.04 in making its finding and recommendation. 
C. 	Following receipt of the findings and recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Township Board shall consider the proposed amendment.  In the case of an amendment to the text of this Ordinance, the Township Board may modify or revise the proposed amendment as recommended 
by the Planning Commission, prior to enactment. In the case of an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, the Township Board shall approve or deny the amendment, based on its consideration of the criteria contained in Section 16.04. 
SECTION 16.04 CRITERIA FOR AMENDMENT OF THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 
A. 	Review. In reviewing any application for an amendment to the Zoning Map, the Planning Commis­sion and Township Board shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the application. The Plan­ning Commission shall report its findings in full, along with its recommendations for disposition of the application to the Township Board. 
B. 	Findings.  The facts to be considered by the Planning Commission and Township Board shall include, 
but not be limited to, the following: 
1. 	
Whether the rezoning is consistent with the goals, policies, and uses proposed for the sub­ject parcel in the Township’s Comprehensive Plan. 

2. 	
Whether the rezoning is justified by a change in conditions since the original ordinance was adopted or by an error in the original ordinance. 

3. 	
Whether the subject parcel possesses natural features and environmental characteristics which would be significantly adversely impacted by a development or use allowed by the requested rezoning. 

4. 	
Whether the rezoning complies with the purposes of this ordinance as described in Section 

1.02 D. 

5. 	
Whether uses allowed under the proposed rezoning would be equally or better suited to the area than uses allowed under the current zoning. 

6. 	
The ability of the Township or other governmental agencies to provide services, infrastruc­


ture and facilities that may be required if the rezoning were approved. 
SECTION 16.05 AMENDMENTS REQUIRED TO CONFORM TO COURT DECREE 
Any amendment for the purpose of conforming to a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction shall be 
adopted by the Township Board and published, without necessity of a public hearing or referral thereof to any other board or agency. 





SECTION 16.06 CONDITIONAL REZONING PROCEDURES 
A. 	Intent.  It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of the Township, as well as advantageous to a property owner seeking a change in a zoning clas­sification, if certain conditions could be proposed by a property owner as part of a request for a rezoning. It is the intent of this Section to provide a process consistent with the provisions of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended, by which an owner seeking a rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of land as part of the rezoning request. 
B. 	Application and Offer of Conditions.  
1. 	A property owner may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for rezoning is filed or may be made at a later time during the 
rezoning process. 
2. 	
The required application and process for considering a Conditional Rezoning request shall be the same as that for considering rezoning requests made without any offer of condi­tions, except as modified by the requirements of this Section. 

3. 	
The Notice of Public Hearing for a Conditional Rezoning request shall include a general description of the conditions proposed by the property owner.  

4. 	
The owner’s offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses and/or developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district. 

5. 	
The owner’s offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the property for which the Conditional Rezoning is requested. 

6. 	
Any use and/or development proposed in conjunction with a Conditional Rezoning that would require special use approval under the terms of this Ordinance may only be com­


menced if special use approval for such use and/or development is ultimately granted in 
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
7. 	
Any use and/or development proposed in conjunction with a Conditional Rezoning that would require a variance under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if a variance for such use and/or development is ultimately granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 

8. 	
Any use and/or development proposed in conjunction with a Conditional Rezoning that would require site plan approval under the terms of this Ordinance may only be com­menced if site plan approval for such use and/or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance. 

9. 	
The offer of conditions may be amended during the processing of a rezoning request pro­vided that any amended or additional conditions are entered voluntarily by the property owner. An owner may withdraw all or part of their offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action by the Township Board provided that, if such withdrawal occurs after 







the Planning Commission’s public hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezon­
ing application shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation. 
C. 	Approval.  
1. 	
The Planning Commission and Township Board shall consider, but not limit themselves to, the facts contained in Section 16.04 B. when reviewing a request for a Conditional Rezoning and Conditional Rezoning Agreement. 

2. 	
If the Township Board approves the rezoning request and offer of conditions, the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a Conditional Rezoning Agreement acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the provisions of this Section. The Conditional Rezoning Agreement shall be incorporated by attachment to the rezoning request at such time as the 


rezoning is approved by the Township Board. 
D. 	Conditional Rezoning Agreement. 
1. 	A Conditional Rezoning Agreement shall be submitted with a rezoning application and shall include the following: 
a. 	
Be in a form recordable with the County Register of Deeds. 

b. 	
A statement acknowledging that the Agreement runs with the property and is bind­ing upon successor owners of the property. 


c. 	
A statement confirming that the Agreement was proposed by the owner and en­tered into voluntarily. 

d. 	
A statement confirming that the property shall not be used or developed in a man­ner that is inconsistent with the conditions placed on the rezoning. 

e. 	
A list of conditions proposed by the owner. 

f. 	
A legal description of the property. 

g. 	
A sketch plan or other documents in sufficient detail to illustrate any specific condi­tions proposed by the owner. 


E. 	Compliance with Conditions. 
1. 	Any person who establishes a development or commences a use and/or development on 
a property that has been the subject of a Conditional Rezoning shall continuously operate and maintain the use and/or development in compliance with all of the conditions set forth in the Conditional Rezoning Agreement. Any failure to comply with a condition stipulated in the Conditional Rezoning Agreement shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Ordinance and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be deemed a nuisance 
per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law. 





2. 	No permit or approval shall be granted under this Ordinance for any use and/or develop­ment that is contrary to the Conditional Rezoning Agreement. 
F. 	Amendment to Zoning Map. 
Upon approval by the Township Board of a Conditional Rezoning request and a Conditional Rezoning Agreement, the Zoning Map shall be amended to reflect a new zoning classification along with a relevant designation providing notice of the Conditional Rezoning Agreement. 
G. 	Time Period for Establishing the Use and/or Development. 
A use and/or development authorized by a Conditional Rezoning and Conditional Rezoning Agreement shall be commenced upon the property within two (2) years from the effective date of the rezoning. A use and/or development of the property is defined as actual physical construction of a substantial nature of 
the approved building improvements which must have commenced and proceeded meaningfully toward completion in accordance with the necessary Township approvals and permits. The two (2) year time limi­tation may, upon written request by the property owner prior to expiration, be extended by the Township Board if it is demonstrated to the Board’s reasonable satisfaction that there is a strong likelihood that the use and/or development will commence within the period of the extension and proceed diligently thereaf­
ter to completion and further that the Board finds that there has not been a change in circumstances that would render the Conditional Rezoning and Conditional Rezoning Agreement incompatible with other zon­ing districts and uses in the surrounding area or be inconsistent with sound planning and zoning policies. 
H. 	Reversion of Zoning. 
If the use and/or development approved as a Conditional Rezoning does not occur within the time frame specified in Section 16.06 G. above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as set forth in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended. The reversion process shall be initiated by the Township Board requesting that the Planning Commission proceed with consideration of rezoning of the property to its former zoning classification. The procedure for considering and making this reversionary rezoning shall thereafter be the same as applies to all other rezoning requests.  
I. 	Subsequent Rezoning of Property. 
When property that is rezoned as a Conditional Rezoning with a Conditional Rezoning Agreement is there­after rezoned to a different zoning classification or to the same zoning classification but with a different or no Conditional Rezoning Agreement, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to Section 16.06 
H. above or otherwise, the Conditional Rezoning Agreement imposed under the former zoning classifica­tion shall cease to be in effect.  
J. 	Amendment of Conditions. 
1. 	During the two (2) year period for commencement of an approved use and/or develop­ment pursuant to Section 16.06 G. above, or during any extension thereof granted by the Township Board, the Township shall not add to or alter the conditions in the Conditional Rezoning Agreement. 





2. 	The Conditional Rezoning Agreement may be amended thereafter in the same manner as was prescribed for the original rezoning and Conditional Rezoning Agreement. 
K. 	Recordation. 
A Conditional Rezoning approval shall not become effective until the Conditional Rezoning Agree­ment is recorded with the Eaton County Register of Deeds and a certified copy of the Agreement is filed with the Township Clerk. 
L. 	Township Right to Rezone. 
Nothing in the Conditional Rezoning Agreement nor in the provisions of this Section shall be deemed to prohibit the Township Board from rezoning all or any portion of a property that is subject to a Conditional Rezoning Agreement to another zoning classification. 
M. 	Failure to Offer Conditions. 
The Township Board shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect an owner’s rights under this Ordinance. 












