7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF DURAND, MICHIGAN
____________
Published by Order of the City Council
____________

M

MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION

CC

Tallahassee, Florida

2002

OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF
DURAND, MICHIGAN
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION
____________
Deborah L. Doyle

Mayor
____________
Cameron C. Canute

Mayor Pro-Tem
____________
Michael Bemis
Timothy Doyle
Vicki Fuja
Leo Krupp
James Schuyler

City Council
____________
Lynn H. Markland

City Manager
____________
Charles R. McKone

City Attorney
____________
Amy J. Roddy

1/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

City Clerk
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Durand, Michigan.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1977 Code, containing ordinances through July 6, 1977, and ordinances
subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof.
The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the
comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent
ordinance included herein.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been
catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A
table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code.

Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each
section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash
refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is
6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using
the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 62 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the
case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the
article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using
one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new
chapters.

Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a
certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of
the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately
to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in
this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes:

CHARTER

CHT:1

CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE

CHTCT:1

CODE

CD1:1

CODE APPENDIX

CDA:1

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES

CCT:1

STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE

SLT:1

CHARTER INDEX

CHTi:1

CODE INDEX

CDi:1

Index
2/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are
couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees.
There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is
interested.

Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the
publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted.
These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and
deleting the obsolete pages.
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will
then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended
by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages
be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.

Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code
Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able
assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Amy J. Roddy, City Clerk, and Lynn H. Markland, City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during
the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which
will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's
affairs.

Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Durand, Michigan. Editorial
enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross
references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used
or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Durand, Michigan.
© Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Durand, Michigan. 2002.
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code.
This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Durand, Michigan" or the "Durand City Code."
State law reference— Codification authority, MCL 117.5b.
Sec. 1-2. - De nitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless
they are inconsistent with the intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise:

Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Durand, Michigan, adopted August 5, 1958, and shall include any
amendment to such Charter.

City. The term "city" shall denote the City of Durand, Michigan.
3/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

City council, council. The terms "city council" and "council" shall mean the city council or council of the City of Durand.
Code. The expressions "Code" and "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Durand, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1 and
as modified by amendment and revision and by the adoption of new chapters, articles, divisions or sections.

Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when
expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, it
shall be excluded; when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded,
except for parking tickets.

County. The terms "the county" and "this county" shall mean the County of Shiawassee in the State of Michigan.
Gender. Terms denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders.
General terms. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated, unless expressly so
limited.

Joint authority. All terms purporting to give joint authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority.

MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" refer to the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended.
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Number. Terms in the singular shall include the plural, and terms in the plural shall include the singular.
Officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission or
other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Durand, Michigan." Whenever,
by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency of the city is assigned any duty or
empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency shall mean and include
such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency or any deputy or authorized subordinate.

Person. The term "person" and its derivatives and the term "whoever" shall include a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a
corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms
"person" and "whoever," as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations,
the officers thereof.

Shall/may. Whenever the term "shall" appears in this Code, it shall be considered mandatory and not directory, except as otherwise provided,
and the term "may" is permissive.

State. The terms "the state" and "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan.
Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past.
State law reference— Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq.
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation per state acts.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public Acts of Michigan.
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code.
This Code shall be amended by ordinance. The title of each amendatory ordinance shall be substantially as follows:
(1)

To amend any section:
An ordinance to amend the Code of Ordinances, City of Durand, Michigan, by amending section ;#rule; (or sections ;#rule; and
;#rule;) of chapter ;#rule;.

(2)

To insert a new section, article or chapter:

4/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
An ordinance to amend the Code of Ordinances, City of Durand, Michigan, by adding a new section (;#rule;, new sections or a
new chapter, as the case may be), which new section (sections or chapter) shall be designated as section ;#rule; (sections
;#rule; and ;#rule;) of chapter ;#rule; of the Code.
(3)

To repeal a section or chapter:
An ordinance to amend the Code of Ordinances, City of Durand, Michigan, by repealing section ;#rule; (sections ;#rule; and
;#rule;), chapter ;#rule;, of the Code.

Sec. 1-5. - Captions.
Headings and captions used in this Code, such as the chapter, article, division and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section and do not limit the subject matter.
Sec. 1-6. - References and notes.
Charter references, cross references, state law references and editor's notes are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part
of the text of any section.
Sec. 1-7. - Application to future legislation.
All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances adopted that amend or supplement this
Code, unless otherwise specifically provided.
Sec. 1-8. - Rules of severability.
Each chapter, article, division or section or, whenever divisible, subsection of this Code is hereby declared to be severable, and the invalidity of
any chapter, article, division, section or divisible subsection shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other chapter, article, division,
section or subsection of this Code.
Sec. 1-9. - Reference to other sections.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section of this Code, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to
as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or
revision.
Sec. 1-10. - Reference to o ces.
Reference to a public officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the City of Durand exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
Sec. 1-11. - Certain provisions saved from repeal.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following when not inconsistent with this Code:
(1)

Any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code;

(2)

Any ordinance levying annual taxes;

(3)

Any ordinance appropriating money;

(4)

Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money;

(5)

Any ordinance establishing utility rates;

(6)

Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons;

(7)

Any ordinance authorizing public improvements;

(8)

Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property;

(9)

Any ordinance annexing or detaching territory;

(10)

Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use;

5/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
(11)

Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public

(12)

Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city;

(13)

Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees;

(14)

Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets;

(15)

Any ordinance pertaining to zoning;

(16)

Any other ordinance or part thereof which is not a general and permanent nature;

and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this
Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office.
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code.
By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council.
Sec. 1-13. - Enforcement o cial or agent.
If sections of this Code do not directly name a city official who is responsible for carrying out enforcement provisions, the city manager may
direct any one of its employees, officers or another agency to perform the stated enforcement provisions.
Sec. 1-14. - Con icting regulations.
Where there is a difference or conflict between other provisions of this Code or those contained in lawfully adopted county, state, city, federal
or other governmental agency rules, regulations, ordinances or laws, the most liberal interpretation of the most restrictive or the one imposing
the most desirable standard shall prevail.
Sec. 1-15. - Service of notice.
Except where the manner of service of notice is specifically provided for in sections of the city Charter, or in any section of this Code requiring
notice, such notice may be served:
(1)

By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his residence, office, or place of business, with
some person of suitable age and discretion;

(2)

By mailing thereof, by registered, certified, or first class mail, to such owner at his last known residence or business address;

(3)

By posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the premises of his last known residence or business address; or

(4)

By one publication of such notice in a newspaper having a general circulation in the city.

Sec. 1-16. - General penalty.
(a)

Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision or section, every person convicted of a
violation of any provision of this Code or any rule, regulation or order adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $500.00 and costs of prosecution in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and every day upon
which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.

(b)

The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of
this Code, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance.

(c)

The penalty shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition, any injunctive relief or revocation of any permit or
license.

Cross reference— Fines for violation of municipal civil infraction, § 2-505.
State law reference— Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i.
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):

6/173

7/12/2019
(1) Cross

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
reference— Elections, ch. 26; emergency preparedness, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 46; offenses affecting governmental functions, § 50-

41 et seq.; administration of traffic regulations, § 74-66 et seq.; utilities, ch. 78; administration and enforcement of sewer regulations, § 78-176 et
seq.
(1) State

Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act,

MCL 15.231 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 2-1. - Approval of legal documents.
The mayor shall sign, the city clerk shall attest to, the city manager shall approve as to substance and the city attorney shall approve as to
form all contracts and agreements requiring the assent of the city, unless otherwise provided by law, the Charter, ordinance or the provisions of
this Code.
(Code 1977, § 1.146)

Sec. 2-2. - Bonds.
(a)

Surety bonds, conditioned as required by section 5.11 of the city Charter, shall be filed by the following officers of the city in not
less than the amounts indicated:
Treasurer .....$25,000.00
Manager .....10,000.00
Clerk .....10,000.00

(b)

All other officers of the city and employees, except the mayor and councilmembers, shall file a blanket bond in an amount to be
designated by order of the city council.

(Code 1977, § 1.147)

Secs. 2-3—2-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE
FOOTNOTE(S):
(2) Cross

reference— Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees saved from repeal, §

1-11(13); fire department, § 38-81 et seq.; department of health, § 42-31 et seq.; police department, § 46-31 et seq.; department of parks and
recreation, § 54-31 et seq.; department of public works, § 78-1; water department, § 78-5.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 2-36. - Division.
The administrative service of the city shall be under the supervision and direction of the city manager, except as otherwise provided by the
city Charter, and shall be divided into the following offices and departments, each of which shall be the responsibility of and under the control of a
head as listed opposite such office or department:

O ce or Department

O cial Head

O ce of clerk

City clerk

O ce of assessor

City assessor

7/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

O ce of treasurer

City treasurer

Department of police

Chief of police

Fire department

Fire chief

Department of public works

Director of public works and utilities

Department of water

Water superintendent

Department of health

Health o cer

Department of parks and recreation

Director of parks and recreation

Department of law

City attorney

(Code 1977, § 1.40)

Secs. 2-37—2-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER

Sec. 2-61. - Duties generally.
The city manager shall see that all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations adopted by the council and the provisions of this Code, are properly
enforced. He shall attend all meetings of the city council, regular and special. He shall be responsible for the proper preaudit and recording of all
financial transactions. He shall establish and maintain a system of accounts for the city and shall prescribe the system and method of
bookkeeping for any city office or department which he may require to keep such records.
(Code 1977, § 1.140)

Sec. 2-62. - Department heads.
All administrative officers are responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and offices and
all activities assigned to them. The city manager may set aside any action taken by any administrative officer and may supersede him in the
functions of his office, but, as to officers appointed by the council, such action shall be subject to approval by the council.
(Code 1977, § 1.141)

Sec. 2-63. - Vacancies.
In case of a vacancy in office or during the absence of any administrative officer, the city manager may designate an interim acting head or
perform personally the functions of the office.
(Code 1977, § 1.142)

Sec. 2-64. - Departments of city; requirements.
All departments of the city shall comply with the following:
(1)

All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the
approval of the city manager in the case of departments responsible to him, or in the case of other departments, with the
approval of the officer or body to whom the department head is responsible, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to

8/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
the service and to the public.
(2)

Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the manager at the end of each month, and an annual report
shall be filed with the manager within 60 days after the end of the fiscal year. A summary of all such reports shall be made by
the manager and submitted to the council. Each department head shall establish a system of records and reports in sufficient
detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic
reports to the manager. The city manager shall keep the council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and
needs of the city.

(3)

Each department head shall be held responsible for the preservation of all public records under his jurisdiction and shall
provide a system of filing and indexing such records. No public records, reports, correspondence or other data relative to the
business of any department shall be destroyed or removed permanently from the files without the knowledge and approval
of the city council.

(Code 1977, § 1.143)

Sec. 2-65. - Administrative manual.
The city manager is authorized to adopt such administrative regulations in addition to, but not inconsistent with, the city Charter and this
Code, as he shall deem necessary and proper to provide for the adequate functioning of all departments. Such regulations shall comprise the
administrative manual.
(Code 1977, § 1.144)

Secs. 2-66—2-85. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - CLERK

Sec. 2-86. - Duties and responsibilities generally.
This office shall be headed by the city clerk, who shall serve as clerk of the city council and perform such other duties for the council as may
be required by it. He shall be responsible for the publication, filing, indexing and safekeeping of all proceedings of the city council.
(Code 1977, § 1.41)

Sec. 2-87. - Election records.
He shall keep and maintain all election records and have custody of all property used in connection with elections.
(Code 1977, § 1.42)

Sec. 2-88. - Other duties.
He shall publish all legal notices unless otherwise provided; collect all license fees required by ordinance or statute except as otherwise
provided; be the custodian of the official seal; and notify the appointing authority of any board or commission 30 days prior to the expiration of
the term of office of any member thereof. He shall examine and audit all accounts against the city and promptly report to the city council through
the city manager in writing any default or delinquency he may discover in the books, records or accounts of any city department. It shall be his
duty to examine, verify and approve all accounts against the city. He shall not verify or approve for payment any voucher until he has verified the
correctness of the account for which the voucher is issued. Neither shall he approve for payment any account unless the money has been
appropriated therefor, nor shall he verify or sign any warrant except in accordance with the provisions of the city Charter.
(Code 1977, § 1.43)

Sec. 2-89. - Examination of books.
The city clerk shall have access to all books, records and documents kept by any officer, employee or department of the city. Daily reports of
all moneys collected and of the disposition thereof shall be made to the city clerk by the department or person receiving the money. The books in
all departments shall be balanced each calendar month, and a report thereof shall be made by the city clerk to the city manager.
(Code 1977, § 1.44)

9/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 2-90. - Reports.
The city clerk shall present to the city manager annually, and whenever required by the city manager or the city council at any other time, a
detailed statement of the financial condition of the city relative to the operating budget which shall include an account of all receipts and
disbursements.
(Code 1977, § 1.45)

Secs. 2-91—2-110. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - ASSESSOR

Sec. 2-111. - Duties generally.
This office shall be headed by the city assessor whose duty it shall be to perform all work in connection with the assessing of property and the
preparation of all assessment and tax rolls and tax notices; and such maps, plats and data as may be necessary or proper to effect an accurate
and scientific assessment of property.
(Code 1977, § 1.50)

Secs. 2-112—2-130. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - TREASURER

Sec. 2-131. - Duties generally.
This department shall be headed by the city treasurer whose duty it shall be to:
(1)

Have the custody of all moneys of the city, any bond pertaining solely to the clerk, and all evidences of indebtedness
belonging to the city or held in trust by the city.

(2)

Collect all moneys of the city, the collection of which is not provided for elsewhere by the city Charter or ordinance. He shall
receive from other officers and employees of the city all money belonging to and receivable by the city that may be collected
by such officers and employees, including fines, license fees, taxes, assessments and all other charges. All money shall be
turned over to the treasurer after collection or receipt, and he shall in all cases give a receipt therefor and shall daily present
an accounting of receipts to the city clerk.

(3)

Keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only in such places as the council may determine as soon after
receipt thereof as may be conveniently possible.

(4)

Disburse all city funds in accordance with the provisions of the city Charter and this Code.

(5)

Perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by the city manager.

(Code 1977, § 1.60)

Secs. 2-132—2-150. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW

Sec. 2-151. - City attorney to head; duties.
This department shall be headed by the city attorney who shall be the legal adviser to the council, the city manager and to all departments
and officers of the city. He shall represent the city in all legal proceedings or matters in which the city is interested. He shall prosecute offenses
against the ordinances of the city and shall attend the meetings of the city council.
(Code 1977, § 1.130)

10/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Secs. 2-152—2-185. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(3) Cross

reference— Housing board of appeals, § 14-141 et seq.; traffic violations bureau, § 74-86 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 2-186. - Existing to continue; membership generally.
Such of the boards and commissions provided for in this article, as are in existence at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be continued
and the members serving thereon shall remain in office for the duration of the term for which they were appointed. Except as otherwise provided
for by law, Charter or this Code, the following provisions shall be applicable to all boards and commissions of the city:
(1)

Vacancies. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of any board or commission shall be filled for the remainder of the term
in the manner provided for original appointment to such board or commission.

(2)

Removal. The appointing authority may remove any member of any board or commission for cause.

(3)

Rules. Each board and commission shall have the power to make rules and regulations concerning the administration of its
affairs as shall not be inconsistent with laws, the city Charter and this Code.

(4)

Compensation. All members of boards and commissions shall serve without compensation as members.

(Code 1977, § 1.150)

Secs. 2-187—2-210. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ASSESSMENT BOARD OF APPEALS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(4) Cross

reference— Special assessments, ch. 62.

Sec. 2-211. - Composition; terms.
(a)

There shall henceforth be a three-man board of appeals named by the council to hear, deliberate and adjust on assessments,
either general or special, in regard to hardship or special circumstance cases. Three persons will be chosen to the board of appeals;
one for a one-year term expiring 12:01 a.m., January 1, 1971; one for a two-year term expiring 12:01 a.m., January 1, 1972; and one
for a three-year term expiring 12:01 a.m., January 1, 1973. As each term expires, the person named to the board will hold the office
for three years.

(b)

A citizen who deems himself in the category of hardship or special circumstances may petition the assessment board of appeals for
a hearing.

(c)

The assessment board of appeals, upon deeming the citizen in this category (hardship or special circumstances), has the power to
extend the payment of these assessments either general or special up to ten years.

(Code 1977, § 1.176)

Secs. 2-212—2-230. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(5) Cross

reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14.

11/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 2-231. - Continuance; powers; hearing of appeals from decisions of building o cials.
The building code board of appeals heretofore created is hereby continued. The building code board of appeals shall have the power to
determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretation of chapter 14 of this Code.
Appeals from the decisions of administrative officials charged with the enforcement provisions of chapter 14 of this Code shall be taken to such
board under the provisions of such rules and regulations as it may prescribe. The board shall render all decisions in writing to the building official
charged with the enforcement of chapter 14 of this Code and shall provide the appellant with a duplicate copy of such decision. The board shall
have such other powers and duties as may be stipulated in chapter 14 and elsewhere in this Code.
(Code 1977, § 1.172)

Secs. 2-232—2-250. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - LIBRARY BOARD

Sec. 2-251. - Continuance; authority.
The library board of the city, heretofore established, is continued and shall have the powers and duties conferred in section 2-254.
(Code 1977, § 1.151; Ord. No. 01-05, § 1.151, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-252. - Composition; terms of members; oaths.
The library board shall consist of five members who shall be either residents or freeholders of the city and shall be citizens of the United
States. Such members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the council. Prior to July 1 of each year, one member or two
members, as the case may be, shall be appointed annually for a term of three years. Each member of the present library board and each member
hereafter appointed shall serve until his successor is appointed and qualified. Within ten days after appointment and before entering upon his
duties as a member of the library board, each appointee shall file written acceptance with the city clerk and subscribe and file with the clerk an
oath to support the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state and to faithfully perform the duties of the office of library
board member to the best of his ability.
(Ord. 1977, § 1.152; Ord. No. 01-05 § 1.152, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-253. - Organization.
The city library board shall organize by electing annually at their first regular meeting in July, a chairman, vice-chairman, secretary and such
other officers as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the duties of the city library board. The secretary shall notify the city council of the
names of all such officers promptly after their appointment. Three members of the city library board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business.
(Code 1977, § 1.153; Ord. No. 01-05, § 1.153, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-254. - Power and duties.
It shall be the duty of the city library board to study and observe the manner in which the library is managed and maintained by the district
library board, and for that reason it may make or adopt such recommendations to the district library board, city manager or city council as may be
expedient and not inconsistent with this chapter, the Charter of the city and the general laws of the state. It shall have the power to recommend
candidates for librarian to the district library board. However, the final decision for selecting a librarian shall reside with the district library board.
It shall make recommendations concerning library hours, custody and purchase of the books, magazines, furniture, fixtures and equipment in the
library. The city library board may accept donations, contributions and gifts on behalf of the city for use at the library. All moneys received shall be
deposited with the city treasurer and, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, credited to the general fund. Any expenditures of these
funds shall be in the sole discretion of the city council. Any purchases made by or on behalf of the district library with such moneys shall revert to
the city should there be a termination of the district library or should the city withdraw from the district library.
(Code 1977, § 1.154; Ord. No. 01-05, § 1.154, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-255. - Recordkeeping.

12/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The city library board shall keep a complete record of its proceedings. It shall make at the end of the fiscal year and at any other times when
requested by the council, a report to the city council stating the condition of the library and such statistics, information and suggestions as it may
deem of general interest.
(Code 1977, § 1.155; Ord. No. 01-05, § 1.155, 3-5-01)

Secs. 2-256—2-275. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - LOCAL OFFICERS' COMPENSATION COMMISSION

Sec. 2-276. - Established; duty generally; composition; terms of members; vacancies.
There is hereby established a local officers' compensation commission which shall determine the salaries of the mayor and members of the
city council. The local officers' compensation commission shall consist of five members who are registered electors of the city and shall be
appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the council. The terms of office shall be five
years, except that the members first appointed shall each be individually appointed to the following terms: one for one year; one for two years;
one for three years; one for four years; and one for five years. The members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year in which the vacancy
occurs. When vacancies occur during the term, the appointment shall be for the unexpired term.
(Ord. No. 85-3, § 1.183, 6-17-85)

Sec. 2-277. - Eligibility for membership.
No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of
such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the local officers' compensation commission.
(Ord. No. 85-3, § 1.184, 6-17-85)

Sec. 2-278. - Determination of salaries; rejection by council; e ective date; existing salary; expenses.
The local officers' compensation commission shall determine the salaries of the mayor and councilmembers, which determination shall be the
salaries unless the city council, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the council, reject them. The
determination of the commission shall be effective for 30 days following their filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the city council. In case of
rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to the elected officials in addition to salary shall be for
the expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city.
(Ord. No. 85-3, § 1.185, 6-17-85)

Sec. 2-279. - Meetings and time of determination; quorum; chairman; session days; compensation and expenses.
The local officers' compensation commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days after September 15, in the year of 1985, and every
odd-numbered year thereafter, and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of the
commission shall constitute a quorum. The commission shall take no action or make determination without a concurrence of a majority of the
members appointed and serving on the commission. The commission shall elect a chairman from among its members. The term "session days"
means any calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the commission shall receive no
compensation, but they shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, and shall not have the
power to expend public funds.
(Ord. No. 85-3, § 1.186, 6-17-85)

Sec. 2-280. - Change of procedure, time and method.
The procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by city Charter amendment or revision.
(Ord. No. 85-3, § 1.187, 6-17-85)

Secs. 2-281—2-300. - Reserved.

13/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

DIVISION 6. - PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD

FOOTNOTE(S):
(6)

Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 54.

Sec. 2-301. - Established; composition; terms of members generally.
There is hereby established a parks and recreation board for the city which shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor with the
consent of the city council for three-year terms as set forth in section 2-305.
(Code 1977, § 1.178; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1.178, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-302. - Organization.
The parks and recreation board shall, on the first meeting of each year elect one of its members chairman and one as secretary. The board
shall keep a correct record of the proceedings and shall meet at such times as it may determine not less than once each quarter. The meetings of
the parks and recreation board shall be subject to the Open Meetings Act (MCL 15.261 et seq.).
(Code 1977, § 1.179; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1.179, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-303. - Control of parks and public grounds.
The parks and recreation board shall have the power and the duty to make recommendations regarding all public parks and any lands or lots
heretofore or hereafter devised and bequeathed to the city for park purposes and shall make recommendations regarding the ornamenting,
adorning, laying out and improving of the grounds of such parks and may recommend the adoption of any and all rules necessary for the use of
such parks. All recommendations shall be made to the city council, either directly or through the city manager.
(Code 1977, § 1.180; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1.180, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-304. - Receipts; donations; disposition of funds.
All receipts on account of the city parks, whether arising from rentals, fees, donations, sale of any part thereof, or of any lands so willed and
devised by any person to the city, shall be exclusively expended and applied under the direction and control of the city. All payments of rents,
fees, donations or other monies shall be paid at city hall. In the event that any money is paid to a city employee not at city hall or to a member of
the parks and recreation board, that payment shall be paid over to the appropriate official at city hall as soon as practicable. All such money shall
be placed in the general fund of the city. Any recommendations of the parks and recreation board will be considered prior to such expenditures.
(Code 1977, § 1.181; Ord. No. 01-09, § 1.181, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-305. - Initial appointments of members.
The first parks and recreation board shall consist of seven persons as set forth in section 2-301, with three to be appointed for a period of
three years, two for a period of two years and two for a period of one year, with all vacancies to be filled for the period of such appointment and
at the expiration of such appointments with the vacancies to be filled for a term of three years.
(Code 1977, § 1.182)

Secs. 2-306—2-325. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - PLANNING COMMISSION

FOOTNOTE(S):
(7)

State Law reference— Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq.

Sec. 2-326. - Continuance.

14/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The city planning commission heretofore created in accordance with Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.),
as amended, is hereby continued.
(Code 1977, § 1.160)

Sec. 2-327. - Membership.
The city planning commission shall consist of the mayor, and one member of the administrative officials of the city who shall be selected by
the mayor, and one member of the city council who shall be selected by the city council, all three of whom shall serve as members ex officio of the
city planning commission, and six additional qualified and registered electors of the city who have been residents of the city for at least two years
prior to the date of appointment, who shall be appointed by the mayor. The mayor, in appointing members, shall cause, insofar as possible,
representation of different professions or occupations. All appointments of the members of the commission shall serve as such without
compensation and no one of the members, except the ex officio members, shall at any time during his membership hold other municipal office.
The terms of ex officio members shall correspond to their respective official tenures, except that the term of the administrative official selected by
the mayor shall terminate with the term of the mayor selecting him. The term of each member, except the ex officio members, shall be three
years and until his successor takes office. Vacancies occurring otherwise than through expiration of terms shall be filled for the unexpired term by
the mayor in the case of members selected or appointed by him, by the city council in the case of the city councilmember. All appointments for
vacancies by the mayor shall be subject to approval of a majority of the elected members of the city council.
(Code 1977, § 1.161)

Sec. 2-328. - Removal of members.
Members of the planning commission may, after a public hearing, be removed by the city council by a majority vote of the members elect for
inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office.
(Code 1977, § 1.162)

Sec. 2-329. - Meetings and records.
The city planning commission shall annually elect its chairman from amongst its appointed members and create and fill such other offices as
it may determine. The city clerk shall act as secretary and clerk of the city planning commission. The city planning commission shall hold at least
one meeting every three months. It shall adopt rules for the transaction of business, and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions,
findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record.
(Code 1977, § 1.163; Ord. No. 97-6/16, § 1.163, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 01-08, § 1.163, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-330. - Contracts for services.
The city planning commission may contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such specialized services as it
may require. In addition, the services of regular city employees may be obtained as found necessary for its work; provided, however, that the city
planning commission shall not expend any funds or enter into any agreements for expenditures, exclusive of gifts, in excess of the amounts
appropriated for the purpose by the city council. The city council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary for the commission's work.
(Code 1977, § 1.164)

Sec. 2-331. - Powers and duties.
The city planning commission shall have such powers as are necessary for the preparation and adoption of a master plan or any part thereof,
the making of surveys as a basis for such a plan, the approval of public improvements, the carrying out of educational and publicity programs, the
approval of plats and a street system, the adoption of regulations governing subdivisions of lands, and such other rights, powers and duties and
responsibilities as are provided under the provisions of Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), as amended.
(Code 1977, § 1.165)

Sec. 2-332. - Gifts.
The city planning commission may receive gifts for purposes of carrying out its objectives and may expend any funds received in the form of a
gift in such manner as it may deem proper.

15/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

(Code 1977, § 1.166)

Sec. 2-333. - Adoption of plan.
The planning commission may adopt the plan as a whole by single resolution or may, by successive resolutions, adopt successive parts of the
plan. Such parts shall correspond with major geographical sections or divisions of the city or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of
the plan, and the planning commission may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. Before the adoption of the plan or
any such part, amendment, extension or addition, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon notice of the time and place of
which shall be given not less than 15 days prior to such hearing by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and by
registered United States mail to each public utility company and to each railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within
the geographical sections or divisions of the city affected. The adoption of the plan or of any such part or amendment or extension or addition
shall be by resolution of the planning commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than six members of the planning commission. The
resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the planning commission to form the whole or part of
the plan. The action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman and/or
secretary of the planning commission. An attested copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the council and to the county register of
deeds.
(Code 1977, § 1.167)

Sec. 2-334. - Public works approval.
Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted the master plan of the city, or one or more major sections of districts thereof, no
street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space, or public building or structure shall be constructed or authorized in the
municipality or in such planned section and district until the location, character and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by
the planning commission; provided, however, that in case of disapproval, the planning commission shall communicate its reasons to the council,
which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. If the public way,
ground, space, building, structure or utility is one, the authorization or financing of which does not under the law or Charter provisions governing
the same fall within the province of the city council, then the submission to the planning commission shall be by the board, commission, or body
having such jurisdiction. The planning commission's disapproval may be overruled by such board, commission or body by a vote of not less than
two-thirds of its entire membership. The failure of the planning commission to act within 60 days from and after the date of official submission to
the commission shall be deemed approval. For the purpose of furthering the desirable future development of the city under the master plan, the
city planning commission shall, after the commission shall have adopted a master plan, prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of
public structures and improvements. The planning commission shall annually prepare such a program for the ensuing six years, which program
shall show those public structures and improvements, in the general order of their priority, which in the planning commission's judgment will be
needed or desirable and can be undertaken within the six-year period. Such comprehensive coordinated programs shall be based upon the
requirements of the community for all types of public improvements, and, to that end, each agency or department of such city concerned with
such improvements shall, upon request, furnish the planning commission with lists, plans and estimates of time and cost of public structures and
improvements within the purview of such department.
(Code 1977, § 1.168)

Sec. 2-335. - Action by council.
Whenever the city council shall have ordered the opening, widening or extension of any boulevard, or whenever the council shall have
ordered that proceedings be instituted for the acquisition or enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space, such
resolution shall not be rescinded until after the matter has been referred back to the city planning commission for a report, and until after a public
hearing shall have been held. The council shall have power to overrule the recommendation of the city planning commission by a vote of not less
than two-thirds of its entire membership.
(Code 1977, § 1.169)

Sec. 2-336. - Publicity and gifts; cooperation from o cials.
The planning commission shall have the power to promote public interest in and understanding of the plan and, to that end, may publish and
distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. Members of the
planning commission, when duly authorized by the planning commission, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of city planning

16/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

institutes, or hearings upon pending city planning legislation. The planning commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the
reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance. The planning commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate
public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise
with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and with citizens with relation
to the protecting or carrying out of the plan. The planning commission shall have the right to accept and use gifts for the exercise of its functions.
All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require
for its work. The planning commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and
make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. In general, the planning commission shall
have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote city planning, or carry out the purposes of Act No. 285 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), as amended.
(Code 1977, § 1.170)

Secs. 2-337—2-370. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE
FOOTNOTE(S):
(8) Cross

reference— Any ordinance levying annual taxes saved from repeal, § 1-11(2); any ordinance appropriating money saved from repeal, § 1-

11(3); any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money saved from repeal, § 1-11(4); any ordinance establishing utility
rates, § 1-11(5); any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property saved from repeal, § 1-11(8); any ordinance
dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city, § 1-11(11);
special assessments, ch. 62.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 2-371. - Payment of money.
All moneys belonging to the city shall be paid out upon presentation of a valid warrant approved by the city clerk and issued in accordance
with the city Charter by checks drawn by the city treasurer and countersigned by the mayor.
(Code 1977, § 1.145)

Secs. 2-372—2-390. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT FUND

Sec. 2-391. - Creation; authority.
There is hereby created a public improvement fund pursuant to Act No. 177 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943 (MCL 141.261 et seq.), as
amended.
(Code 1977, § 1.190)

Sec. 2-392. - Purpose.
The purpose of the public improvement fund shall be the appropriating, providing for, setting aside and accumulating moneys to be used for
acquiring, extending, altering or repairing public improvements which the city may by the provisions of its Charter or the general law be
authorized to acquire, alter or enlarge.
(Code 1977, § 1.191)

Sec. 2-393. - Disbursements.

17/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The moneys accumulated in the public improvement fund, notwithstanding the provisions of any law or the Charter of the city, shall not be
transferred, encumbered or otherwise disposed of, except for the purpose of acquiring, extending, altering or repairing public improvements
which the city may, by the provisions of its Charter or the general laws, be authorized to acquire, extend, alter or repair. The money so
accumulated in such fund shall be disbursed only on specific resolution of the city council and in accordance with the other provisions of this
section.
(Code 1977, § 1.192)

Sec. 2-394. - Appropriations to fund.
The council may allocate to such fund miscellaneous revenues received, including revenue raised under the provisions of state law.
(Code 1977, § 1.193)

Secs. 2-395—2-415. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASES

Sec. 2-416. - Purchasing agent.
The city manager shall act as purchasing agent of the city, and shall adopt any necessary rules respecting requisitions and purchase orders.
(Code 1977, § 1.231; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1.231, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-417. - Purchases or contracts under $1,500.00.
Purchases of supplies, materials or equipment, the cost of which is less than $1,500.00, may be made in the open market, but such purchases
shall, where practicable, be based upon at least three competitive bids and shall be awarded to the lowest bidder meeting specifications. The
purchasing agent may solicit bids verbally or by telephone, or may contact prospective bidders by written communication. Where bids are
solicited by written communication, a request for such bids shall also be posted in the city hall. A record shall be kept for six months of all open
market orders and the bids submitted thereon, which records shall be available for public inspection. Any or all bids may be rejected.
(Code 1977, § 1.232; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1.232, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-418. - Purchases or contracts over $1,500.00.
Any expenditure for supplies, materials or equipment, construction project or contract obligating the city, where the amount of the city's
obligation is in excess of $1,500.00 shall be governed by the following provisions of this section:
(1)

Such expenditures shall be made the subject of a written contract. A purchase order shall be a sufficient written contract only
in cases where the expenditure is in the usual and ordinary course of the city's affairs, and in no case shall it be sufficient for
the construction of public works or the contracting for supplies or services over any period of time or where the quality of the
goods or materials or the scope of the services bargained for is not wholly standardized.

(2)

Notice inviting sealed competitive bids shall be published in the official newspaper at least five days before the final date of
submitting bids thereon. Such notice shall give briefly the specifications of the supplies, materials or equipment or
construction project or other matter to be contracted for, and shall state the amount of bond or other security, if any is to be
required, to be given with the bid, and the amount of bond or other security to be given with the contract. The notice shall
state the time limit, the place of filing and the time of opening bids, and shall also state that the right is reserved to reject any
or all bids. Any other conditions of award of the contract shall also be stated in general terms.

(3)

The purchasing agent shall also solicit bids from a reasonable number of such qualified prospective bidders as are known to
him by sending each a copy of the notice requesting bids, and notice thereof shall be posted in the city hall.

(4)

Unless prescribed by the council, the city manager shall prescribe the amount of any security to be deposited with any bid
which deposit shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check or bond written by a surety company authorized to do
business in the state. The amount of such security shall be expressed in terms of percentage of the bid submitted. Unless

18/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
fixed by the council, the city manager shall fix the amount of the performance bond and, in the case of construction contracts,
the amount of the labor and materials bond to be required of the successful bidders.
(5)

Bids shall be opened in public by the city manager, or in the event of his being absent or incapacitated, by the city clerk, at the
time and place designated in the notice requesting bids. The city manager or the city clerk and at least one other city official,
preferably the head of the department most closely concerned with the subject of the contract, shall be present at the
opening of the bids. The bids shall thereupon be carefully examined and tabulated and reported to the council with the
recommendation of the purchasing agent. After tabulation, all bids may be inspected by the competing bidders.

(6)

When such bids are submitted to the council, the contract to be executed, in a form approved by the city attorney, shall also
be submitted; and, if the council shall find any of the bids to be satisfactory, it shall award the contract and shall authorize
execution of the contract upon execution of the contract by the successful bidder and the filing of any bonds which may have
been required, which bonds shall first be approved by the city attorney as to form and content. Contracts shall be awarded to
the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications unless the council shall determine that the public interest will be better
served by accepting a higher bid. Such award may be by resolution or ordinance. The council shall have the right to reject any
or all bids and to waive irregularities in bidding and to accept bids which do not conform in every respect to the bidding
requirements.

(7)

At the time any public works construction, maintenance or repair contract is executed by him, the contractor shall file a bond
executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, to the city, conditioned to pay all laborers, mechanics,
subcontractors and materialmen as well as all just debts, dues and demands incurred in the performance of such work. Such
contractor shall also file evidence of public liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the city manager, and agree to save
the city harmless from loss or damage caused to any person or property by reason of the contractor's negligence.

(8)

All bids and deposits of certified or cashier's checks may be retained until the contract is awarded and signed. If any
successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into the contract awarded to him within five days after the contract has been
awarded, or file any bond required within the same time, the deposit accompanying his bid shall be forfeited to the city.

(Code 1977, § 1.233; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1.233, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-419. - Exception to competitive bidding.
Competitive bidding shall not be required in respect to contracts for professional services. In any other case where competitive bidding clearly
is not practical or where no advantage would result to the city to require competitive bidding, the council, upon the written recommendation of
the city manager, may authorize the execution of a contract without competitive bidding. Where a contract is let without competitive bidding the
proposed contract shall be approved by the city attorney as to form and content, unless prepared by him by direction of the council, and
submitted to the council.
(Code 1977, § 1.234; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1.234, 3-5-01)

Sec. 2-420. - Emergency purchases.
In case of emergency, any department head, with the approval of the city manager, may purchase directly any supplies, material or
equipment, the immediate procurement of which is necessary to the continuation of the work of his department. Such purchases and the
emergency causing them shall be reported in detail to the city manager within a week from the time when made, and such reports shall be
preserved for a period of two years.
(Code 1977, § 1.235; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1.235, 3-5-01)

Secs. 2-421—2-440. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - SALE OF PROPERTY
FOOTNOTE(S):
(9)

State Law reference— Confiscation of property used to create nuisance, MCL 600.3801.

Subdivision I. - In General

19/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 2-441. - City property.
Whenever any city property, real or personal, is no longer needed for corporate or public purposes, the property may be offered for sale on
approval by the council. Personal property not exceeding $1,500.00 in value may be sold for cash by the purchasing agent after receiving
quotations or competitive bids therefor for the best price obtainable. All real property and personal property with a value in excess of $1,500.00
may be sold after advertising and receiving competitive bids, as provided in section 2-418 and after approval of the sale has been given by the
council. In the sale of automotive equipment, bidders may include in their bid a trade-in allowance for old equipment which shall be in lieu of all
bids required in this section.
(Code 1977, § 1.236; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1.236, 3-5-01)

Secs. 2-442—2-460. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Con scated, Impounded, Abandoned and Lost and Found Property

Sec. 2-461. - Disposition alternatives.
The department of police shall be authorized to dispose of property which comes into its possession in accordance with procedures
established pursuant to applicable state law, including the following:
(1)

The department of police shall provide for the disposition and sale of recovered stolen property or abandoned personal
property in accordance with state law, Act No. 214 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1979 (MCL 434.181 et seq.), as amended.

(2)

The department of police shall provide for the sale and disposition of lost property, which includes all property found in an
abandoned vehicle, in accordance with state law, Act No. 273 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1987 (MCL 434.21 et seq.), as
amended.

(3)

The department of police shall maintain and dispose of impounded or abandoned vehicles in accordance with the uniform
traffic code for cities, townships and villages which is authorized by Act No. 62 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956 (MCL
257.951 et seq.), as amended.

(4)

All pistols, weapons or devices which are seized by the department of police and determined to have been carried, possessed
or used in violation of state law shall be turned over to the commissioner of the Michigan State Police pursuant to MCL
750.239.

(5)

Property seized by the department of police and which is subject to forfeiture pursuant to part 75 of article 7 of the Michigan
Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.7501 et seq.), as amended, shall be disposed
of in accordance with article 7 of such code.

(6)

Property seized by the department of police and which is subject to forfeiture pursuant to Act No. 104 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1988 (MCL 600.470 et seq.), as amended, shall be disposed of in accordance with the act.

Sec. 2-462. - Sale of property.
(a)

In all cases where property is to be sold by the department, sale shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth in state law.
Alternatively, the director may authorize sale by means of public auction.

(b)

Except as otherwise required by law or by any other express provision of this Code, every public auction held pursuant to this
section shall be preceded by notice describing the property to be sold to the highest bidder ad setting forth the date, place and
time of the sale. Such notice shall be posted in a public place for at least 15 days prior to the sale, and published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city at least ten days, and no more than three weeks, prior to the sale.

(c)

Any property that is inherently dangerous to the public is not to be sold at public auction, and may not otherwise be sold or
transferred to any person failing to provide evidence of responsibility determined by the director to be adequate.

Sec. 2-463. - Disposition of proceeds.
Proceeds of any sale described in this subdivision, less necessary expenses incident thereto, shall be deposited with the city treasurer.
Proceeds from property seized, forfeited and sold pursuant to article 7 of the Michigan Public Health Code (MCL 333.7101 et seq.) shall be used to
enhance law enforcement efforts pertaining to such article 7. Proceeds from property seized, forfeited and sold pursuant to Act No. 104 of the

20/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Public Acts of Michigan of 1988 (MCL 600.4701 et seq.) shall be utilized as set forth in that act.
Secs. 2-464—2-500. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(10) Cross

reference— Traffic violations bureau, § 74-86 et seq.

(10) State

Law reference— Authority to designate certain violations as municipal civil infractions, MCL 117.4l(3), (4); municipal civil infractions, MCL

600.8701 et seq.
Sec. 2-501. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Act means Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.), as amended.
Authorized city official means a police officer or other personnel of the city authorized by section 2-502 or any ordinance to issue municipal
civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices.

Bureau means the city municipal ordinance violations bureau as established by section 2-503.
Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in
court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited.

Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city
municipal ordinance violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by
the city, as authorized under sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act.
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 2-502. - Citations and violation notices.
(a)

Designated officials. The following personnel of the city have the authority to issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal
civil infraction violation notices pursuant to this article:

(b)

(1)

Police officers.

(2)

Fire chief.

(3)

Code enforcement officer.

(4)

Health officer.

Action, commencement. A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of:
(1)

A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or

(2)

A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations
bureau.

(c)

Issuance, service of citations. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows:
(1)

The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued.

(2)

The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court.

(3)

Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original
citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged
violator as provided by section 8705 of the Act.

(4)

A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the

21/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the
following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the
statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief."
(5)

An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as
possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation.

(6)

An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if:
a.

Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or

b.

Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil
infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the
prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation.

(7)

Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows:
a.

Except as provided by subsection (c)(7)b of this section, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the
citation upon the alleged violator.

b.

If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant
of the land, building or structure by posting the copy of the citation on the land or attaching the copy to the building or
structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure
at the owner's last known address.

(d)

Contents of citation. A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil
infraction alleged to have been violated, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the
court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
(1)

The citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following:
a.

Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified
for appearance.

b.

Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or,
in person, or by representation.

c.

Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following:
1.

Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of
being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city.

2.
(2)

Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.

The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following:
a.

If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged
violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for
appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance.

b.

If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by
telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to
appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.

c.

A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city.

d.

At an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.

e.

At a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented
by an attorney.

(3)

The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified
in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance will result in entry of a default judgment against the
alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction.

Sec. 2-503. - Violations bureau.
(a)

Established. The city hereby establishes a bureau as authorized under section 8396 of the Act to accept admissions of responsibility
22/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials,
and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by sections 2-501—2-503 or any ordinance.
(b)

Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at the city administrative offices, and shall be
under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. The city treasurer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall adopt
rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau.

(c)

Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled
and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has
been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in sections
2-501 and 2-502 shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from
prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction
violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any
person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges
and protection afforded by law.

(d)

Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting
admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those
admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who
admits responsibility only with explanation, and the bureau shall not determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any
fact or matter relating to an alleged violation.

(e)

Violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same
circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations in section 2-502(c)(6) and (c)(7). In addition to any other
information required by sections 2-501 and 2-502 or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the
alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone
number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and
the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time.

(f)

Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the
bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation
notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation.

(g)

Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal
ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the
schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court
and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address.
The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by
sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal
ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation.

State law reference— Authority to establish municipal ordinance violations bureau, MCL 600.8396.
Sec. 2-504. - Failure to appear; penalty.
A person served with a municipal civil infraction citation as provided in section 2-502(c)(7) who fails to appear within the time specified in the
citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. Failure to appear will also result in
the entry of a default judgment on the municipal civil infraction.
Sec. 2-505. - Schedule of nes.
A schedule of civil fines payable to the bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices is
hereby established. The fines for the violations listed in this section shall be as follows:

Code
Section

O ense

Fine for

Fine for

Fine for

First

Second

Third or any

Violation

Violation

Subsequent
Violation
23/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Cross reference— General penalty, § 1-16.
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(11) Cross

reference— Businesses, ch. 18; public intoxication, § 50-141.

(11) State

Law reference— Liquor law, MCL 436.1 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 6-1. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary,
patented, and by whatever names called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage
purposes.

Beer means any beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion decoction of barley, malt, hops and/or other cereal in potable
water.

Club means an association licensed by the liquor control commission pursuant to section 2(e) and 24(c) of Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1933 (Ex. Sess.) (MCL 436.1 et seq.), as amended, to sell beer, wine and spirits for consumption on the premises only to bona fide
members, who have attained the age of 21 years.

Spirits means any beverages containing alcohol by distillation, mixed with potable water and other substances in solution, and includes,
among other things, wine containing an alcoholic content of over 16 percent by volume.

Wine means the product made by the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe grapes, or any other fruit with the usual cellar
treatment and containing not more than 16 percent of alcohol by volume. It shall also include fermented fruit juices other than grapes.
(Code 1977, § 9.151)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 6-2. - State license required.
No person shall engage in the business of selling alcoholic liquor, beer, wine or other spirits for consumption in the city without first obtaining
a license therefor, as required by state statutes.
(Code 1977, § 9.152)

Sec. 6-3. - Council approval required for sale.
No person shall sell alcoholic liquor, beer, wine or spirits for consumption on the premises within the city without having obtained the
approval of the council of the city of an application for a license so to sell, as required by state statutes.
(Code 1977, § 9.153)

24/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 6-4. - Sale of spirits.
No person shall permit spirits to be consumed in any place or on any premises owned, operated or controlled by him, and licensed under the
laws of the state to sell beer and/or wine, and not licensed to sell spirits.
(Code 1977, § 9.156)

Sec. 6-5. - Hours of licensed premises.
No person, either directly or indirectly, by himself, his agent, servant or employee, shall sell, give away, make delivery, transfer possession or
furnish in or on the premises owned, operated or controlled by him and for which a license has been granted by the state, any alcoholic beverages
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, on any Sunday, or between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any other day.
(Code 1977, § 9.157)

Sec. 6-6. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor in public.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic liquor or to possess alcoholic liquor in an open container on a public
street, sidewalk, highway or in a public park, public place of amusement or other publicly owned area not licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises.

(b)

This section shall not apply to the consumption of alcohol or the possession of an open container of alcohol upon public property
where such consumption or possession is within a grant of permission given by the city council of the city.

(Ord. No. 01-03, §§ 1, 2, 3-5-01)

Secs. 6-7—6-35. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - UNDERAGE PERSONS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(12) Cross

reference— Offenses involving underaged persons, § 50-256 et seq.

Sec. 6-36. - Sales.
No person, either directly or indirectly, by himself, clerk, agent, servant or employee, shall at any time sell any alcoholic liquor to any person
unless the person has attained 21 years of age. A person who sells alcoholic liquor to a person who is underage shall be liable for a civil penalty of
not more than $500.00.
Sec. 6-37. - Purchases.
(a)

A person under the age of 21 years shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume
alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, except as provided in this section. A person under the age of 21
years who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions:
(1)

For the first violation, a fine of not more than $100.00, and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or
substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of the public health code, art no. 368 of the
Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.6107), as amended, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse
services, and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at
his own expense as described in subsection (b) of this section.

(2)

For a violation of this section following a prior conviction or juvenile adjudication for a violation of this section or section
33b(1) of former art. no. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (Ex. Sess.), a fine of not more than $200.00, and may be
ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in
section 6107 of the public health code, art. no. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.6107), as amended, and
designated by the administrator of substance abuse services to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his own expense as described in subsection (b) of this section.

(3)

For a violation of this section following two or more prior convictions of juvenile adjudications for a violation of this section or

25/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
section 33b(1) of former art. no. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan 1933 (Ex. Sess.), a fine of not more than $500.00, and may be
ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in
section 6107 of the public health code, art. no. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.6107), as amended, and
designated by the administrator of substance abuse services to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his own expense as described in subsection (b) of this section.
(4)

The secretary of state shall suspend the operator of chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating this subsection
or subsection (c) of this section as provided in section 319 of the Michigan vehicle code, art. no. 300 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1949 (MCL 257.319), as amended.

(b)

The court may order the person convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section to undergo screening and assessment by a
person or agency as designated by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in section 6103 of the public health code
(MCL 333.6103), as amended, in order to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including
alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs.

(c)

A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person under the age of 21 years, or notwithstanding subsection (a), a person
under the age of 21 years who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both.

(d)

A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person under the age of 21 years has consumed alcoholic liquor may require
the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon
the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable
blood alcohol tests are admissible in a criminal prosecution to determine whether the person under the age of 21 years has
consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor. A person under the age of 21 years who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical
breath test analysis as required in this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not
more than $100.00.

(e)

A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated under art. no. 293 of
the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 722.1 to 722.6), as amended, allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased, or attempted to
consume, possess or purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall notify the parent or parents,
custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, custodian is reasonably
ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than 48 hours after
the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated subsection (a) of this section is less than 18 years of
age and not emancipated under art. no. 293 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 722.1 to 722.6), as amended. The notice
may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by
telephone, or by first class mail. If an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a) of this section,
his parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection.

(f)

This section does not apply to the following circumstances:
(1)

When a minor possesses alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his employment if employed by a
person licensed by art. no. 58 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.), as amended, by the state liquor
control commission, or by an agent of the state liquor control commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his
personal consumption.

(2)

To the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under the age of 21 years offered by an accredited postsecondary
educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member if the purpose of
the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course.

(3)

To the consumption by a person under the age of 21 years of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a
church, synagogue, or temple. To the purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by an underage person under the direction of the
person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office in an undercover operation which is part of an
employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.

(4)

To an undercover operation in which the underage person purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the
state police, the state liquor control commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or
contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the underage person was not under the direction of the state
police, the state liquor control commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation.

(g)

This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a
violation of Art. No. 58 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.), as amended, or the ordinances of the city.

26/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

(Code 1977, § 9.155; Ord. No. 01-07, §§ 1—7, 3-5-01)

Sec. 6-38. - Admission of minors in bars and taverns for consumption of food.
All bars or taverns within the city that serve food, such as lunches and dinners, may admit minors into their establishments if accompanied by
an adult but only for the consumption of food.
(Code 1977, § 9.158)

Sec. 6-39. - Transport of alcoholic liquor in motor vehicles.
A person less than 21 years of age shall not knowingly possess, transport or have under the person's control in a motor vehicle alcoholic
liquor unless the person is employed by a licensee under this chapter and is possessing, transporting or having the alcoholic liquor in a motor
vehicle under the person's control during regular working hours and in the course of the person's employment.
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74.
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(13)

Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42.

(13)

State Law reference— Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 10-1. - Cruelty to animals.
No person shall cruelly treat or abuse any animal or bird in this city. Cruel and abusive treatment shall include, but not be confined to,
inhumanely beating, not adequately feeding, not adequately watering, abandoning or confining in an area not sufficient to allow the animal
adequate exercise.
(Code 1977, § 9.41)

Sec. 10-2. - Poisoning animals.
No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed public or private place where it endangers, or is likely to
endanger, any animal or bird.
(Code 1977, § 9.42)

Sec. 10-3. - Birds and birds' nests.
No person, except a police officer acting in his official capacity, shall molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird, or molest or disturb any wild
bird's nest or the contents thereof.
(Code 1977, § 9.43)

Sec. 10-4. - Domestic animals and fowl.
No person shall keep or house any animal or domestic fowl within the city except dogs, cats, canaries or animals commonly classified as pets
which are customarily kept or housed inside dwellings as household pets, and, furthermore, no person or family or household shall keep more
than three adult cats and/or dogs or in any residence within the city. For purposes of this section a cat or dog is deemed to be an adult upon
becoming ten weeks old.
(Code 1977, § 9.44)

Secs. 10-5—10-35. - Reserved.

27/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE II. - DOGS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(14) State

Law reference— Regulations pertaining to dogs, MCL 287.261 et seq.

Sec. 10-36. - Presumption of ownership.
No person owning, possessing or having charge of any dog, shall permit such dog to be at large at any time in the city in violation of any of the
following restrictions:
(1)

No person shall permit any vicious dog of which he is the owner, caretaker or custodian to be unconfined unless securely
muzzled and led by a leash. Any dog shall be deemed vicious which has bitten a person or domestic animal without
molestation or which, by its actions, gives the indication that it is liable to bite any person or domestic animal without
molestation.

(2)

No person who is the owner of any female dog shall permit or allow such female dog to go beyond the premises of such
owner when such dog is in heat.

(3)

No person shall own, harbor or keep a dog which by loud or frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling shall cause
annoyance to the people in the neighborhood.

(4)

No person shall own, harbor or keep a dog that has been bitten by an animal known or reasonably suspected of having been
afflicted with rabies at the time such dog was bitten, unless such dog shall have been surrendered to the police department or
dog warden, held for observation, and released by the health officer of the city.

(5)

No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog, either licensed or unlicensed that, by the destruction of property or trespassing
on the property of others, becomes a nuisance in the vicinity where kept.

(Code 1977, § 9.49)

Sec. 10-37. - Seizure and impounding.
Any dog which is in violation of any section of this article may be seized and impounded by the dog warden or any police officer of the city, or
authorized city employee.
(Code 1977, § 9.50)

Sec. 10-38. - Rabies prevention.
Any person who shall have in his possession a dog which has contracted rabies or which has been subjected to rabies, or which is suspected
of having rabies or which has bitten any person, shall, upon demand of the police department or the health officer, produce and surrender up
such dog to be held for observation as provided in sections 10-39 and 10-40.
(Code 1977, § 9.51)

Sec. 10-39. - Exposure to rabies—Notice.
It shall be the duty of any person owning or harboring a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or other animal showing the
symptoms of rabies, immediately to notify the police department of his possession of such dog.
(Code 1977, § 9.52)

Sec. 10-40. - Same—Impounding and release.
Any dog impounded for observation for rabies shall be held until released by the health officer or otherwise disposed of. Any dog impounded
for having bitten any person shall be held not less than 14 days and, in case any complaint shall have been made before any court asking that
such dog be killed or confined, then such dog shall be confined until the case is finally disposed of.
(Code 1977, § 9.53)

Sec. 10-41. - Impoundment fee.

28/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

No dog shall be released from the pound unless the owner or persons entitled to claim the dog shall pay the fees established by the county
dog departments, and if the dog was impounded by any city police officer, or authorized employee, the owner shall pay the sum of $50.00 to the
city to reimburse for the expense, prior to the dog being released from any pound. Such fee may be changed by resolution of the city council from
time to time.
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 9.54, 7-1-85)

Sec. 10-42. - Restraint.
Any owner or keeper of any dog who shall allow such dog to run at large in the city shall be guilty of a violation of this article, punishable as
prescribed in section 1-16. The term "at large" shall be defined as permitting the dog to be off the owner's property without a leash or harness.
(Ord. No. 1985-4, § 9.55, 7-1-85)

Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(15) Cross

reference— Building code board of appeals, § 2-231 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; health and

sanitation, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; moving of buildings, § 66-3; subdivisions and land division,
ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING, ELECTRICAL AND PLUMBING CODES

Secs. 14-31—14-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(16) Cross

reference— Environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42.

(16) State

Law reference— Dangerous buildings, MCL 125.539 et seq.

Sec. 14-61. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Dangerous building means a building or structure that has one or more of the following defects or is in one or more of the following
conditions:
(1)

A door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the city.

(2)

A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood or other cause so that the structural strength or stability
of the building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and does not meet with minimum
requirements of the building code for the city for a new building or structure, purpose or location.

(3)

A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become detached or dislodged, or collapse and injure persons or damage
property.

(4)

A portion of the building or structure has settled to such extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or
structure have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new construction by the building code of the

29/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
city.
(5)

The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty
construction or the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for other reason, is
likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is
likely to fall or give way.

(6)

The building, structure or a part of the building or structure is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.

(7)

The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind or flood, or is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive
nuisance to the children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a harbor for vagrants,
criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an
unlawful or immoral act.

(8)

A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is
in a condition that the health officer determines is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to injure the health, safety or
general welfare of the people living in the dwelling.

(9)

A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the
elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers.

(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.227))

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-62. - Maintenance of dangerous buildings.
It is unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any dwelling or part thereof which is a dangerous building.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.226))

Sec. 14-63. - Notice of dangerous conditions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building, the health officer shall issue
a notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building. The notice shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee that is registered with the
health officer under section 14-181. If an owner, agent or lessee is not registered under section 14-181, the notice shall be served on each owner
of or party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records. The notice shall
specify the time and place of a hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous building.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.228))

Sec. 14-64. - Hearing o cer.
A hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor to serve at his pleasure. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing
matters including, but not limited to, an engineer or architect, or a building contractor, building inspector or member of a community housing
organization. An employee of the city shall not be appointed as the hearing officer.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.229))

Sec. 14-65. - Hearing—Right to be heard.
The person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause at the hearing why the hearing officer should not order
the building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.230))

Sec. 14-66. - Same—Notice.
A copy of the notice that a building or structure is a dangerous building shall be filed with the hearing officer by the health officer. The notice
shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom the notice is directed, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records. If a notice is served on a person by certified mail,

30/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. The notice shall be served upon the owner or party
in interest at least ten days before the date of the hearing included in the notice.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.231))

Sec. 14-67. - Same—Testimony; decision.
At a hearing the hearing officer shall take testimony of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property and any interested party. Not more
than five days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision, either closing the proceedings or ordering the building
or structure demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained. If the hearing officer determines that the building or structure should be
demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained, the hearing officer shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or
lessee to comply with the order.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.232))

Sec. 14-68. - Failure to comply with hearing o cer's order.
If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order issued under section 14-67, the hearing officer
shall file a report of the findings and a copy of the order with the city council not more than five days after noncompliance by the owner, and
request that necessary actions be taken to enforce the order. The city council shall fix a date not less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed in
this division for a hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer, and shall give notice to the owner, agent or lessee in the manner
prescribed in section 14-66 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show
cause why the order should not be enforced. The city council shall either approve, disapprove or modify the order. If the order is approved or
modified, the owner, agent or lessee shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the hearing under this section. In the case of an
order of demolition, if the city council determines that the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood or other
natural disaster, and the cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state equalized value of the building or structure, the
owner, agent or lessee shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of the hearing under this section. The city council
shall take all necessary action to enforce the order.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.233))

Sec. 14-69. - Appeals.
An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the city council acting as the housing board of appeals may appeal the decision or order
to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.234))

Sec. 14-70. - Abatement costs of city; reimbursement by owner or party in interest.
The cost of the demolition, making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the
building or structure, incurred by the city to bring the property into compliance with this article shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner or
party in interest in whose name the property appears.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.235))

Sec. 14-71. - Notice of abatement costs; lien.
The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the
assessor of the amount of the costs of the demolition, making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building, structure or
grounds adjoining the building or structure by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the
costs within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost to the city, the city shall have a lien for the cost incurred
to bring the property into conformance with this article. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided
by law. A lien provided for in this section does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the cost
shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act, Act No. 206 of the Public
Acts of Michigan of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq.), as amended.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.236))

31/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-72. - Separate legal action; judgment.
In addition to other remedies under this article, the city may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of
the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or
structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to this section. The lien provided for in this
section shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed or
recorded liens and encumbrances. In addition, a judgment obtained pursuant to this section shall also grant to the city a lien for the amount of
the judgment against the owner's interest in all real property located in the state that is owned in whole or in part by the owner of the building or
structure against whom the judgment is obtained. A lien provided for in this section does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded
as provided by law, and the lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.237))

Sec. 14-73. - Violation of order a misdemeanor.
A person who fails or refuses to comply with an order approved or modified by the city council under section 14-68 within the time prescribed
by that section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-16.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.238))

Secs. 14-74—14-95. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - FENCES

FOOTNOTE(S):
(17)

Cross reference— Swimming pool fencing, § 14-594.

Sec. 14-96. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Fence means any partition, structure, planting or grate erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure.
(Ord. of 3-7-88, § 8.82)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-97. - Permit—Required.
No fence shall hereafter be erected or altered without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector. Written application for such permit
shall be made to the building inspector which shall contain a drawing showing the location, type of fence to be constructed, description of the
property and such other information as may be required by the building inspector in order to determine whether or not such fence will violate any
ordinance of this city or law of the state.
(Ord. of 3-7-88, § 8.83)

Sec. 14-98. - Same—Application fees.
A fee of $25.00 shall be paid with each application for a permit filed pursuant to section 14-97. Such fee may be changed by resolution of the
city council from time to time.
(Ord. of 3-7-88, § 8.84)

Sec. 14-99. - Restriction on residential fence construction.
The following restrictions shall apply to fences on property zoned residential:
(1)

Fence height. No fence within a residential district shall exceed six feet in height in the rear or side yard. A maximum height of
32/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
four feet shall apply to any fence in a front yard area (beyond the front building line) or within 30 feet of any street
intersection on corner lots. Any fence which may be located in a front yard shall be of approved materials, of a design so as
not to obscure sight and of a fence type listed as follows:
a.

Post and rail;

b.

Split rail;

c.

Picket;

d.

Wrought iron.

Fences of a type not listed above must be approved by the building inspector.
(2)

Visibility. Any fence constructed in a front yard area shall be of such material and construction so as not to substantially
impair visibility in and from either direction. The building inspector shall have the authority to determine compliance with this
section. This subsection shall also apply within 30 feet of any street intersection on corner lots.

(3)

Dangerous construction. No fence shall be constructed in a residential district which has affixed to it any spike, nail, barb
(including barbed wire) or other pointed instrument exposed. All nail ends, protruding wires and sharp points shall be
removed or bent to eliminate sharp extrusions. No fence shall be charged or connected with an electrical current.

(Ord. of 3-7-88, § 8.85)

Sec. 14-100. - Restrictions on nonresidential fence construction.
The following restrictions shall apply to fences on property zoned nonresidential:
(1)

Fence height. No fence shall be constructed which exceeds seven feet, six inches in height.

(2)

Dangerous construction. There shall not be affixed to any fence any spike, nail, barb (including barbed wire) or other pointed
instrument within seven feet of the ground level. No fence shall be charged or connected with an electrical current.

(Ord. of 3-7-88, § 8.86)

Sec. 14-101. - Restrictions on all fences regardless of district.
The following restrictions, rules and regulations shall apply to all fences within the city:
(1)

Location. No fence shall be located nearer than one foot to the inside sidewalk line. If no sidewalk is present, no fence shall be
located nearer than one foot of the inside street right-of-way line.

(2)

Location continued. All fences shall be located entirely on the property of the person, firm or corporation erecting the fence.

(3)

Gates. Gates in fences shall not open over public property or over property of other persons without the written consent of
such other persons.

(4)

Posts. All fenceposts shall be placed on the inside of the fence line.

(5)

Maintenance; nuisances. Fences must be maintained so as not to endanger life or property. Any fence which, through lack of
maintenance or type of construction or otherwise, imperils life or property, shall be deemed a nuisance. No fence shall be
constructed in such manner or of such materials that it will obstruct vision so to create a hazard to vehicular traffic or
pedestrians upon the public streets and/or sidewalks, and any fence so constructed shall be deemed a nuisance. The building
inspector shall notify the owner of the property on which such fence is located of the existence of such nuisance, and such
nuisance shall be abated within six days after receiving notice.

(6)

Lot lines. The building inspector may require the owner of property upon which a fence is located or is to be located to
establish lot lines upon such property through placing of permanent markers located by a licensed surveyor. Such lot lines
shall be established within five days after receiving notice.

(7)

Alterations. Any person being the owner, lessee, occupant or agent for the same, of any property upon which is located a
fence contrary to the provisions of this article, shall not alter, change or rebuild such fence without first having obtained a
permit therefor in the manner provided in this article.

(8)

Easements. No fence shall be constructed over, through or under any utility easement without authorization of the utility
utilizing such easement.

(Ord. of 3-7-88, § 8.87)

33/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Secs. 14-102—14-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - HOUSING CODE
FOOTNOTE(S):
(18) State

Law reference— Housing law, MCL 125.401 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 14-131. - Purpose of article.
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards for existing dwellings and dwelling units; to provide for the elimination of
overcrowding; and to provide for a basis of enforcement of sanitary conditions in and around structures used for human habitation; to effectively
eliminate and prevent the development of slum conditions and to protect the health and safety of the people of the city.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1 (8.91); Ord. No. 98-11/6, 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-132. - Applicability of article.
This article shall apply to all persons, firms, partnerships, associations and corporations owning, occupying, or having control or management
of any building or premises used for dwelling purposes which is located within the city limits.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.92); Ord. No. 98-11/6, 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-133. - De nitions.
(a)

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Approved means accepted by the health officer or his authorized representative as a result of their experience or investigation, or by reason
of tests, or acceptable to a recognized testing laboratory, designated by the health officer.

Basement means a portion of a building located partly below grade and having less than half its floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.

Building means any structure, framework or housing, public or private, and includes tanks and/or receptacles for the storage of materials or
commodities.

Cellar means a portion of a building located partly or wholly below grade, and having half or more than half of its floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.

Dwelling means any house, building, structure, tent, shelter, trailer or vehicle or portion thereof (except railroad cars, on tracks or rights-ofway) which is occupied or intended for occupancy in whole or in part as the home, residence, living or sleeping place of one or more human
beings, either permanently or transiently. A house trailer or other vehicle, when occupied or used as a dwelling, shall be subject to all the
provisions of this article, except that house trailers or other vehicles, duly licensed as vehicles, may be occupied or used as a dwelling for
reasonable periods or lengths of time, without otherwise being subject to the provisions hereof for dwellings, when located in a park or place
designated for the purpose by the city; provided, that such parking sites are equipped with adequate safety and sanitary facilities.

Dwelling unit and apartment unit mean any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling, having one kitchen sink and forming a single
habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.

Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal
pest-elimination methods approved by the health officer.

Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling unit, and under one head.
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
34/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Guest means any person or persons who patronize a hotel for purposes within the scope of the business that is conducted therein, including
nonpaying guests.

Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet apartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.

Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the city, or his authorized representative.
Hotel means a building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised or offered to the public as an inn or place where sleeping
accommodations are furnished for rent, lease or hire whether with or without meals in which sleeping accommodations for 25 persons or more
and/or 15 or more apartments are maintained for accommodation of guests.

Human habitation means the use of any room, rooming unit, dwelling, dwelling unit, apartment unit, building or premises for living, sleeping,
cooking or eating purposes by one or more families or persons.

Infestation means the presence of any insects, rodents, or other pests within or around a dwelling, building or premises.
Occupant means any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
Owner means any person, alone or jointly or severally with others, who shall have:
(1)

Legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, building or premises with or without accompanying actual possession
thereof; or

(2)

Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual
owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to
the same extent as if he were the owner.

Person means and includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
Plumbing means and includes all of the following supplies, facilities and equipment; gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines,
catchbasins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.

Premises means any lot or piece of land inclusive of the buildings and shall include parking lots, tourist camps, airports, junkyards or other
places or enclosures however owned or occupied.

Rental unit means any dwelling unit or apartment unit which is occupied by any person or persons for which a periodic payment is made in
legal tender or barter to the owner or the owner's representative. Land contract purchases are not included in this definition.

Rooming unit means a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for
cooking or eating purposes.

Roominghouse, lodginghouse and boardinghouse (hereinafter referred to as roominghouses) mean a dwelling having one kitchen and used
for the purpose of providing meals or lodging or both meals and lodging for compensation of any kind, computed by day, week or month to
persons other than members of the family occupying such dwelling. In the case of single-family and two-family dwellings the number of roomers
or boarders shall not exceed two per dwelling unit unless such dwellings be made to comply in all respects with the provisions of this article
relating to multiple dwellings.

Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials except garbage; and such term shall include but not be restricted to paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, dust and the
residue from the burning of combustible materials.

Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of, the owner or operator.
(b)

Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit," and "premises," are used in this article, they shall
be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." The singular of any word shall also mean the plural.

(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.93); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.93), 11-6-95)

35/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-134. - Citation and adoption.
The Housing Law of Michigan, being Act No. 167 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq.), as amended, is hereby adopted
and made a part of this article.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.121); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.121), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-135. - Rules and regulations created by health o cer authorized.
The health officer is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the enforcement of this article, subject,
however, to the approval of the city council. When the rules and regulations made under this article have been adopted and promulgated by the
health officer and approved by the city council, they shall be deemed to be as complete and binding a part of the article as if such rules were
specifically set forth in this article. The violation of any of such regulations so adopted shall be deemed a violation of this article. Copies of such
rules and regulations shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk for inspection by interested parties at any reasonable time.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.136); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.136), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-136—14-140. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING BOARD OF APPEALS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(19)

Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-186 et seq.

Sec. 14-141. - Housing board of appeals.
The city council shall act as the housing board of appeals.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.122); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.122), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-142. - Appeals.
Appeals from the rulings of any official charged with the enforcement of this article or the Housing Law of Michigan may be made to the city
council acting as the housing board of appeals within 20 days from the date upon which the action is taken which is subject to appeal. Such appeal
may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or commission of the city. The appellant shall file with the official from
whose decision such appeal is taken and with the city clerk, a notice of appeal specifying the ground therefor. With each notice of appeal filed
there shall be paid a fee of $10.00 to cover the city's cost of handling the appeal; provided that such fees may be returned or retained after
hearing in the discretion of the city council. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the city clerk a summary report
of all previous action taken. The city council may at its discretion call upon the official from whom the appeal is taken, to explain his action. The
final disposition of such appeal shall be in the form of a resolution either reversing, modifying or affirming, wholly or partly, the decision or the
determination appealed from. To this end, the city council shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.123); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.123), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-143. - Hearings.
The city council acting as the board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to
interested parties and decide the same within a reasonable time.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.124); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.124), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-144. - Decisions of board of appeals to be nal.
The decision of the city council acting as the board of appeals shall be final.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.125); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.125), 11-6-95)

36/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Secs. 14-145—14-150. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT
Subdivision I. - In General

Sec. 14-151. - Service; contents.
Whenever the health officer determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation and orders for correction of the
violation to the person or persons responsible therefor, as provided in this section. Such notice shall:
(1)

Be put in writing;

(2)

Include a statement of the conditions that constitute violations of this article and what must be done to correct the same;

(3)

Specify a time limit for the performance of any act it requires; which shall be a reasonable time for the correction of the
violation or violations;

(4)

Notify the owner or his agent, or the occupant as the case may require, of his right to appeal from the notice or order to the
housing board of appeals as set forth in this article;

(5)

Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the case may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed
to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is served upon him personally; or if
a copy thereof is sent by certified mail to his last known address; or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the dwelling affected by the notice; or if he is served with such notice by any other method authorized or required
under the laws of this state.

(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.111); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.111), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-152. - Emergency clause.
Whenever the health officer finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he shall, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to
suit the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such
order is directed shall comply therewith immediately.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.112); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.112), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-153—14-160. - Reserved.
Subdivision II. - Inspections

Sec. 14-161. - Authorized; right of entry.
The health officer is hereby authorized to make inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and
premises located within the city, in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings of the
general public. For the purpose of making such inspections the health officer is hereby authorized according to law to enter, examine, and survey
at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, and
rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the health officer free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, and its
premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination, and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for
the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful rule or
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.101); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.101), 11-6-95)

37/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-162. - Frequency.
The health officer shall cause a periodic inspection to be made of every rental unit at least once every two years. Such inspection shall include
a thorough examination of all parts of such rental unit and the premises connecting therewith. The health officer is also hereby empowered to
make similar inspections of all dwellings as frequently as he may deem necessary.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.102); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.102), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-163. - Regular inspection fee.
The owner or owners of each rental unit shall pay an inspection fee of $10.00 per rental unit at the time the inspection is performed by the
health officer or his designate. Only one regular inspection fee shall be required every two years.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.103); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.103), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-164. - Reinspection fee.
In the event that a reinspection is necessitated because a rental unit is not approved by the health officer or his designate, the first
reinspection shall be conducted at no charge to the owner or owners of the rental unit. In the event that a subsequent reinspection is required for
a rental unit, the owner or owners shall pay a reinspection fee of $10.00 for each subsequent inspection.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.104); Ord. No. 98-11/6, §1(8.104), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-165. - Warrants for nonemergency situation; no warrant required in an emergency situation.
In a nonemergency situation where the owner or occupant demands a warrant for inspection of the premises, the health officer shall obtain a
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The health officer shall prepare the warrant, stating the address of the building to be inspected,
the nature of the inspection, as defined in this or other applicable laws, and the reasons for the inspection. It shall be appropriate and sufficient to
set forth the basis for the inspection established in this article, state law or any rules or regulations provided under state law. The warrant shall
also state that it is issued pursuant to this article, and that it is for the purposes set forth in this and other acts which require that inspections be
conducted. In the event of an emergency no warrant shall be required.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.105); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.105), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-166. - Preexisting conditions.
For purpose of rental inspections, no rental property owner shall be required to complete construction thereon relating to the removal,
relocating or addition of walls, the removal, relocating or addition of windows or doors, or rewiring if it can be shown by the owner that any
preexisting condition was lawful by the building code at the time the building was placed into rental service.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.106), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-167—14-180. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - REGISTRATION OF RENTAL UNITS

Sec. 14-181. - Registry to be kept; responsibility.
A registry of all rental units within the city setting forth the address of the rental unit, the name of the owner or owners of the rental unit and
the address of such owner or owners shall be kept by the health officer. The owner or owners of each rental unit shall be responsible for
registration.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.95); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.95), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-182. - Deadline.
For all premises currently being used as rental units the owner or owners thereof shall complete registration within 90 days from the effective
date of the ordinance from which this division was derived. Registration of any new rental units shall be completed prior to occupancy by a tenant.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.96); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.96), 11-6-95)

38/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-183. - Fees.
The registration fee for any rental unit which is registered in a timely manner pursuant to section 14-182 shall be $15.00 per building
containing a rental unit. The registration fee for any building containing a rental unit not timely registered pursuant to this article shall be $150.00
per building.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.97); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.97), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-184—14-255. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES

Sec. 14-256. - Compliance with division required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping,
cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the requirements of this division.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.141); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.141), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-257. - Kitchen sink.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.142); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.142), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-258. - Water closet, lavatory and bath.
Every dwelling unit (except as otherwise permitted under section 14-259) shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within such
room and which is equipped with a flush water closet, a lavatory basin and a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly
connected to a water and sewer system.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.143); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.143), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-259. - Shared sanitary facilities.
Under special circumstances where additional sanitary facilities must be installed to conform to section 14-258 and practical difficulties
prevent the installation of such facilities within the dwelling unit, the health officer may permit sanitary facilities to be shared, provided that at
least one flush water closet, one lavatory basin and one bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each two dwelling units or fraction thereof. Where
more than one flush water closet or more than one bathtub or shower is supplied within one room, they shall be separated by partitions or walls
which afford privacy to a person using each facility. The provisions of this section shall in no way supersede or alter the requirements of this
chapter pertaining to new structures or conversions of old structures.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.144); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.144), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-260. - Water system.
The water supply shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient
volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely and free from defects and leaks. Water-heating facilities shall
be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub,
shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43 degrees Celsius). A gas-burning water heater shall not be
located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An
approved combination temperature and pressure relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water
heaters.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.145); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.145), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-261. - Rubbish storage facilities.

39/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage storage facilities whose type and location are approved by the health officer.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.146); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.146), 11-6-95)

Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 58.
Sec. 14-262. - Water-heating facilities.
Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are properly installed, maintained in safe and good working condition and
properly connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of section 14-260. Such supplied facilities are to be capable of providing
an adequate amount of water at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees
Fahrenheit. Such supplied facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this section when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating
facilities required under the provisions of section 14-290 are not in operation.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.147); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.147), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-263. - Means of egress.
Every dwelling unit shall have two remote means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have safe unobstructed means of egress leading to an
open space at ground level and this open space shall lead to a public street or alley as required by the laws of the state and the city.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.148); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.148), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-264. - Sanitary drainage system.
All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected either to a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. Every
plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.149), 11-6-1995)

Sec. 14-265. - Storm drainage.
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates
a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.150), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-266. - Interior structure and sanitation.
The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Every
occupant shall keep that part of the structure which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a
structure containing a rooming house, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies shall maintain,
in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.151), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-267. - Exterior structure and sanitation.
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health,
safety or welfare. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks and loose or rotting materials; and maintained waterproof and properly
surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.152), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-268. - Electrical system hazards.
Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate
service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall
require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.

40/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.153), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-269—14-285. - Reserved.
DIVISION 6. - MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING

FOOTNOTE(S):
(20) Cross

reference— Utilities, ch. 78.

Sec. 14-286. - Compliance with division required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein,
which does not comply with the requirements of this division.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.156); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.156), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-287. - Windows.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that
of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the
required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window
area of such skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the total floor area of such room.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.157); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.157), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-288. - Ventilation.
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be easily opened for adequate ventilation, except where there is
supplied some other device or method affording adequate ventilation and approved by the health officer.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.158); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.158), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-289. - Bathroom lights and ventilation.
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in
sections 14-287 and 14-288, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet
compartments equipped with a ventilation system which is kept in continuous operation and approved by the health officer.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.159); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.159), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-290. - Heating facilities.
Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a
temperature of at least 65 degrees Fahrenheit, at a distance three feet above floor level.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.160); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.160), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-291. - Electrical outlets.
Every room shall contain at least two separate electrical convenience outlets or one such convenience outlet and one lighting fixture.
Additional convenience outlets shall be provided in sufficient number to adequately service the electrical devices and/or appliances located
therein, without the use of unapproved writing methods. Cords to appliances and devices shall not be run through doorways or under rugs or be
stapled to wood base boards, door casings or through holes in partitions on floors. All installations and repairs are to be made in a manner that
conforms to this chapter.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.161); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.161), 11-6-95)

41/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-292. - Lighting public halls and stairways.
Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every
public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with
conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.162); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.162), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-293. - Screens, windows and doors.
During that portion of each year when the health officer deems it necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every
door opening directly from a dwelling unit to an outdoor space shall have supplied screens and a self-closing device; and every window or other
device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.163); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.163), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-294. - Screens on basement or cellar windows.
Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an
entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.164); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.164), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-295—14-315. - Reserved.
DIVISION 7. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO MAINTENANCE

FOOTNOTE(S):
(21) Cross

reference— Utilities, ch. 78.

Sec. 14-316. - Compliance with division required.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein,
which does not comply with the requirements of this division.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.171); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.171), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-317. - Foundation, oor, wall, ceiling and roof; maintenance.
Every exterior foundation, wall and roof shall be weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; shall be capable of affording privacy; and shall be
kept in good repair. Every interior floor, wall or ceiling, shall be rodentproof, capable of affording privacy and kept in good repair.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.172); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.172), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-318. - Window, door, basement hatchway.
Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair. Each such window and door shall be equipped with a locking device which tightly secures the window or door. In
addition, all entrance doors to dwelling units, rooming units and guestrooms shall be equipped with a locking device which tightly secures the
door.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.173); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.173), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-319. - Stairs and porches; maintenance and safety.
Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.174); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.174), 11-6-95)

42/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-320. - Stairways, handrails and guards.
Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers, and every open portion of a stair, landing or balcony which is more
than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) nor more than 42
inches (1,067 mm) high, measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards
shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing or balcony.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.179), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-321. - Floor surfaces.
Every water closet compartment, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be water resistant and so
as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.176); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.175), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-322. - Supplied facilities; maintenance.
Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this article shall be so constructed or installed that it will function
safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.177); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.176), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-323. - Facilities not to be shut o .
No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this article to be removed from
or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary
while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the health
officer.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.178); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.177), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-324. - Dwelling unit to be clean before occupied.
No person shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling, dwelling unit or premises unless it is in compliance with the
requirements of this article.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.179); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.178), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-325—14-345. - Reserved.
DIVISION 8. - MINIMUM SPACE, USE AND LOCATION REQUIREMENTS

Sec. 14-346. - Compliance with division required.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply
with the requirements of this division.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.181); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.181), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-347. - Living space.
Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. In no case shall any
private dwelling be occupied which does not contain at least 450 square feet of habitable room area.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.182); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.182), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-348. - Sleeping space.

43/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 80 square feet
of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.183); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.183), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-349. - Room arrangement.
No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water
closet compartment intended for use by the occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room;
nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or
water closet compartment.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.184); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.184), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-350. - Cooking and sleeping in same room.
Where more than two persons occupy any dwelling unit, food shall not be prepared or cooked in any room used for sleeping purposes.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.185); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.185), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-351. - Ceiling height.
At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of that part of
any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the
room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.186); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.186), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-352. - Cellar.
No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit the use of cellar rooms for
recreation purposes.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.187); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.187), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-353. - Basement.
No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
(1)

The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;

(2)

The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area sizes as required in section 14-287

(3)

Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and

(4)

Openable window area in each room is provided as required under section 14-284, except where there is supplied some other
device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the health officer.

Sec. 14-354. - Kitchen; use of jointly by more than one family.
No kitchen or cooking accommodations shall be permitted or maintained in any room or space of any building for the common or joint use of
the individual occupants of a two-family or multiple-family dwelling.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.189); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.189), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-355. - Prohibited uses.
No horse, cow, calf, swine, sheep, goat, chickens, geese, ducks, or rabbits shall be kept in any dwelling or part thereof. No such animal shall
under any circumstances be kept on the same lot or premises with a dwelling.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.190); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.190), 11-6-95)

44/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-356. - Temporary dwellings.
It shall be unlawful to erect or occupy any structure which is intended to be occupied in whole or in part as a temporary dwelling unless it
complies with all the provisions of this article.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.191); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.191), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-357. - Certi cate of compliance.
No building constructed as or altered into a dwelling shall be occupied in whole or in part for human habitation unless the health officer
issues a certificate that such dwelling substantially conforms in all respects to the requirements of this article. The certificate shall specify the
maximum of persons permitted to occupy the dwelling. Such certificate shall be issued within 15 days after written application therefor, if such
dwelling, at the date of such application, shall be entitled thereto.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.192); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.192), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-358. - Unlawful occupation.
If any building hereafter constructed as or altered into a dwelling be occupied in whole or in part for human habitation in violation of section
14-387 during such unlawful occupation, no rent shall be recoverable by the owner or lessee of such premises for such period, and no action or
special proceedings shall be maintained therefor for possession of such premises for nonrent, and such premises shall be deemed unfit for
human habitation and the health officer may cause them to be vacated accordingly.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.193); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.193), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-359—14-380. - Reserved.
DIVISION 9. - RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS

Sec. 14-381. - Maintenance of unit cleanliness.
Every owner of a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. In all other cases it shall be the responsibility of
the occupants.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.201); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.201), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-382. - Cleanliness requirements of occupants.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.202); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.202), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-383. - Rubbish.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish
facilities required by section 14-261. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to remove the rubbish properly placed in containers, for all dwelling
units in a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. In all other cases it shall be the responsibility of the occupants to remove the rubbish.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.203); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.203), 11-6-95)

Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 58.
Sec. 14-384. - Garbage.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage
disposal facilities or garbage storage containers required by section 14-261. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or
containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. In all other cases it shall be the responsibility of the

45/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.204); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.204), 11-6-95)

Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 58.
Sec. 14-385. - Screens.
Every owner of a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units shall be responsible for hanging all supplied screens and screen doors. In
all other cases it shall be the responsibility of the occupant.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.205); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.205), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-386. - Extermination of pests.
The presence of insects, rodents or other pests within a dwelling or on the premises is declared to be a violation of this article. Every occupant
of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the
premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination
whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever infestation is caused by
failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing
two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.206); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.206), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-387. - Plumbing xtures.
Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.207); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.207), 11-6-95)

Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78.
Sec. 14-388. - Summary eviction.
If the occupant of a dwelling shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article after due and proper notice from the health officer, such
failure to comply shall be deemed sufficient cause for the summary eviction of such tenant by the owner and cancellation of his lease.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.208); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.208), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-389—14-410. - Reserved.
DIVISION 10. - SMOKE DETECTORS

Sec. 14-411. - New dwellings.
The installation of a minimum of one smoke detector per dwelling unit is hereby required for all new single and multiple residential dwellings
constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived.
(Ord. No. 84-2, § 8.209(1), 4-2-84)

Sec. 14-412. - Existing dwellings.
All existing multiple-occupancy residential structures and single dwelling structures with rental rooms shall, within six months from the
effective date of the ordinance from which this division was derived, or at the time of any change in ownership, or when a structural change or
repair is made costing $1,000.00 or more, whichever occurs first, have installed therein a minimum of one smoke detector per dwelling unit or
rental room.
(Ord. No. 84-2, § 8.209(2), 4-2-84)

46/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-413. - Installation.
Each required smoke detector shall be mounted on the ceiling or a wall not more than 12 inches from the ceiling, at a point centrally located
in a corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes. In an efficiency dwelling unit the detector shall be centrally located on the
ceiling of the main room. An A.C.-only unit is not permitted, and D.C.-powered detectors shall have built-in protection to warn of battery failure.
(Ord. No. 84-2, § 8.209(3), 4-2-84)

Sec. 14-414. - Maintenance.
The owner or agent of the owner shall at the time of renting the premises to a tenant demonstrate the operation of the smoke detector
installed upon the premises, and ensure the proper functioning thereof. Thereafter, during the term of tenancy, the tenant shall maintain each
smoke detector in proper working order.
(Ord. No. 84-2, § 8.209(4), 4-2-84)

Secs. 14-415—14-435. - Reserved.
DIVISION 11. - ROOMINGHOUSES

Sec. 14-436. - Compliance with certain article provisions.
No person shall operate a roominghouse, or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any roominghouse, except in
compliance with the provisions of every section of this article except the provisions of sections 14-256—14-263, inclusive, and sections 14-381—
14-388, inclusive.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.211); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.211), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-437. - License to operate required.
No person shall operate a roominghouse unless he holds a valid roominghouse license issued by the city clerk in the name of the operator
and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to the city clerk for such license which shall be issued by the city clerk after
inspection by the health officer and upon compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this article and of any rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto. The fee for such license shall be as prescribed in chapter 18 of this Code.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.212); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.212), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-438. - Appeal of a denial of license.
Any person whose application for a license to operate a roominghouse has been denied may appeal the matter to the housing board of
appeals under the procedure provided in division 5 of this article.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.213); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.213), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-439. - Inspection; suspension of license.
Whenever, upon inspection of any roominghouse, the health officer finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
provision of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the health officer shall give notice in writing to the operator of such
roominghouse that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a maximum period of time, to be determined by the health officer, the
operator's roominghouse license will be suspended. At the end of such period the health officer shall reinspect such roominghouse, and if he
finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice in writing to the operator that the latter's license has been
suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease operation of such roominghouse, and no person shall
thereafter occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit therein.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.214); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.214), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-440. - Appeals of the revocation of a license.

47/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Any person whose license to operate a roominghouse has been suspended, or who has received notice from the health officer that his license
is to be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his roominghouse are corrected, may appeal the matter to the city council acting as
the housing board of appeals, under the procedure provided in this article. Provided that if no petition for such appeal is filed within ten days
following the day on which such license was suspended, such license shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.215); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.216), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-441. - Minimum basic facilities.
At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, connected to a water and sewer system and in good working condition,
shall be supplied for each eight persons or fraction thereof residing within a roominghouse, including members of the operator's family wherever
they share the use of the facilities. In a roominghouse where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than onehalf the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be accessible from a common hall or
passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all
times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval of the health officer. Any roominghouse where food is served
shall comply with chapter 42 of this Code.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.216); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.216), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-442. - Supply of bed linen and towels.
The operator of every roominghouse shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of
any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.217); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.217), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-443. - Minimum space.
Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.218); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.218), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-444. - Means of egress.
Every roominghouse shall have two remote means of egress. Every rooming unit shall have safe unobstructed means of egress leading to an
open space at ground level and this open space shall lead to a public street or alley as required by the laws of the state and the city.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.219); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.219), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-445. - Responsibility for maintenance.
The operator of every roominghouse shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for maintenance of
a sanitary condition in every other part of the roominghouse; and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the owner.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.220); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.220), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-446. - Application of division to hotels.
Every provision of this division which applies to roominghouses shall also apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be
found in conflict with the laws of the state or with the lawful regulations of any state board or agency.
(Ord. of 11-6-95, § 1(8.221); Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.221), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-447—14-460. - Reserved.
DIVISION 12. - CONDEMNATION OF DWELLINGS

48/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-461. - Dangerous building; prohibited.
It is unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any dwelling or part thereof which is a dangerous building as defined in
section 14-462.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.226), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-462. - Dangerous building de ned.
As used in this division dangerous building means a building or structure that has one of more of the following defects or is in one or more of
the following conditions:
(1)

A door, isle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the city.

(2)

A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood or other cause so that the structural strength or stability
of the building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and does not meet with minimum
requirements of this chapter for a new building or structure, purpose or location.

(3)

A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become detached or dislodged, or collapse and injure persons or damage
property.

(4)

A portion of the building or structure has settled to such extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or
structure have materially less resistence to wind than is required in the case of new construction by this chapter.

(5)

The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty
construction or the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for other reason, is
likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is
likely to fall or give way.

(6)

The building, structure or a part of the building or structure is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.

(7)

The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, or flood, or is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive
nuisance to the children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a harbor for vagrants,
criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an
unlawful or immoral act.

(8)

A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is
in a condition that the health officer determines is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to injure the health, safety or
general welfare of the people living in the dwelling.

(9)

A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the
elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers.

(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.227), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-463. - Notice of dangerous conditions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building, the health officer shall issue
a notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building. The notice shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee that is registered with the
health officer under section 14-181. If an owner, agent or lessee is not registered under section 14-181, the notice shall be served on each owner
of or party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records. The notice shall
specify the time and place of a hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous building.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.228), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-464. - Hearing o cer.
A hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor to serve at his or her pleasure. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in
housing matters including, but not limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector or member of a community housing
organization. An employee of the city shall not be appointed as the hearing officer.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.229), 11-6-95)

49/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 14-465. - Hearing—Right to be heard.
The person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause at the hearing why the hearing officer should not order
the building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.230), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-466. - Same—Notice.
A copy of the notice that a building or structure is a dangerous building shall be filed with the hearing officer by the health officer. The notice
shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom the notice is directed, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records. If a notice is served on a person by certified mail,
a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. The notice shall be served upon the owner or party
in interest at least ten days before the date of the hearing included in the notice.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.231), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-467. - Same—Testimony; decision.
At a hearing, the hearing officer shall take testimony of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property, and any interested party. Not more
than five days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision, either closing the proceedings or ordering the building
or structure demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained. If the hearing officer determines that the building or structure should be
demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained, the hearing officer shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent, or
lessee to comply with the order.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.232), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-468. - Failure to comply.
If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order issued under section 14-467, the hearing officer
shall file a report of the findings and a copy of the order with the city council not more than five days after noncompliance by the owner and
request that necessary actions be taken to enforce the order. The city council shall fix a date not less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed
above for a hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice to the owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed
in section of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent, or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the
order should not be enforced. The city council shall either approve, disapprove or modify the order. If the order is approved or modified, the
owner, agent, or lessee shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the hearing under this section. In the case of an order of
demolition, if the city council determines that the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood, or other natural
disaster, and the cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state equalized value of the building or structure, the owner,
agent, or lessee shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of the hearing under this subsection. The city council shall
take all necessary action to enforce the order.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.233), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-469. - Appeals.
An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the city council acting as the housing board of appeals may appeal the decision or order
to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.234), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-470. - Costs.
The cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure, or grounds adjoining the
building or structure incurred by the city to bring the property into compliance with this act shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner or party
in interest in whose name the property appears.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.235), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-471. - Notice; lien.

50/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the
assessor of the amount of the cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or
grounds adjoining the building or structure by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the
cost within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost to the city, the city shall have a lien for the cost incurred to
bring the property into conformance with this article. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided by
law. A lien provided for in this section does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the cost shall
be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act, Art. No. 206 of the Public Acts
of Michigan of 1893 (MCL 211.1 to 211.157), as amended.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.236), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-472. - Separate legal action; judgment.
In addition to other remedies under this article, the city may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of
the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or
structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to this section. The lien provided for in this
section shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed or
recorded liens and encumbrances. In addition, a judgment obtained pursuant to this section shall also grant to the city a lien for the amount of
the judgment against the owner's interest in all real property located in the state that is owned in whole or in part by the owner of the building or
structure against whom the judgment is obtained. A lien provided for in this section does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded
as provided by law, and the lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.237), 11-6-95)

Sec. 14-473. - Penalty; misdemeanor.
A person who fails or refuses to comply with an order approved or modified by the city council under section 14-468 within the time
prescribed by that section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00,
or both.
(Ord. No. 98-11/6, § 1(8.238), 11-6-95)

Secs. 14-474—14-515. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 14-516. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Display area means the area that is bounded by a series of curved or straight lines that are tangent to the outer boundaries of the sign.
Flashing lighted sign means a sign which is illuminated by electricity or electric or neon or similar lights which intermittently and repeatedly
flash on and off in rapid succession, or so as to create an illusion of a flow of lights.

Ground sign means any freestanding sign supported by and anchored directly to the ground on privately owned property.
Projecting sign means any sign attached to or erected on the exterior wall or surface of any building which projects more than 12 inches from
the wall or surface.

Roof sign means any sign mounted on or over the roof of a building.

51/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sign means any device, panel, banner or structure constructed or maintained with words, numbers or characters thereon for the purpose of
an advertisement, announcement or giving information; provided, however, that words, numbers or characters painted on any wall of a building,
on a fence or on an awning shall not be governed by the provisions of this article.

Wall sign means any sign attached to or placed flat against the exterior wall or surface of any building, no portion of which projects more than
12 inches from the wall.
(Code 1977, § 8.21)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-517. - Location generally.
It shall be unlawful for any sign to be attached to a door, window casing or tree; for any sign to obstruct any fire escape or building entrance,
passageway or window; to be located a distance, the horizontal projection of which is less than ten feet from any fire hydrant, traffic light, fire or
police box, or on any pole or column on public property; or to be erected in any location where by reason of traffic conditions or a fire hazard, it
would imperil public safety or interfere with the duties of the police or fire departments. All signs shall be securely and adequately fastened and
anchored. Single strand wires, wood plugs or other structurally unsafe materials are prohibited in the erection or maintenance of any sign.
(Code 1977, § 8.27)

Sec. 14-518. - Existing signs.
Existing signs which do not conform to the provisions of sections 14-523, 14-524, 14-526 and 14-528, but which do not present an immediate
peril to the public safety because of such nonconformance or for any other reason, shall be deemed nonconforming structures and may be
continued subject to the limitations on the continuance of nonconforming structures and uses imposed by the city zoning ordinance.
(Code 1977, § 8.32)

Sec. 14-519. - Illegal signs; nuisance.
Any sign or billboard maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be thereupon deemed to create a public nuisance, and shall be
subject to removal by appropriate action to abate such nuisance.
(Code 1977, § 8.33)

Sec. 14-520. - Excepted signs.
A permit will not be required for a sign or banner to be placed or repaired on a vacant lot or building advertising the sale or renting of such lot
or building, provided such sign or banner does not exceed six square feet in area on any one lot or building, nor violate the zoning regulations of
the city. A permit will not be required for a sign to be placed on the wall of a building and flat against such building, provided such sign does not
exceed six square feet in area, does not project beyond the line of such building and does not violate the zoning regulations of the city.
(Code 1977, § 8.34)

Sec. 14-521. - Maintenance.
The owner of any sign shall be required to have properly painted at least once every two years all parts and supports of the sign, unless the
parts and supports are galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust.
(Code 1977, § 8.35)

Sec. 14-522. - Load resistance.
All signs and other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 40 pounds per
square foot of area, and shall be constructed to receive such loads as required by this article.
(Code 1977, § 8.36)

Sec. 14-523. - Billboards; location.

52/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

No billboard shall be erected or maintained within 100 feet of any sidewalk or public highway, nor within 150 feet of any residential or
business building, nor within any distance from adjoining property of less than twice the height of such billboard, nor shall any such billboard be
erected or maintained within any area restricted against billboards under any provisions of this Code.
(Code 1977, § 8.28)

Sec. 14-524. - Ground signs—Size.
No billboard, sign, bulletin board or advertising display, if standing free of any building, shall be more than 25 feet in its greatest horizontal
dimension, nor more than 15 feet in height.
(Code 1977, § 8.29)

Sec. 14-525. - Same—Setback.
Other than temporary "for sale" signs, no ground sign shall be nearer the street than the building line established by law.
(Code 1977, § 8.37)

Sec. 14-526. - Roof signs—Location.
No roof sign shall be constructed nearer any edge of the roof of the building on which it is located than a distance between the roof of such
building and the top of the sign.
(Code 1977, § 8.30)

Sec. 14-527. - Same—Securing.
Every roof sign shall be thoroughly secured to the building by iron or other metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods or braces. When erected upon
buildings which are not constructed entirely of fireproof material, the bearing plates of such sign shall bear directly upon masonry walls and
intermediate steel columns in the building. No roof sign shall be supported or anchored to the wooden framework of a building.
(Code 1977, § 8.38)

Sec. 14-528. - Projecting signs—Location.
No projecting sign shall be so hung, constructed or located that any portion of such sign, or any point on the ground projected perpendicular
thereto, is nearer any public or private street, sidewalk or building entrance, than a distance equal to the distance between the top of such sign
and the ground.
(Code 1977, § 8.31)

Sec. 14-529. - Same—Size.
Except by special permission of the city manager on showing by survey and report of the building inspector and chief of police that public
safety will not be endangered, projecting signs shall be limited in area as follows:
(1)

Horizontal projecting signs 50 square feet each side; and

(2)

Vertical projecting signs 100 square feet each side.

(Code 1977, § 8.39)

Sec. 14-530. - Same—Securing.
Projecting signs exceeding ten square feet in area of 50 pounds in weight shall not be attached to nor supported by frame buildings nor the
wooden framework of a building. Such projecting signs shall be attached to masonry walls with galvanized expansion bolts at least three-eighths
of an inch in diameter, shall be fixed in the wall by means of bolts, extending through the wall, shall contain a proper size metal washer or plate on
the inside of the wall and shall comply otherwise herewith. No projecting sign shall be secured with wire, strips of wood or nails, nor shall any
projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign.
(Code 1977, § 8.40)

53/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Secs. 14-531—14-550. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT

Sec. 14-551. - Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate, reassemble or post any sign governed by the provisions of this article within the
city without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city.
(Code 1977, § 8.22)

Sec. 14-552. - Application.
An application for a permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the city, and shall contain among other things the name and address of the
applicant; the type of sign and the proposed location; the name of the person who will erect or hang the sign; the written consent of the owner or
lessee of the property on which any sign is to be located; and a plan or sketch of the sign, showing the dimensions, plans and specifications of the
material to be used in its construction. If the sign is to be electrically illuminated, the name of the electrician who is to connect the wiring to the
supply line must be specified and his license shown, and the sign shall have an approved Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., label number, together
with an electrical permit number. Electrical clocks, thermometers or similar devices shall, for the purpose of this article, be deemed to be signs.
Application for permits to erect signs in which plastic materials are to be employed shall set forth the manufacturer's trade name for, and the
common name of, the plastic material to be used; and shall certify either that the plastic material is noncombustible or that the plastic material
has been tested by a recognized testing laboratory and rated as an approved noncombustible plastic. If plastics are employed in any part of a sign,
the finished plastic unit shall be identified with the manufacturer's trade name for the plastic material or with the common name of the plastic
material, if any.
(Code 1977, § 8.23)

Sec. 14-553. - Issuance.
The application for a permit, together with all plans and specifications in connection therewith, shall be approved by the city manager, and
such approval shall not be given unless and until such application shall comply with all of the provisions of this Code. If such application complies
with this Code, a permit to erect, alter, relocate, reassemble or post the sign shall be issued. Any sign which has been erected for a particular
purpose shall not have its use changed without first making a new application and having a permit issued therefor.
(Code 1977, § 8.24)

Sec. 14-554. - Sign to bear permit number.
Every permit shall bear a number, which number shall be inscribed upon a suitable metal tag and fastened to the sign in a conspicuous
location, and the sign hanger shall have the permit in his possession at the time the sign is being placed or erected.
(Code 1977, § 8.25)

Sec. 14-555. - Fee.
A permit fee of $25.00 for each sign to be erected shall be paid at the time the application therefor is filed, except as to signs specifically
designated otherwise in this article. Such fee may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.
(Code 1977, § 8.26)

Secs. 14-556—14-585. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - SWIMMING POOLS

Sec. 14-586. - De nitions.

54/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Private swimming pools means any pool designed, used and maintained for swimming purposes by an individual for use by his household
and guests and located on a lot as an accessory use to a residence. Unless otherwise qualified, the term "private swimming pool" shall be
construed as including both artificial and partly artificial pools. The term "partly artificial pool" shall mean a pool formed from a natural body of
water which has either so limited a flow or such an inadequate natural circulation that the quality of water must be maintained by artificial means.
The term "artificial pool" shall mean a pool composed entirely of artificial construction.

Wading pool means any artificially constructed pool, not designed or used for swimming, with a maximum area of 120 square feet and a
maximum water depth of 24 inches.
(Code 1977, § 8.61)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 14-587. - Permit.
(a)

Required. It shall be unlawful to construct or establish a private swimming pool or wading pool without having obtained a permit
therefor in the manner prescribed in this section.

(b)

Application; fees. Application for the construction and maintenance of a private swimming pool or wading pool shall be made to
the building inspector by the owner of the property or by the contractor who will construct such swimming pool. The application
shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of plans, specifications and plot plans of the property. The plot plan shall show the accurate
location of the proposed swimming pool on the property, together with any proposed bathhouses or cabanas. The plot plan shall
also show the location, height and type of all existing fencing or walls on the boundary lines of the property, together with the type
and height of such fencing or enclosure as may be required by section 14-595 to prevent, within reason, any person from gaining
access beneath or through such fence when the pool is unguarded or unattended. A fee of $20.00 shall be paid to the city for such
private swimming pool permit, which permit fee shall be exclusive of the permit fee required for erection of any accessory structure
to be used in connection with such swimming pool. A fee of $10.00 shall be paid to the city for a wading pool. Such fees may be
changed by resolution of the city council from time to time. No permit for a private swimming pool or wading pool shall be issued
by the building inspector until the plans, specifications and plot plan have been approved by the city health officer and city
engineer, and such approval has been properly certified on the plans. Such approval must be directly obtained from the health
officer by the applicant.

(Code 1977, §§ 8.62, 8.63)

Sec. 14-588. - Construction and maintenance.
All material used in the construction of artificial private swimming pools and wading pools shall be waterproof and easily cleaned.
Construction and design of such pools shall be such that the pools may be so maintained and operated as to be clean and sanitary at all times.
The owners of every private swimming pool shall be responsible to maintain the pool in such condition as to prevent breaks in the pool chassis or
water from the pool overflowing into adjacent public or private property.
(Code 1977, § 8.64)

Sec. 14-589. - Discharge system.
All private swimming pools now existing or hereafter constructed within the city shall be provided with one drainage outlet not in excess of
three inches in diameter extending from such pool to either a brook, storm sewer or lawn sprinkling system on the premises on which the private
pool is located. Such drainage shall be first approved by the city engineer and health officer after written application therefor. No private pool
drain shall be connected into the city's sanitary sewer system. Approval shall not be given to discharge such water at the curb or upon the surface
of any street.
(Code 1977, § 8.65)

Sec. 14-590. - Disinfection.

55/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

All private swimming pools shall be treated with chlorine or its compounds in sufficient quantity so that there will be present in the water at
all times when the pool is in use, a residual of excess chlorine of not less than 0.20 parts per million of available free chlorine.
(Code 1977, § 8.66)

Sec. 14-591. - Bacteriological standards.
Not more than 20 percent of the samples of water taken from any private swimming pool, when more than 20 samples have been examined,
and not more than three samples shall contain more than 200 bacteria per cubic centimeter or shall show positive test (confirmed) for coliform in
any of five, ten-cubic-centimeter portions of water at times when the pool is for use. For the purpose of this section, any number of samplings of
water on a single day shall be considered as one sample. The health officer is hereby authorized to take samples to ensure compliance with this
article.
(Code 1977, § 8.67)

Sec. 14-592. - Accessory buildings.
Locker rooms, bathhouses, cabanas, shower rooms, toilets, runways and all other physical facilities or equipment incident to the operation of
any private swimming pool shall be kept in a sanitary condition.
(Code 1977, § 8.68)

Sec. 14-593. - Location.
No private swimming pool or wading pool shall be erected nearer than ten feet to any lot line.
(Code 1977, § 8.69)

Sec. 14-594. - Fencing.
Every pool shall be completely enclosed with fencing with a height not less than four feet, nor more than six feet, so constructed as to
prevent, within reason, any person from gaining access beneath or through such fence, and which shall have similarly substantial gates or doors
of the same height as the fence, with facilities for locking such gates at all times when the pool is unguarded, unattended or not in actual use.
(Code 1977, § 8.70)

Cross reference— Fences generally, § 14-96 et seq.
Sec. 14-595. - Lighting.
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with private swimming pools in such a manner as to be a nuisance or an
annoyance to neighboring properties.
(Code 1977, § 8.71)

Sec. 14-596. - Enforcement of article.
Every private swimming pool or wading pool, constructed or to be constructed in the city, shall at all times comply with the requirements of
the health officer. Any nuisance or hazard to health which may exist or develop in or in consequence of or in connection with any such swimming
pool shall be abated and removed by the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises on which the pool is located within ten days of a receipt of
notice from the building inspector, city engineer or health officer.
(Code 1977, § 8.72)

Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(22)

Cross reference— Alcoholic liquors, ch. 6; cable telecommunications, ch. 22; utilities, ch. 78.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

56/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES

Sec. 18-31. - Required.
No person shall engage, or be engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any enumerated trade, profession, business or privilege for
which any license is required by any provision of this Code without first obtaining a license from the city in the manner provided for in this article.
Any person duly licensed on the effective date of this Code shall be deemed licensed hereunder for the balance of the current license year. Any
person conducting any enumerated business prior to or on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but having not
been licensed as now required, shall have 30 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived to become licensed.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.1, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-32. - Application.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, every person required to obtain a license from the city to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying
on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall make application for such license to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city clerk and
shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such license.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.2, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-33. - Contents of application.
The application for a business license shall contain all information relevant and necessary to determine whether a particular license may be
issued, including but not limited to the following:
(1)

The applicant's full name, current address, telephone number and proof of identity, together with one full-face photograph of
the applicant, not less than two square inches, nor more than three square inches. For purposes of this subsection, a
photograph is required for all partners, shareholders, sole proprietors or other interested parties in any partnership,
corporation, LLC, sole proprietorship or entity conducting the business;

(2)

A brief description of the nature, character and quality of goods, wares or merchandise to be offered for sale;

(3)

The specific location, if any, in which the business intends to conduct business;

(4)

If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the person, firm, association, organization, company or
corporation employing the applicant;

(5)

If a motor vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle together with the motor vehicle registration number and license
number;

(6)

A complete listing of any other licenses or permits issued to the applicant by the city within five years immediately preceding
the date of the application;

(7)

A complete list of any and all misdemeanor or felony convictions of any person or any business entity involved in the conduct
of the business. To this end, all persons required to submit a photograph under subsection (1) would be required to list their
convictions under this subsection.

(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.3, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-34. - Health o cer's certi cate.
The request for a license shall be submitted to the health officer. The health officer shall conduct an actual inspection of the premises in
which the applicant proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege. The health officer shall certify that the
proposed use complies with all of the health and safety standards of the city.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.4, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-35. - Fire chief's certi cate.

57/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The request for a license shall be submitted to the fire chief. The fire chief shall conduct a fire safety inspection of the premises in which the
applicant proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege. The fire chief shall certify that the proposed use
complies with all of the fire safety standards of the city.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.5, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-36. - Police chief's certi cate.
The application shall also be submitted to the chief of police who shall conduct such investigation as he deems appropriate. The chief of police
shall certify that the applicant or the persons in ownership positions of the applicant are of good moral character.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.6, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-37. - Building and zoning o cer's certi cate.
The application shall also be submitted to the building and zoning officer of the city. The building and zoning officer shall certify that the
proposed use of the premises is within the appropriate zoning guidelines and that the building or location proposed for a specific business is
structurally adequate to house the proposed business or enterprise.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.7, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-38. - Businesses requiring license.
The following businesses are required to secure a license from the city clerk in order to conduct business within the corporate limits of the
city:
(1)

Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants are required to apply for and receive a license prior to conducting any business
or solicitation activities within the city. United States military veterans are exempt from this requirement. For purposes of this
subsection the following definitions apply:
a.

The term peddler as used in this article shall include any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or other
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting
goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and
exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to
place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, or other vehicle or conveyance. Any person
who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade
the provisions of this article, shall be deemed a peddler. The term peddler shall include the terms hawker and huckster.

b.

The term solicitor as used in this article shall include any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either
by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or
from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, books or magazines,
personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the
future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he
is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, and such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for
another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodging
house, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders
for future delivery. The term solicitor shall include the term canvasser.

c.

The term transient merchant shall mean a trader who sells merchandise whether at retail or otherwise at a temporary
location without intending to become a permanent merchant in that place. The term transient merchant shall include
street vendors.

(2)

Tattoo parlors. No person or entity shall engage in the business of operating a tattoo parlor without first obtaining a license
therefor. For purposes of this subsection the following definitions shall apply:
a.

A "tattoo parlor" shall mean any person, business or entity which engages to any degree in tattooing, body piercing or
branding upon human tissue or a human body.

b.

The term "tattoo" shall mean either an indelible mark made upon the body of another individual by the insertion of a
pigment under the skin or an indelible design made upon the body of another individual by production of scars other
than by branding.

58/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

(3)

c.

The term "body piercing" shall mean the perforation of human tissue other than an ear for a nonmedical purpose.

d.

The term "branding" means a permanent mark made on human tissue by burning with a hot iron or other instrument.

Sexually oriented businesses. Any person operating or intending to operate a sexually oriented business within the city shall
first secure a license from the city clerk. The definition of the term sexually oriented business is as defined in the zoning code
for the city.

(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.17, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-39. - Bonds.
The city may by ordinance require that an applicant for any license or permit furnish a bond. Prior to issuance of the license such bond shall
be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the city manager or in an amount specified in an ordinance of the city. The form of such bond
shall be acceptable to the city attorney. In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one or more policies of insurance in the
same amounts and providing the same protection as called for in any such bond. Any such policies of insurance shall be approved as to substance
by the city manager and as to form by the city attorney.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.8, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-40. - Fees.
(a)

The fee required by this Code for any license or permit shall be paid at the office of the city clerk.

(b)

The fee required to be paid and the amount of any bond required to be posted, or insurance required to be carried, to obtain any
license to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is
required by the provisions of this Code shall be established by resolution of the city council. The city council shall establish the fee
by determining the anticipated cost of providing the necessary inspections by the city's employees and/or officials, the
administrative costs in issuing the license or permit and any anticipated costs or expenses related to the regulation of the business.
The city council may from time to time by resolution amend or change the fees imposed.

(c)

In the event that an applicant for a license shall fail to apply in a timely manner, or if the payment of the fee is untimely, a late fee
equal to 25 percent of the original license fee, but in no event less than $5.00 shall be paid.

(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.10, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-41. - Exempt persons.
No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all other
provisions of this article. The city clerk shall in all such cases issue to such persons licenses which are clearly marked as to the exemption and the
reason therefor.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.11, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-42. - Suspension or revocation.
Any license issued by the city may be suspended by the city manager for cause, and any permit issued by the city may be suspended or
revoked by the issuing authority for cause. The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city council on any such action by the city
manager, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within five days after receipt of the notice of such suspension. The council
may confirm such suspension or revoke or reinstate such license. The action taken by the city council shall be final. Upon suspension or
revocation of any license or permit, the fee therefor shall not be refunded.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.12, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-43. - Renewal.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original
application.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.9, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-44. - Display; exhibition upon request.

59/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Any license issued under this article shall be prominently displayed at the place of business. Every licensee shall produce his license for
examination when applying for a renewal or when requested to do so by any city police officer or by any person representing the issuing
authority.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.13, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-45. - Displaying invalid license.
No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a duplicate has been issued.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.14, 3-5-01)

Sec. 18-46. - Transferability; misuse.
No license or permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this
Code. No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, transfer or attempt to transfer his license or
permit to another, nor shall he make any improper use of the license or permit. Improper transfer or misuse of such license or permit shall result
in automatic revocation of such license or permit in addition to the general penalty provision for violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 01-06, § 7.15, 3-5-01)

Secs. 18-54—18-85. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FEES AND BONDS

Sec. 18-86. - Setting.
All fees, bonds, penalty fees and insurance required by any section of this chapter shall be as set by resolution of the city council from time to
time.
Secs. 18-87—18-115. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - AMUSEMENT DEVICES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Secs. 18-116—18-140. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE

Sec. 18-141. - Required.
No person shall keep, maintain, use or operate for gain or hire a shuffleboard, bumper pool table, miniature pool table, pinball machine,
jukebox, bowling game or other coin-operated mechanical or electronic amusement device in the city without first obtaining a license therefor.
(Code 1977, § 7.211)

Sec. 18-142. - Application.
Any person desiring to obtain a license to maintain, use or operate such coin-operated mechanical or electronic amusement devices shall
make application to the city clerk on blanks to be furnished by the city. Such application shall contain the name of the owner of the device; the
owner of the premises; and the owner of the business where such devices are maintained, used or operated; and a statement of the place where
such business is to be carried on or operated, with a full description of the premises and of all business carried on at such premises.
(Code 1977, § 7.212)

60/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-143. - Ownership of device and business required for granting.
No license shall be granted unless the applicant shall be the owner or lessee of both the device and the business. Such application shall be
signed by the owner of the business, or in the case of ownership of a corporation, by the president and the secretary thereof.
(Code 1977, § 7.213)

Sec. 18-144. - Approval; fee.
No license required in this article shall be granted except upon certification by the chief of police. The fee for such license shall be as specified
by resolution of the city council from time to time.
(Code 1977, § 7.214)

Sec. 18-145. - Transferability; revocation.
The license granted in this article shall not be transferable either as to owners, proprietors or location. Such licenses shall be subject to
suspension and revocation in the manner provided in article II of this chapter.
(Code 1977, § 7.215)

Secs. 18-146—18-175. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - CARD ROOMS

Sec. 18-176. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Card room means any place open to the public for playing cards.
(Code 1977, § 7.135)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-177. - License required; certi cation; application.
No person shall engage in the business of operating a card room without first obtaining a license therefor. No license shall be granted except
upon certification of the chief of police. Each license application shall designate the number of card tables to be used by the owner and/or
operator.
(Code 1977, § 7.136)

Sec. 18-178. - Closing hours.
Public card rooms shall be closed promptly at 2:00 a.m., legal standard time and shall remain closed until 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
(Code 1977, § 7.137)

Secs. 18-179—18-210. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - CIRCUSES, SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS

Sec. 18-211. - Show license required for circus or show.
No person shall conduct a circus or show, except in a theater licensed under the provisions of this article, without first obtaining a license
therefor which shall be known as a show license.

61/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

(Code 1977, § 7.151)

Sec. 18-212. - Animal show licenses and exhibition licenses.
No person shall conduct any dog or pony show or menagerie without first obtaining a license therefor. Such license shall be known as an
animal show license. No person shall conduct any panorama, exhibition of statuary or paintings or any other exhibition, not otherwise licensed
under this article, and for which an admission fee is charged, without first obtaining a license therefor to be known as an exhibition license. The
provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any fair held under the direct management and supervision of any recognized agricultural
association or society, nonprofit association or corporation, at which agricultural or industrial products are principally exhibited.
(Code 1977, § 7.152)

Secs. 18-213—18-245. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - GASOLINE STATIONS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 18-246. - Location requirements.
No license shall be granted for any such filling station hereafter established for any location outside of the limits of the C-1 commercial district
as established by the zoning ordinance of the city, nor for any location where by reason of traffic conditions or fire or explosion hazard a filling
station would endanger and imperil the public safety. No such license shall be granted for any location within 200 feet of any school, church,
theater, park or any other place of public assembly which has a seating capacity of 200 or more persons, nor for any location within 200 feet of
any school, church, theater, park or any other place of public assembly which has a seating capacity of 200 or more persons, nor for any location
within 200 feet of any building occupied in whole or in part as a dwelling house; provided, however, that a license may be granted for such filling
stations for a location within less than 200 feet of any building within such commercial district occupied in whole or in part as a dwelling house
when the owners of not less than 75 percent of such buildings used for dwelling house purposes within 200 feet of the proposed location consent
thereto in writing, and such written consent is filed with the city clerk.
(Code 1977, § 7.93)

Sec. 18-247. - Measurement of distances.
The distance from a place of dwelling, school, church, theater or other place of public assembly to the location of such filling station as
provided in section 18-246 shall be measured from the nearest pump or tank to the front entrance, or to the nearest portion of the dwelling or
auditorium in which the public is gathered. In case of a park, the measurements shall be from the nearest pump or tank to the regular entrance of
such park; provided, however, that the foregoing provisions for parks shall not be construed to include Trumble Park, so-called, or small triangular
parks not used or designated as public assembly grounds.
(Code 1977, § 7.94)

Secs. 18-248—18-270. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE

Sec. 18-271. - Required.
No gasoline filling station shall be established or maintained within the city without first obtaining a license therefor in accordance with the
provisions of this article. No such license shall be issued until approved by the city council.
(Code 1977, § 7.91)

Sec. 18-272. - Application.

62/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The application for a license to operate a gasoline filling station shall state the location of such proposed filling station and the capacity of the
tank or tanks to be used, and how such oil and gasoline shall be stored and sold.
(Code 1977, § 7.92)

Secs. 18-273—18-305. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDDLERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(23) State

Law reference— Veterans exempt from payment of fee for peddler's license, MCL 35.441 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 18-306. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Peddler means any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or other conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or
from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or
provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to
place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, or other vehicle or conveyance. Any person who solicits orders and as
a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article, shall be deemed a
peddler. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster."
(Code 1977, § 7.71)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-307. - Fixed stands.
No licensee shall stop or remain in any one place upon any street, alley or public place longer than necessary to make a sale to a customer
wishing to buy. Any peddler using a vehicle, when stopped, shall place his vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the curb and shall depart from
such place as soon as he has completed sales with customers actually present.
(Code 1977, § 7.73)

Sec. 18-308. - Prohibited areas.
No peddler, in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or driveway except as may be necessary
and reasonable to consummate a sale nor remain, barter, sell, offer or expose for sale any goods, wares or merchandise in front of or at the side
of any property against the wish or desire of the property owner or the tenant or occupant of such property. No peddler shall engage in peddling
on any street, alley or public place after having been requested to desist by any police officer of the city because of congested or dangerous traffic
conditions.
(Code 1977, § 7.74)

Sec. 18-309. - Prohibited practices.
No peddler shall shout or cry out his goods or merchandise nor blow any horns, ring any bell or use any other similar device to attract the
attention of the public.
(Code 1977, § 7.75)

Sec. 18-310. - Curb service.

63/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

No person shall operate or maintain any stand, vehicle, store or place of business on or near to any highway in such a manner that the
customers of or traders with such person occupy or congregate within the limits of any street, land, highway or public place within the city. No
person shall be permitted to use the streets, alleys, lanes or public places of the city for the service of customers or for the transaction of
business, or to use any stands, stores or other places of business in any manner that shall require the customer, when transacting such business,
to stand within the limits of the streets, highways, alleys or public places of the city.
(Code 1977, § 7.76)

Secs. 18-311—18-330. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE

Sec. 18-331. - Required.
No person shall engage in the business of peddler without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon
certification of the chief of police.
(Code 1977, § 7.72)

Sec. 18-332. - Exempt persons.
(a)

The following shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this article but shall be subject to the other provisions of this
article:
(1)

Farmers or truck gardeners selling or offering for sale any products grown, raised or produced by them, the sale of which is
not otherwise prohibited or regulated.

(2)

Any person under 18 years of age, when engaged in peddling on foot in the neighborhood of his residence under the direct
supervision of any school or recognized charitable or religious organization.

(b)

The following persons shall be exempt from the payment of license fees under this article: veterans of the armed forces.

(Code 1977, § 7.77)

Secs. 18-333—18-365. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. - POOL ROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS

Sec. 18-366. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Bowling alley means any place open to the public for bowling.
Pool room means any place open to the public for playing pool or billiards.
(Code 1977, § 7.121)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-367. - License required; certi cation; ngerprinting.
No person shall engage in the business of operating a pool room or bowling alley without first obtaining a license therefor. No license shall be
granted except upon certification of the chief of police and unless a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant therefor are on file in the
noncriminal identification file of the police department. Each license shall designate the number of pool or billiard tables or bowling alleys
permitted thereunder, and no licensee shall keep or maintain more tables or alleys than permitted by such license.
(Code 1977, § 7.122)

64/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-368. - Closing hours.
No person shall keep open any pool room or bowling alley between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. of the succeeding morning.
(Code 1977, § 7.123)

Sec. 18-369. - Restrictions for minors.
No person who is less than 17 years of age may remain or loiter in or about any premises licensed under this article as a pool room, nor shall
any licensee permit any such minor to remain in such pool room. No person shall falsely represent himself to be 17 years or older in order to
obtain admittance to or remain in any licensed pool room.
(Code 1977, § 7.124)

Sec. 18-370. - Public institutions excepted.
This article shall not be applicable to bowling alleys or pool rooms operated and owned by public institutions.
(Code 1977, § 7.125)

Secs. 18-371—18-400. - Reserved.
ARTICLE X. - PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS

Sec. 18-401. - Registration required; fees.
In accordance with the provisions of the Precious Metal and Gem Dealer Act of 1981, Act No. 95 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1981 (MCL
445.481 et seq.), as amended, the city hereby sets dealer registration fees as follows:
(1)

Dealer, $25.00; and

(2)

Each employee, $5.00, not to exceed the sum total of $50.00 per dealer.

Such fees may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.
(Ord. of 12-7-81, § 1)

Sec. 18-402. - Form of application and registration certi cate.
The application for a certificate of registration and the certificate of registration shall be in such form as may be set and supplied by the city
clerk.
(Ord. of 12-7-81, § 2)

Secs. 18-403—18-435. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. - PUBLIC DANCES

Sec. 18-436. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Public dance means any dance to which the general public is invited, expressly or impliedly, except dances sponsored by the city.
(Code 1977, § 7.129)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-437. - Dancehall license required; certi cations.

65/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

No person shall operate or maintain any place in or on which public dances are held, without first obtaining a dancehall license, and no
person shall conduct a public dance except in or on premises licensed under this article. No license shall be granted except upon certification of
the building inspector and the fire chief.
(Code 1977, § 7.130)

Sec. 18-438. - Sanitary facilities.
No license shall be issued to any dancehall or place where public dances are held, unless there is in such hall, proper provisions for
ventilation, either natural or mechanical, so that each person in the hall will be supplied with 1,200 cubic feet of air per hour, and sufficient toilet
conveniences so that there will be at least one women's toilet in good sanitary condition per 2,000 square feet of floor space, or fraction thereof;
at least one men's toilet and urinal in good sanitary condition per 2,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof; and provision made for
privacy therein; at least one washstand in each toilet provided with soap and sanitary towels; at least one sanitary drinking fountain, either on the
dance floor or reasonably accessible thereto for each 4,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof; sufficient fire exits free from all rubbish
and inflammable material as required by the regulations of the state fire marshal; and at least one free and unobstructed means of exit from the
premises in addition to the main entrance thereto.
(Code 1977, § 7.131)

Sec. 18-439. - Building code requirements.
No license shall be issued for any place in which public dances are held unless the building code requirements of the city, as far as can be
determined, are being complied with.
(Code 1977, § 7.132)

Sec. 18-440. - Closing hours.
No public dancehall shall remain open between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
(Code 1977, § 7.133)

Secs. 18-441—18-470. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. - SALES

Sec. 18-471. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Yard sales, garage sales and basement sales mean the sale or offering for sale of more than five items by other than a licensed retail
merchant, church, club or charitable institution of new and used merchandise, clothing, household goods or rummage in other than premises
zoned for such sale.
(Code 1977, § 7.191)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-472. - Penalty for violation of article.
Violation of this article is punishable by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days in jail and/or a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(Code 1977, § 7.192)

Sec. 18-473. - Required conditions, including license.
Yard sales, garage sales and basement sales shall not be permitted in the city except under the following conditions:
(1)

Such sales shall only be conducted by the owner or occupant of the premises for the sale of goods owned by such owner or

66/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
occupant.
(2)

The sale shall be for a period not greater than three days.

(3)

Signs advertising the sale may be posted on the premises where the sale is being conducted, or on a privately owned
property, if written permission is obtained from the owner of the property where the sign is to be placed. Signs shall not be
placed in rights-of-way, on utility poles, on public property or on any property in which prior written permission has not been
given. Signs shall be removed at the closing, or end of the last day of the sale.

(4)

The owner or occupant of the premises shall be limited to two sales per calendar year.

(5)

No sale shall be held until a license for the sale has been obtained from the city clerk on a form provided by the city.

(Code 1977, § 7.192)

Secs. 18-474—18-505. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. - SOLICITORS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(24) State

Law reference— Charitable organizations and solicitations act, MCL 400.271 et seq.; public safety solicitation act, MCL 14.301 et seq.;

home solicitation sales, MCL 445.111 et seq.
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 18-506. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Solicitor means any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other
type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares
and merchandise, books or magazines, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is
collecting advance payments on such sales or not, and such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires,
leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, or any other place within
the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The word "solicitor" shall include the word "canvasser."
(Code 1977, § 7.81)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-507. - Exempt persons.
Persons under 18 years of age, when engaged in soliciting on foot in the neighborhood of their residence under the direct supervision of any
school or recognized charitable or religious organization, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article.
(Code 1977, § 7.85)

Secs. 18-508—18-530. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE

Sec. 18-531. - Required.
No person shall engage in the business of solicitor within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted
except upon certification of the chief of police.
(Code 1977, § 7.82)

67/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-532. - Application; contents.
The license application filed under the provisions of this division shall furnish the following information:
(1)

Name and description of the applicant;

(2)

Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;

(3)

A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;

(4)

If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship;

(5)

The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;

(6)

The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or
produced, where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery;

(7)

A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture
shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;

(8)

The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners of the county who will certify as to the
applicant's good character and business respectability, or, in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as
to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such
character and business responsibility; and

(9)

A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal
ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.

(Code 1977, § 7.83)

Sec. 18-533. - Fees.
The fees for a solicitor's license shall be as specified by resolution of city council from time to time. No fee for a solicitor's license shall be so
applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a
license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, he may apply to the city manager for an adjustment of the fees so that it shall not be
discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within six months after payment of the
prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and gross volume or estimated
gross volume of business and such other information as the city manager may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such
undue burden on such commerce. The city manager shall then conduct an investigation, comparing the applicant's business with other businesses
of like nature and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee fixed for the solicitor's license is unfair, unreasonable
or discriminatory as to applicant's business and shall fix as the license fee for the applicant, an amount that is fair, reasonable and
nondiscriminatory, or, if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be
charged, the city manager shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or any other method which will ensure that the
fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the fee as
prescribed by the city council. Should the city manager determine the gross sales measure of the fee to be the fair basis, he may require the
applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of the applicant's business in the city, or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn
statement of the gross sales and pay the amount of the fee therefor, provided that no additional fee during any one license year shall be required
after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license fee as prescribed by the city council.
(Code 1977, § 7.84)

Secs. 18-534—18-565. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. - TAXICABS AND DRIVERS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(25) Cross

reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

68/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-566. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Taxicab shall have the meaning given in the state uniform traffic code.
(Code 1977, § 7.231)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-567. - Rates.
All fares and charges for the use of taxicabs shall be determined by resolution of the city council following a hearing held by such council at a
regular meeting. All taxicab licensees shall be notified of any such hearing by mail. The term "waiting time" as used in any schedule of rates and
charges shall include the time when the taxicab is not in motion, beginning with the arrival at the place to which it has been called, or the time
consumed while standing at the direction of any passenger, but shall not include time lost because of inefficiency of the taxicab or its operator, or
time consumed by premature response to a call or by traffic delays.
(Code 1977, § 7.240)

Sec. 18-568. - Lost articles.
Every taxicab driver, immediately after the termination of any hiring or employment, shall carefully search such taxicab for any property lost
or left therein, and any such property unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner shall be taken to the headquarters of the police
department and deposited with the officer in charge within 24 hours after the finding of such article.
(Code 1977, § 7.244)

Sec. 18-569. - Passengers.
Every taxicab driver shall have the right to demand payment of the legal fare in advance, and may refuse employment until so prepaid, but no
taxicab driver shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request anywhere in the city unless previously engaged or
unable to do so. No driver of any licensed taxicab shall carry any other person than the passenger first employing a taxicab without the consent of
the passenger.
(Code 1977, § 7.245)

Sec. 18-570. - Rules and regulations.
The chief of police is hereby empowered, subject to approval by the city council, to make such rules and regulations regarding the dress and
conduct of drivers, the maintenance, marking and operating of taxicabs as may be necessary in the interest of providing safe and orderly service
to passengers, and no person shall fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. Upon adoption or change in any such rule or regulation, notice
of such change shall be furnished to each taxicab licensee and taxicab driver licensee. The chief of police may require periodic reports to be
submitted by operators and drivers in order to assist in the enforcement of such rules and regulations or the terms of this article. Until changed
or added to in the manner provided in this section, the following rules and regulations shall be applicable to taxicabs and taxicab drivers:
(1)

It shall be the duty of every person driving or operating a taxicab to be courteous; to refrain from smoking while actually
carrying passengers in his taxicab; to refrain from swearing, loud talking or boisterous conduct; to drive his motor vehicle
carefully and in full compliance with the traffic regulations of the city and orders of the police officers of the city; to promptly
answer all court notices, traffic violation notices or police notices; and to deal honestly with the public and with his employer.

(2)

Any taxicab licensee who is a member of any cooperative association shall furnish the police department with the name of
such association and shall notify the police department of any change in his membership or affiliation within 48 hours after
such change.

(3)

All taxicabs shall be kept in good running condition and clean and fit for public use and each taxicab shall be inspected at such
intervals as the chief of police may direct.

(4)

Only licensed taxicabs in such number as may be designated on any taxicab stand sign shall remain at any stand to which
such sign refers, while waiting for employment and each taxicab shall be parked in single file. The taxicab standing at the head

69/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
of such parked line shall not be permitted to refuse to carry any orderly person who offers to hire such taxicab and agrees to
pay the proper rate of fare, but any person desiring to hire any taxicab shall be free to select any taxicab he may desire on the
stand, whether it be at the head of the line or not. As the taxicabs leave the taxicab stand with passengers, those in the rear
shall move up, and any taxicab entering such stand shall enter at the rear thereof and shall move up as closely as possible to
the last cab on such stand.
(5)

No person shall charge any fare for the hire of any taxicab other than in accordance with the current schedule of rates.

(6)

No taxicab, while awaiting employment by passengers, shall stand on any public street or place other than upon a taxicab
stand; nor shall any taxicab driver seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his taxicab to and fro in a short
space before, or by otherwise interfering with, the proper and orderly access to or egress from any theater, hall, hotel, public
resort, bus station or other place of public gathering, or in any other manner obstructing or impeding traffic; but any taxicab
driver may solicit employment by driving through any public street or place without stops other than those due to traffic and
at such speed as not to interfere with or impede traffic and may pass and repass any theater, hall, hotel, public resort, bus
station or other place of public gathering, provided that after passing such public place he shall not turn and repass until he
shall have gone a distance of two blocks beyond such place.

(7)

No person shall solicit passengers for a public taxicab upon the streets of the city except the driver of the taxicab when sitting
within his vehicle. Every taxicab driver shall remain on the driver's seat or inside his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is
standing upon any taxicab stand or when actually engaged in carrying passengers, except that every taxicab driver shall be
permitted to leave his taxicab to assist passengers into or out of such taxicab. Any taxicab driver may leave his taxicab on a
taxicab stand to take care of calls of nature. During such absences his taxicab shall be parked at the rear of such taxicab
stand, and no such absence shall be longer than 30 minutes.

(8)

Any taxicab licensee may place advertising matter on or in any licensed taxicab but the form and content thereof shall be first
approved by the chief of police.

(9)

No taxicab driver shall drink any intoxicating beverage while on duty, nor immediately prior thereto.

(Code 1977, § 7.247)

Secs. 18-571—18-590. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - TAXICAB LICENSE

Sec. 18-591. - Required; certi cations.
No person shall engage in the business of operating or causing to be operated, any taxicab upon the streets, alleys or public ways of the city
without first having obtained a license for each such taxicab. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police, and
upon approval of the city council. Picking up passengers within the city shall be deemed engaging in the taxicab business, but discharging
passengers in the city, when the trip originated from a point outside the city, shall not be so construed.
(Code 1977, § 7.232)

Sec. 18-592. - New applications; determination of public necessity and convenience.
Upon application made for any new taxicab license, as distinguished from any renewal thereof, the city council shall first consider the
question of whether public convenience and necessity require the operation of such taxicab. The council shall consider the number of taxicabs
operating in the city and whether the demands of the public require additional taxicab service; traffic conditions on the streets of the city and
whether the additional taxicab service will result in a greater hazard to the public; and such other relevant facts as the council may deem
advisable. The judgment of the council on the question of public necessity and convenience shall be conclusive.
(Code 1977, § 7.233)

Sec. 18-593. - Change in taxicab ownership shall cause revocation.
When the ownership of any taxicab shall change, whether by operation of law or otherwise, the taxicab license pertaining to such taxicab shall
be automatically revoked. Any transfer of, or attempt to transfer, a taxicab license to any other person shall automatically revoke the license.
(Code 1977, § 7.234)

70/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-594. - Transfer between vehicles.
The owner of any licensed taxicab who desires to transfer such license to another vehicle owned by him, shall make application to the city
clerk on forms provided therefor, and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for, or applicable to, such transfer. Upon
approval of the chief of police, such transfer shall be granted.
(Code 1977, § 7.235)

Sec. 18-595. - Issuance.
Upon issuance of any taxicab license, the city clerk shall furnish the licensee a license for each vehicle so licensed.
(Code 1977, § 7.236)

Sec. 18-596. - Insurance.
(a)

Before any such license is issued, the applicant therefor shall furnish one or more policies of insurance, issued by responsible
insurance companies providing indemnity for the insured in the amounts specified in this section, or as changed by resolution of
the city council from time to time, and agreeing to pay, within the limits of such amounts on behalf of the insured, all sums which
the insured shall become obligated to pay by reason of the liability imposed upon the insured by law, for damages because of
bodily injury, including death, at any time resulting therefrom, or of damages to property, or both, sustained by any person other
than the employees of the insured and caused by accident, and arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of such licensed
taxicab.

(b)

The minimum amount of such insurance coverage as to any one licensed taxicab shall be:
(1)

On account of injury to, or death of, any person in any one accident .....$100,000.00

(2)

On account of any one accident resulting in injury to, or death of, more than one person .....300,000.00

(3)

On account of damage to property in any one accident .....500,000.00

Such amounts may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.
(Code 1977, § 7.237)

Sec. 18-597. - Bonds.
In lieu of insurance required by section 18-596, the licensee may furnish a surety company bond, in a form to be approved by the city attorney
in penal sums of not less for each taxicab than the amounts specified for insurance, and binding the principal and surety to the same conditions
as are required in insurance policies as set forth in section 18-596.
(Code 1977, § 7.238)

Sec. 18-598. - Cancellation notice for insurance policy or bond.
Every such insurance policy or bond shall contain a clause obligating the insurer or surety to give the city clerk, by registered mail, at least ten
days' written notice before the cancellation, expiration, lapse or other termination of each insurance policy or bond, or the withdrawal of surety
from any such bond.
(Code 1977, § 7.239)

Secs. 18-599—18-620. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - TAXICAB DRIVER LICENSE

Sec. 18-621. - Required; application; certi cation; additional requirements; applicant quali cations.
No person shall drive a taxicab on the streets of the city without first having obtained a taxicab driver license. Applications for such license
shall be made to and the licenses issued by the police department. No such license shall be granted except upon certification by the chief of
police, nor unless a photograph, a complete set of fingerprints and a copy of the driving record file from the secretary of state's office of the

71/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

applicant are on file in the noncriminal identification file of the police department. Two photographic pictures of each applicant shall be furnished
at the time of application. The size and form of such photographs shall be prescribed by the police department. That part of section 18-44
requiring licensees to carry licenses on their persons shall not apply to taxicab drivers. The license issued to a taxicab driver shall be
conspicuously displayed on the inside of the taxicab operated by him and illuminated at night. Every applicant shall be 18 years of age or over and
able to read and write. Every applicant shall furnish the police department with such information as it may require and as may be reasonably
necessary in order to investigate the background and character of the applicant. As an additional reason for refusal of certification, in the case of
taxicab drivers, the chief of police shall refuse to certify any person whose record of previous driving violations is such as to indicate that he is not
habitually a careful, skilled and prudent driver. In the discretion of the chief of police, a temporary taxicab driver license, valid for a period not to
exceed 20 days, may be issued to any applicant pending certification by him.
(Code 1977, § 7.241)

Sec. 18-622. - Physical examination.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver license, shall, at his own expense, be required to submit to a medical examination by a duly licensed
physician of his own choosing, and the results of such examination shall be reduced to writing by such physician on a form furnished by the police
department. Such report of examination signed by the physician shall be attached to the application for a taxicab driver license. Upon application
for a taxicab driver license from a person who then holds such a license, the physical examination required in this section shall be waived, unless
no such examination shall have been had, and a report thereof furnished to the city, for longer than two years immediately preceding such
application.
(Code 1977, § 7.242)

Sec. 18-623. - Misuse.
No person having a taxicab driver license shall allow any other person to use or attempt to use such license, for any purpose. No person shall
use or have in his possession while operating a taxicab in the city, any taxicab driver license which has been issued to any other person. No
taxicab licensee shall permit any person not having a taxicab driver license to operate any taxicab.
(Code 1977, § 7.243)

Secs. 18-624—18-655. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XV. - THEATERS

Sec. 18-656. - License required; exceptions.
No person shall conduct a moving picture show, vaudeville, opera house, theater or other place for the giving of plays, and other theatrical
exhibitions where an admission fee is charged, without first obtaining a license therefor to be known as a theater license. The requirements of this
section shall not be applicable to exhibitions or shows given for charity or for the benefit of schools or benevolent, educational, fraternal or
religious societies.
(Code 1977, § 7.153)

Sec. 18-657. - Inspection of movie pictures, lms or picture shows; enumeration of prohibited displays and activities.
(a)

Every person or company operating under this article and in whose place of amusement or exhibition shall be displayed moving
pictures of any character, kind or description shall present the pictures, films or plates so sought to be displayed to the chief of
police for his inspection. The chief of police shall designate a place where the inspection is to be held, and he is authorized, and it is
hereby made his duty, to inspect or cause to be inspected such pictures, plates or films. If in his judgment, using the standards set
out in this section, the motion picture or any part thereof is obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent, sadistic or masochistic, he
shall reject that motion picture or part of such motion picture and notify the person or company operating the place of amusement
or exhibition from whom the pictures, films or plates were received, that the same cannot be exhibited. The test to be applied shall
not be whether sexual desires or sexually improper thoughts would be aroused in those comprising a particular segment of the
community, the young, the immature or the highly prudish, or would leave another segment, the scientific or highly educated or
the so-called worldly wise and sophisticated, indifferent and unmoved. But such test shall be the effect of the picture considered as

72/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
a whole, not upon any particular class, but upon all those whom it is likely to reach, that is, its impact upon the average person in
the community. The picture must be judged as a whole in its entire content, not by considering detached or separate portions only,
and by the standards of the common conscience of the community of the contemporary period of the violation charged. Any
person or company who knowingly exhibits the rejected material after it has been rejected by the police chief shall, upon
conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-16
(b)

Movies, pictures or films intended primarily for dissemination to a clearly deviant sexual group, rather than the public at large, are
hereby declared to be obscene.

(c)

No child under the age of 12 years of age, unless accompanied by his parent or other suitable adult person, shall be permitted to
enter any theater or moving picture show at any hour later than will enable the child to view a full program and be out of the
theater or moving picture show by existing curfew hour. No minors under the age of 16 years shall be admitted to any theater or
moving picture show at any time during regular school hours on days on which the public and parochial schools of the city are in
session, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.

(d)

It shall be unlawful for any theater or moving picture show or the owner, operator, manager or employee thereof in connection
therewith, either directly or indirectly, to maintain, operate or carry on any lottery, game of chance, game of skill, bank night,
screens, luck-o-grams or any other games of similar nature or engage in any similar device or plan.

(Code 1977, § 7.154)

Secs. 18-658—18-690. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XVI. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(26) State

Law reference— Licensing and regulation of transient traders, MCL 445.371 et seq.

Sec. 18-691. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Temporary business means every person engaged in the retail sale and delivery of goods, wares or merchandise, unless his goods, wares or
merchandise shall have been assessed for taxation in the city during the current year.
(Code 1977, § 7.62)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 18-692. - License required; certi cations.
No person shall engage in a temporary business of selling goods, wares or merchandise at retail within the city from any lot, premises,
building, room or structure, including railroad cars, without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon
certification of the chief of police and city treasurer.
(Code 1977, § 7.61)

Sec. 18-693. - Indebtedness to the city.
No license shall be granted to any person owing any personal property taxes or other indebtedness to the city, or who contemplates using
any personal property on which personal property taxes are owing, in the operation of such business.
(Code 1977, § 7.63)

Sec. 18-694. - Bene t sales.
Any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise on behalf of and solely for the benefit of any recognized charitable or
religious purpose shall, after meeting all other requirements, be granted a license without payment of the fee as established from time to time by
resolution of the city council.

73/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

(Code 1977, § 7.64)

Sec. 18-695. - Exemption.
The operation of a business licensed under another provision of this Code shall be exempt from the requirements of this article.
(Code 1977, § 7.65)

Secs. 18-696—18-725. - Reserved.
ARTICLE XVII. - TATTOO ESTABLISHMENTS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 18-726. - Periodic inspections.
Upon issuance of a license under this article, the city health officer, the county health department or any other appropriate officer of
government shall be authorized to make such inspections as are deemed necessary for the enforcement of state and local regulations.
(Code 1977, § 7.305)

Secs. 18-727—18-750. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE

Sec. 18-751. - Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any practice, business or occupation involving tattooing within the city without a license issued
by the city.
(Code 1977, § 7.301)

Sec. 18-752. - Health approval required.
Upon application for a license to conduct tattooing, the city shall cause an investigation and report to be made by the city health officer, or in
the absence thereof, the county health department, a copy of which shall be provided to the applicant. The applicant shall conform to any
recommendations made by such health official prior to the approval of a license. The applicant may thereafter be referred to as the "licensee."
(Code 1977, § 7.302)

Sec. 18-753. - Other approvals.
The city shall have the right to require approval of the fire marshal, or any other such approval as the city shall deem necessary.
(Code 1977, § 7.304)

Sec. 18-754. - Denial.
If the health official finds good and sufficient reason to recommend denial of a license, the city shall notify the applicant in writing that a
license will not be issued and of the reason therefor.
(Code 1977, § 7.303)

Sec. 18-755. - Power of suspension.
If at any time the licensee is deemed to be in violation of any law, rule or regulation of the state, county or city, or fails to comply with the
recommendations thereof, the city may suspend the license heretofore granted. Upon notice to the licensee, he shall forthwith cease operation.
(Code 1977, § 7.306)

74/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 18-756. - Fees.
The fee payable upon application for a license shall be as set by resolution of the city council from time to time.
(Code 1977, § 7.307)

Chapter 22 - CABLE TELECOMMUNICATIONS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(27) Cross

reference— Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78.

Sec. 22-1. - Provisions saved from repeal.
Chapter 27, Cable Television of the 1977 Code, is saved from repeal. The city is working on a new ordinance because of the many changes
made by the 1996 Federal Telecommunications Act.
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(28) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2.

(28) State

Law reference— Michigan election law, MCL 168.1 et seq.

Sec. 26-1. - Nominating petitions.
Nominating petitions shall be filed with the city clerk between the 35th day preceding the regular city election and 5:00 p.m. on the 30th day
preceding the regular city election, or on the corresponding days preceding any special election to fill any vacancy.
(Code 1977, § 1.36)

Sec. 26-2. - Precinct boundaries.
The territory comprising the city shall consist of two election precincts which precincts are hereby established:
(1)

Precinct 1. Precinct 1 shall consist of the following: Beginning at the intersection of North Saginaw Street and the north
corporation line of the city, thence west along the north corporation line of the city to the west corporation line of the city,
thence south along the west corporation line of the city to the south corporation line of the city, thence east along the south
corporation line of the city to a point directly south of the place of beginning; and thence north to the point of beginning, and
shall include all properties adjacent thereto which have been annexed to the city since June 11, 1956.

(2)

Precinct 2. Precinct 2 shall consist of all of the city not included in precinct 1, together with all properties adjacent thereto
which have been annexed to the city since June 11, 1956.

(Code 1977, §§ 1.30—1.32)

Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(29) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous

provisions, ch. 50.
Sec. 30-1. - Authority of city manager.

75/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The city manager, with the approval of the city council, is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization for emergency
preparedness, utilizing to the fullest extent the existing agencies within the city. The city manager shall be at the head of all emergency
preparedness forces and, working through a director, shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operation.
(Code 1977, § 1.241)

Sec. 30-2. - Organization.
The organization shall consist of the following:
(1)

An office of emergency preparedness within the administrative service of the city government and under the direction of the
city manager. There shall be an executive head of emergency preparedness, who shall be known as the director of the office
of emergency preparedness, and such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of
the organization.

(2)

The employees, equipment and facilities of all city departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for, or
adaptable to, emergency preparedness and designated by the city manager, with the approval of the city council, to
participate in the emergency preparedness activity. Duties assigned to a city department shall be analogous to the normal
duties of the department.

(3)

Volunteer persons and agencies offering service to, and accepted by, the heads of the various departments of interest and
subject to the final approval of the director.

(Code 1977, § 1.242)

Sec. 30-3. - Director.
The city manager, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint a director who shall be a person experienced in public safety and disaster
relief work and well versed and trained in planning operations involving the activities of many different agencies which will operate to protect the
public health, safety and welfare in the event of damage from enemy action or natural disaster.
(Code 1977, § 1.243)

Sec. 30-4. - Emergency powers and duties of the mayor.
The mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified in this section. Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require,
that the mayor invoke such power and authority, he shall, as soon as possible, convene the city council to perform its legislative and
administrative powers as the situation demands, and shall report to that body relative to emergency preparedness activities. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the city council, unless specifically provided in this section.
(Code 1977, § 1.244)

Sec. 30-5. - Assembly of emergency preparedness forces.
Under the following circumstance the mayor may assemble and utilize the emergency preparedness forces and he may prescribe the
conditions of their use:
(1)

Whenever on the basis of information received from authoritative sources, he feels that attack on the city is impending or
imminent.

(2)

During any period of attack on the city and thereafter so long as he shall deem it necessary. During any period when attack on
the city is imminent, or when the city has been subjected to attack or during any period of natural disaster, the mayor may
promulgate such reasonable regulations as he deems necessary to protect life and property and preserve critical resources.
Such regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a.

Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles in order to facilitate the work of emergency
preparedness forces, or to facilitate the mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the city.

b.

Regulations designed to lessen the hazard to property and citizens from attack. Such regulations shall include blackouts
and other measures to reduce vulnerability of the city during any period of natural disaster.

(Code 1977, § 1.245)

76/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 30-6. - Aid outside city.
The mayor shall order emergency preparedness forces to the aid of other communities when required in accordance with the statutes of the
state. He may request the state or political subdivisions of the state to send aid to the city in case of natural disaster or in case of disaster resulting
from attack, when conditions in the city are beyond the control of the local emergency preparedness forces.
(Code 1977, § 1.246)

Sec. 30-7. - Power to contract.
When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of attack relief activity, the mayor may, until the city council convenes, waive
procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations,
the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities and the
expenditure of existing funds, and the city council is also empowered to waive any such procedure and formalities.
(Code 1977, § 1.247)

Sec. 30-8. - Natural disasters.
Whenever the mayor finds that any condition in the city has attained, or threatens to attain, the proportions of a natural disaster, he may
assemble and utilize emergency preparedness forces and he may prescribe the manner and conditions of their use. He may, when he deems it in
the public interest, send the emergency preparedness forces of the city to the aid of other communities stricken by natural disaster when such
disaster is affecting the national defense effort, or is seriously affecting the health, welfare or security of the stricken community; provided,
however, that after the city council convenes, the further continuance of any such natural disaster relief and the period thereof shall be subject to
the action of the city council.
(Code 1977, § 1.248)

Sec. 30-9. - Regulations delegating powers.
The mayor, with the approval of the city council, may make regulations permitting the director to assemble and utilize the emergency
preparedness forces and request disaster relief aid as prescribed in sections 30-5, 30-7 and 30-8, and he may, with the approval of the city council,
make regulations permitting the conduct of practice air raid alerts or tests of the emergency preparedness organization. Such regulations shall be
filed with the city council and shall be binding upon the emergency preparedness forces when they have been approved by resolution of the
council.
(Code 1977, § 1.249)

Sec. 30-10. - Municipal or private liability.
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental function for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the
city nor its agents and representatives, nor any person carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result of such
activity.
(Code 1977, § 1.250)

Sec. 30-11. - Violation of chapter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or of the regulations issued pursuant to the authority
contained in this chapter, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency preparedness organization in the enforcement of
this chapter or any regulations issued under this chapter.
(Code 1977, § 1.251)

Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):

77/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

(30) Cross

reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; dangerous buildings, § 14-61 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch.

42; parks and recreation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; subdivisions and land division, ch. 70;
utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82.
(30) State

Law reference— Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL

Sec. 34-31. - Local enforcing agency.
The city is hereby designated as a local enforcing agency within the municipal limits of the city as provided by the soil erosion and
sedimentation control act, MCL 324.9101 et seq.
(Code 1977, § 8.401)

Sec. 34-32. - Rules adopted.
The city adopts by reference the latest rules promulgated by the state department of natural resources and the department of agriculture
pursuant to part 91 of the natural resources and environmental protection act, Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994 (MCL 324.101 et
seq.), as amended. Such rules shall be available for public distribution, at reasonable charge, with not less than ten copies to be available for
public inspection at the office of the city clerk.
(Code 1977, § 8.402)

Sec. 34-33. - Submission of plans.
Before the commencement of any construction project in the city involving one or more acres of land, or any construction project within 500
feet of a lake or stream or any watercourses and storm sewers discharging into the stream, an erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be
submitted to the city pursuant to and in conformity with the standards and specifications developed by the Shiawassee Soil Conservation District.
(Code 1977, § 8.403)

Sec. 34-34. - Permits and fees.
Upon the filing of the application and plans and payment of the fees to the city in accordance with the fee schedule to be adopted by the city
council, the submitted plan shall be reviewed and approved and the permit shall be issued, provided the plans meet standards, adopted by
reference in section 34-32, to prevent soil erosion at all major construction sites in the city in excess of one acre or within 500 feet of a lake or
stream, or any watercourse and storm sewers discharging into the stream.
(Code 1977, § 8.404)

Sec. 34-35. - Conditions for issuance of permit; bond.
As a condition for the issuance of a permit, an applicant shall deposit with the city clerk in the form of cash, a certified check or an irrevocable
bank letter of credit, whichever the applicant selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the city council in an amount not less than the proposed cost
of the installation of protective or corrective measures as may be required by the county or local enforcing agency, as certified by the city
engineer.
(Code 1977, § 8.405)

Sec. 34-36. - Site inspection.

78/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The local enforcing agency shall inspect the construction site at least once at the commencement, once during construction and at the
completion of the project and shall issue cease and desist orders immediately upon a discovery of any violation of the rules adopted by reference
in section 34-32.
(Code 1977, § 8.406)

Sec. 34-37. - Appeal.
When a person believes that an error has been made by the city enforcing agency in any of its orders, requirements or decisions under this
article, he may appeal to the city council. The city council shall have the power to hear the appeal and may amend, alter or change the city's
enforcing agency's requirements or decision so that it is consistent with the general purpose and intent of part 91 of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts
of Michigan of 1994 (MCL 324.101 et seq.), as amended.
(Code 1977, § 8.407)

Secs. 34-38—34-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - JUNK VEHICLES

FOOTNOTE(S):
(31)

Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74.

Sec. 34-71. - Junk cars; required to be in operable condition.
(a)

Any motor vehicle must be in operating condition and eligible for use in accordance with the requirements of the Michigan Vehicle
Code being Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.), as amended; provided, however, that any such
vehicle will be permitted not to comply with these requirements for any period not to exceed 30 days.

(b)

These minimum conditions, except for any 30-day period, will include, but not be limited to, an engine that runs, four wheels and
four pneumatic tires capable of holding air, and a working battery.

(c)

Any person enumerated in this section who, under special conditions of hardship, or for valid reasons such as the preservation of a
historic or classic vehicle, may request an extension of the 30-day limitation by filing a timely request with the city council. The city
council may at its discretion, after review of all the circumstances and after holding any hearings which it deems necessary, grant
the applicant any reasonable extension of time.

(Ord. No. 83-6, § 9.221, 8-15-83)

Sec. 34-72. - Storage of partially dismantled, inoperable or wrecked motor vehicles.
(a)

No partially dismantled, inoperable, or wrecked motor vehicles shall be stored out of doors within the city for a period of time in
excess of seven days unless within an approved storage area, which has been approved by the planning commission after
presentation of a site plan to the planning commission.

(b)

The city manager shall establish rules and regulations for the storage of such vehicles during periods awaiting repair or claim by
the owner of such vehicle, which rules and regulations shall become effective 20 days after approval by the city council, and copies
of which shall be delivered to each business in the city engaged in the repair or storage of motor vehicles. Copies of such rules shall
also be available to the public at city hall during regular business hours.

(Ord. No. 87-1, § 9.222, 12-15-86)

Sec. 34-73. - Application of article.
This article shall apply in all areas except where the storage of junk automobiles is in a completely enclosed building or is by a licensed junk
dealer.
(Code 1977, § 9.222)

Sec. 34-74. - Penalty for violation of article.

79/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or imprisoned in the
county jail for not more than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court.
(Code 1977, § 9.223)

Secs. 34-75—34-105. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES

Sec. 34-106. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Nuisance means whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes
with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property.
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 34-107. - Committing, creating or maintaining.
Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provisions of this chapter. No person shall commit, create
or maintain any nuisance.
(Code 1977, § 9.1)

Secs. 34-108—34-140. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - NOISE

FOOTNOTE(S):
(32) Cross

reference— Disturbing the peace by loud, vulgar or boisterous conduct, § 50-146.

Sec. 34-141. - Prohibited acts.
Each of the following acts is declared unlawful and prohibited, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
(1)

Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb
the comfort or repose of any person.

(2)

Construction noises. The erection (including excavating therefor), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the
excavation of streets and highways except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, unless a permit is first
obtained from the city manager.

(3)

Sound amplifiers. Use of any loudspeaker, amplifier or other instrument or device producing sound which is cast upon the
public street, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle, for any purpose except by speakers in the course of a public
address which is noncommercial in character and when so used shall be subject to the following restrictions:
a.

The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.

b.

Operations are permitted for four hours each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays when no operations shall be
authorized. The permitted four hours of operation shall be between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. and between
the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m.

c.

Sound amplifying equipment mounted on vehicles shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such
equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten miles per hour except when such truck is stopped or
impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic, the sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one
minute at each such stop.

80/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
d.

Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools, churches or courthouses.

e.

The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound
amplifying equipment and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to
persons within the area of audibility.

f.
(4)

No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated with an excess of 15 watts of power in the last stage of amplification.

Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine
or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom.

(5)

Handling merchandise. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.

(6)

Blowers. The discharge into the open air of air from any noise creating blower or power fan unless the noise from such blower
or fan is muffled sufficiently to deaden such noise.

(7)

Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner.

(8)

Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while
not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of control, or to give warning of
intent to get under motion, or in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the
vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the
sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.

(9)

Radio and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television set, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a
manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or the making of any such noise
at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any school, place of worship or office, or in
any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.

(10)

Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing or the making of any other loud noise on the public
street, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or the making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any school, place of worship or office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.

(11)

Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
fire or danger.

(Code 1977, § 9.25)

Sec. 34-142. - Exceptions to section 34-141.
None of the terms or prohibitions of section 34-141 shall apply to or be enforced against:
(1)

Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance, while engaged upon emergency business.

(2)

Highway maintenance and construction. Excavation or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city or the
state, during the night, when the public safety, welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during
the day.

(3)

Churches and religious institutions. Any church or religious institution may play chimes or church bells between 8:00 a.m. and
9:30 p.m. on any day of the week and carillons or organs over outside amplifiers between 9:00 a.m. and 9:30 p.m. on any day
of the week.

(Code 1977, § 9.26; Ord. No. 83-8, 11-21-83)

Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(33) Cross

reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; emergency preparedness, ch. 30; open fires in parks, § 54-65; hydrant use, § 78-

89.
(33) State

Law reference— State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; fire protection act, MCL 41.801 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240

et seq.

81/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 38-1. - False alarm.
No person shall willfully turn in, sound or cause to be communicated to the fire department, a false alarm of fire.
(Code 1977, § 9.90)

Sec. 38-2. - Injury to re equipment.
No person shall willfully molest, take for his own private use, or damage in any manner, any firefighting equipment or apparatus or anything
pertaining to the firefighting system, or drive any vehicle upon or against any hose or equipment of the fire department.
(Code 1977, § 9.91)

Cross reference— Offenses against property, § 50-71 et seq.
Sec. 38-3. - Fire hydrants—Obstruction.
No person shall place any obstruction whatever, nor shall any person responsible for such obstruction permit it to remain, within 15 feet of
any fire hydrant.
(Code 1977, § 9.92)

Sec. 38-4. - Same—Openings.
No person, except members of the fire department or of the water department, shall use any fire hydrant except in case of emergency,
without first securing permission from the water department for such use; and paying or agreeing to pay for the water to be used. In no case shall
any wrench or tool be used on any fire hydrant other than a regulation fire department wrench.
(Code 1977, § 9.93)

Sec. 38-5. - Fireworks.
Within the city limits a person shall not sell or retail; offer for sale at retail; expose for sale at retail; keep with an intent to sell at retail; give,
furnish, transport, use, explode or cause to explode any firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, day-glow bombs or other fireworks
of like construction containing more than 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per device, nor any fireworks containing an explosive or inflammable
compound or a tablet or other device commonly used and sold as fireworks containing nitrates, chlorates, oxalates, sulphides of lead, barium,
antimony, arsenic, mercury, nitro-glycerine, phosphorus or a compound containing these or other modern explosives.
(Code 1977, § 9.104)

Cross reference— Discharge, display or possession of fireworks, § 50-182.
Sec. 38-6. - Fire exits.
The following rules relative to passageways, stairs and fire exits shall be applicable to all public buildings, places of assembly, commercial and
business buildings, hotels, apartment buildings, lodginghouses, tourist homes and all other buildings except private dwellings, and except as
otherwise expressly limited in this section to a particular type of building as follows:
(1)

No fire escape, stairway, balcony or ladder on any building shall be obstructed, out of repair or maintained in a hazardous
condition. Doors and windows leading to any fire escape shall open easily from the inside.

(2)

No combustible material shall be stored, placed or kept under or upon any passageway, stairs or elevator shaft, nor shall any
such material be stored, placed or kept in any other part of any building in such a position as to obstruct or render hazardous
egress therefrom.

(3)

All doors, hallways and stairways shall be unobstructed at all times.

(4)

In all theaters, churches, schools and other places of public assembly, no door, aisle or passageway shall be obstructed with
any furniture or article; nor shall any person sit or stand or be permitted to sit or stand in any aisle, or in any exit or

82/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
passageway; and all exits and the sidewalks leading therefrom shall be unobstructed while such places of public assembly are
in use.
(5)

No person shall do any act which causes any violation of any of the rules set forth in this section, nor shall any person owning
any building or in charge thereof, as agent, employee or otherwise permit any of such rules to be violated.

(Code 1977, § 9.96)

Sec. 38-7. - Nuisances.
It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to burn or allow to be burned, at any time or place, any materials of any kind which exude
obnoxious odors, or when such fire emits sparks or burning embers upon adjoining, adjacent, neighboring or nearby premises.
(Code 1977, § 9.98)

Sec. 38-8. - Regulation of ammable liquids.
The use, storage and processing of flammable liquids shall conform to the flammable liquids regulations of the state fire marshal, adopted
November 29, 1955, effective February 15, 1956. Any person violating any of such regulations or failing to comply therewith, shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
(Code 1977, § 9.100)

Sec. 38-9. - Special permits.
Special permits shall be issued by the fire chief for the use, occupancy and operation of certain dangerous and hazardous businesses as
specified in this section. Any permit may be revoked at any time by the fire chief or his assistants for violation of any pertinent law or provision of
this Code. Permits are required to:
(1)

Transport, use or store explosives.

(2)

Handle, use or store flammable liquids in quantities in excess of 500 gallons.

(3)

Operate spray rooms or booths.

(4)

Store hazardous chemicals.

(5)

Fumigate buildings.

(Code 1977, § 9.101)

Sec. 38-10. - Blasting.
No person shall blast or carry on any blasting operation without first having obtained a written permit from the city manager. Before any such
permit is issued, the applicant therefor shall file with the city clerk a bond or policy of insurance in the amount specified by the city manager,
which amount shall be reasonably commensurate with the risk of damage to property and injury or death to persons arising out of the proposed
blasting operation. Such policy of insurance shall indemnify the applicant, and such bond shall be conditioned upon payment by the applicant of
all sums which the applicant shall become obligated to pay by reason of the liability imposed upon him by law, for damages because of bodily
injury, including death at any time resulting therefrom, or for damage to property, or both, sustained by any person and arising out of the blasting
operations.
(Code 1977, § 9.102)

Sec. 38-11. - Burning.
No person shall burn any type of waste material, leaves, debris, etc., within the limits of the city, except within an approved incinerator
installed within a building.
(Code 1977, § 9.103)

Sec. 38-12. - Fire inspection.

83/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The fire chief is hereby empowered to enter at any and all reasonable times upon and into any premises, building or structure for the purpose
of examining and inspecting the building or structure, to ascertain the conditions thereof with regard to fire hazards and the condition, size,
arrangement and efficiency of any and all appliances for firefighting. The fire chief is hereby empowered to appoint members of the regular
personnel of the fire department to make the inspection provided in this section, who shall report in writing the results of the inspection to the
fire chief and who are hereby empowered to make such written orders for the correction of any hazard or deficiency in firefighting appliances as
the fire chief is authorized to make. Every order made by the fire chief or by authorized members of the fire department shall be promptly obeyed
and complied with.
(Code 1977, § 9.94)

Sec. 38-13. - Open res.
(a)

Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Open fire means a fire in which any material is burned in the open or in a receptacle or pit other than a fireplace or grill constructed for the
cooking of food for human consumption.

Smoke violation means smoke drifting or blowing onto property of others for a period in excess of ten minutes.
(b)

Prohibited. There shall be no open fires permitted within the city limits.

(c)

Exceptions to prohibition. Exceptions to the prohibition contained in subsection (b) of this section are as follows:
(1)

Open fires may be set in performance of an official duty for the instruction or training of public firefighters, or to abate or
prevent a fire hazard which cannot be abated by any other means.

(2)

Fires may be used for cooking purposes, outside in properly constructed fireplaces or grills, provided no smoke violation or
nuisance is created.

(3)

Open fires may be set for recreational purposes, such as campfires, provided no smoke violation or nuisance is created.

(Ord. No. 82-5, § 9.97, 8-16-82)

Sec. 38-14. - Starting res by smoking.
It shall be unlawful for any person in smoking or attempting to light or to smoke a cigarette, cigar or pipe, to set fire to any bed, bedding,
furniture, curtains or draperies in any hotel, motel, lodginghouse or tourist home in the city.
(Code 1977, § 9.99)

Cross reference— Smoking regulations, § 42-66 et seq.; similar provisions, § 50-181.
Secs. 38-15—38-45. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE

Sec. 38-46. - Adoption.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city, being marked and designated as "The BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code, 9th edition, 1993," as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc. is adopted as the fire code
for structures and premises as provided in this article, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such
BOCA National Fire Prevention Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 38-47.
Sec. 38-47. - Establishment of limits.
The limits referred to in section F-3003.2 of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code/1993 in which the storage of explosive materials is
prohibited are hereby established as follows: all property within city limits.

84/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Secs. 38-48—38-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT

FOOTNOTE(S):
(34) Cross

reference— Administrative service, § 2-36 et seq.

Sec. 38-81. - Administered by re chief; duties generally.
The fire department shall be headed by the fire chief, who shall be charged with the prevention and extinguishment of fires, the protection of
life and property against fire, the removal of fire hazards, the performance of other public services of an emergency nature assigned to it and the
conducting of an educational fire prevention program.
(Code 1977, § 1.80)

Sec. 38-82. - Rules.
The fire chief shall adopt rules and regulations for the government of the department, subject to the approval of the city manager, which shall
be entered in a book of fire department rules and which may be changed and repealed by the fire chief upon notice to and approval by the city
manager. Such rules and regulations shall designate the chain of command for the department so that in the absence or disability of the chief, the
responsibility for the operation of the department shall immediately and automatically be vested in the next ranking officer or member of the
department present.
(Code 1977, § 1.81)

Sec. 38-83. - Equipment; maintenance and care.
The fire chief shall be responsible for the maintenance and care of all property and equipment used by the fire department.
(Code 1977, § 1.82)

Sec. 38-84. - Enforcement of re laws.
It shall be the duty of the fire chief to enforce all state laws and provisions of this Code governing the following:
(1)

The prevention of fires;

(2)

The storage and use of explosives and flammables;

(3)

The maintenance of fire alarm systems, both automatic and private, and all fire extinguishing equipment;

(4)

The maintenance and use of fire escapes;

(5)

The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards in all buildings and structures;

(6)

The maintenance and adequacy of fire exits from factories, schools, hotels, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters and all
other places in which numbers of persons work or congregate for any purpose.

(Code 1977, § 1.83)

Sec. 38-85. - Other duties of chief.
The fire chief shall perform the following duties:
(1)

Investigate the origin, cause and circumstances of all fires;

(2)

Issue all orders necessary for the enforcement of state laws and provisions of this Code;

(3)

Require and supervise from time to time fire drills from all schools and educational institutions as required by law.

(Code 1977, § 1.84)

Chapter 42 - HEALTH AND SANITATION

85/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
FOOTNOTE(S):

(35) Cross

reference— Animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; dangerous buildings, § 14-61 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; solid

waste, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 78.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

FOOTNOTE(S):
(36) Cross

reference— Administrative service, § 2-36 et seq.

Sec. 42-31. - Administered by health o cer; powers, duties and functions.
The department of health shall be headed by the health officer who shall have charge and control of all functions involved in protecting and
preserving the public health; he shall have all power provided by the statutes of the state, the city Charter, or provisions of this Code relating to
the public health. Until otherwise provided, the duties and functions of the department of health shall be performed by the county health
department and the director of such department shall be health officer of the city.
(Code 1977, § 1.110)

Sec. 42-32. - Communicable disease control.
The department of health shall exercise the power of quarantine and detention and shall adopt such other measures as will prevent the
spreading, or aid in the prevention of, communicable diseases.
(Code 1977, § 1.111)

Sec. 42-33. - Sanitation.
The department of health shall be responsible for the inspection and supervision of the preparation, manufacture, storage and sale of all
articles and commodities intended for human consumption and the regulation of all matters pertaining to sanitation conditions affecting the
public health.
(Code 1977, § 1.112)

Secs. 42-34—42-65. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - SMOKING

FOOTNOTE(S):
(37) Cross

reference— Starting fires by smoking, §§ 38-14, 50-181.

(37) State

Law reference— Smoking in public places, MCL 333.12601 et seq.

Sec. 42-66. - Purpose of article.
The intent of this article is to eliminate the health hazards of smoking to all individuals while working in the Durand City Hall and Durand
Memorial Library, buildings owned and operated by the city. The adverse health effects of smoking to smokers and of so-called "secondary" or
"passive" smoke to nonsmokers are well documented by the medical community. Such adverse health effects threaten the general health and
well-being of individuals, increase health care and insurance costs to the city, and decrease worker attendance and productivity. The general

86/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

irritation produced by secondary smoke causes frustration among workers and users of city buildings and generally interferes with the quality of
life therein. The smoking ban established in this article will eliminate the irritating and adverse effects of smoking, thereby promoting productivity,
health and the quality of life within these city buildings, as well as lowering health care and insurance costs.
(Ord. of 2-21-94, § 1)

Sec. 42-67. - Prohibited in city-owned buildings; exception; ne.
Smoking is prohibited in all buildings owned by the city, with the exception of Durand Union Station. Any person smoking in a city-owned
building shall be subject to a fine in an amount up to $250.00.
(Ord. of 2-21-94, § 2)

Sec. 42-68. - Notice and posting.
Section 42-67 shall be posted by the city clerk at all public entrances to all buildings owned or leased by the city. The absence of a posting,
however, shall not bar enforcement of this article.
(Ord. of 2-21-94, § 3)

Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT
FOOTNOTE(S):
(38)

Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; emergency preparedness, ch. 30; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles,

ch. 74.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 46-1. - Stop and search.
(a)

A peace officer may stop a person whom he reasonably suspects is committing, has committed or is about to commit a felony and
may demand of him his name, address and an explanation of his actions.

(b)

When a peace officer has so stopped a person and reasonably suspects that his own life or limb are in danger, he may search the
person.

(c)

If the peace officer finds a weapon or any other thing on such person, the possession of which may constitute a crime, he may take
it and keep it until completion of the questioning, at which time he shall return it, if lawfully possessed, or arrest the person.

(Code 1977, § 9.65)

Secs. 46-2—46-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT

FOOTNOTE(S):
(39)

Cross reference— Administrative service, § 2-36 et seq.

Sec. 46-31. - Administered by police chief; duties generally.
The department of police shall be headed by the police chief, who shall be the commanding officer of the police force. He shall direct the
police work of the city and be responsible for the enforcement of law and order.
(Code 1977, § 1.70)

Sec. 46-32. - Functions.
The police work of the city shall consist of the following functions:

87/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
(1)

The operation of motor and nonmotor patrol units for routine investigations and the general maintenance of law and order.

(2)

The maintenance of the central complaint desk at central police headquarters, the maintaining and supervising of police
records, criminal and noncriminal identification, property identification, custody of property and the operation of detention
quarters.

(3)

The investigation of crimes, the elimination of illegal liquor, traffic and vice, and the preparation of evidence for the
prosecution of criminal cases and offenses in violation of this Code.

(4)

The prevention and control of juvenile delinquency, the removal of crime hazards and the coordination of community
agencies interested in crime prevention.

(5)

The control of traffic, traffic educational programs, school patrols, coordination of traffic violation prosecutions, issuance of
operators' licenses, the maintenance and erection of traffic signs and the painting of street and crosswalk lanes.

(Code 1977, § 1.71)

Sec. 46-33. - Rules.
The chief of police may prescribe rules for the government of police officers of the city, subject to approval by the city manager, which shall be
entered in a book of police department rules and orders and may be amended or revoked by the police chief upon written notice to the city
manager. Such rules may establish one or more divisions within the police department, each of which divisions may be charged with performing
one or more of the functions of the police department enumerated in section 46-32. Any such divisions shall be supervised by an officer of the
police department, who shall be responsible for the particular functions of the police department assigned to the particular division supervised by
him. It shall be the duty of all members of the police force to comply with such rules and orders while effective.
(Code 1977, § 1.72)

Sec. 46-34. - Acting chief.
In case of the absence from the city of the police chief, or his disability or inability from any cause to act as police chief, the city manager shall
designate and appoint some other member of the police department to act as chief during such absence or disability.
(Code 1977, § 1.73)

Sec. 46-35. - Monthly reports.
The chief of police shall report monthly to the city manager all arrests made by the department, the disposition of persons arrested, the
number of persons remaining in confinement for ordinance violations, and such other information as the city manager shall require.
(Code 1977, § 1.74)

Sec. 46-36. - Appointment of special police o cers.
The chief of police is authorized to appoint special police officers when in his judgment the emergency and necessity therefor may exist, but
such appointments shall not continue in effect for a period longer than ten days unless confirmed by the city manager.
(Code 1977, § 1.75)

Sec. 46-37. - Lost and stolen property.
The chief of police is hereby authorized to act as custodian for, and to dispose of, lost and stolen property as provided in this section:
(1)

He shall prepare a list of such property annually and shall request authority from the council to dispose of such property.

(2)

If the council approves of the request by resolution, he shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the
county at least five days before the sale. The notice shall describe the property and shall state the time and place of public
sale at which the property may be purchased by the highest bidder.

(3)

Until the date of the sale, upon proving ownership, the owner may claim the property at the chief's office and the sale as to
such property shall be cancelled.

(4)

Receipts from the sale shall be deposited with the city treasurer and, after deducting the costs of the sale, shall be deposited
to the credit of the city general fund.

88/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
(5)

If within six months of any sale an owner of property sold shall file a claim and prove his ownership of such property sold, the co
the city treasurer to pay the amount received from the sale to the owner. No sums shall be paid if claim is not made within six m
date of sale.

(6)

The chief of police or anyone acting under authority of this section and disposing of property in the manner provided in this
section shall not be liable to the owner thereof.

(Code 1977, § 1.76)

Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(40) Cross

reference— Emergency preparedness, ch. 30; law enforcement, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 50-1. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Public place means any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any
other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access.
(Code 1977, § 9.61)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 50-2. - Spitting.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to spit on any sidewalk or on the floor or seat of any public assemblage.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(30))

Sec. 50-3. - Begging.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to beg in any public place.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(6))

Sec. 50-4. - Prowling.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to prowl about any private premises of any person in the nighttime, without the authority or the
permission of the owner of such premises.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(29))

Sec. 50-5. - Obstruction of streets and sidewalks by playing ball or collecting in groups.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to play any ball game in any public street or upon any public sidewalk so as to obstruct traffic, or
to obstruct traffic on any street or sidewalk by collecting in groups for any purpose whatsoever.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(18))

Secs. 50-6—50-40. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS

FOOTNOTE(S):

89/173

7/12/2019
(41) Cross

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
reference— Administration, ch. 2.

Sec. 50-41. - Obstructing or resisting police or peace o cers.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to obstruct, resist, hinder or oppose any member of the police force, or any peace officer in the
discharge of his duties as such.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(27))

Sec. 50-42. - False alarms for re, burglary or security purposes.
(a)

Public purpose. The city council does hereby declare that false alarms for fire, burglar or security purposes constitute a threat to
public health and safety by diverting emergency services of the city from legitimate public safety demands. The council further finds
that the sounding of false alarms constitutes a public nuisance and that responding to a false alarm is an unwarranted expense to a
public body.

(b)

Violation. It is deemed to be unlawful for any person, business, corporation, partnership, association, company, vehicle owner or
other legal entity to intentionally or unintentionally sound an audible fire, burglary or security alarm or to emanate an electronic
notice to an alarm system monitoring company for emergency response when there is no legitimate purpose for such alarm.

(c)

Enforcement. This section is to be enforced on the following basis:
(1)

Upon the first occurrence of a false alarm from a specific home, building, business location or automobile, the city manager
shall direct a letter to be mailed to the person, business, corporation, partnership, association, company, vehicle owner or
other legal entity deemed to be responsible for the false alarm. The letter shall enclose a copy of this section and shall be sent
by regular mail. No fine or penalty shall be assessed for a first occurrence. Failure to mail the appropriate letter or failure to
receive the letter shall not be grounds to avoid the enhanced penalties provided for below.

(2)

Upon a second occurrence in a calendar year, the person, business, corporation, partnership, association, company, vehicle
owner or other legal entity shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The fine for such a violation is $100.00 plus
reimbursement of actual costs incurred by the city in responding to the false alarm.

(3)

Upon a third or subsequent occurrence the person, business, corporation, partnership, association, company, vehicle owner
or other legal entity shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine no less than $100.00 and no greater than $500.00
or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or a combination of such fine and jail term. In addition,
the court shall order restitution in the amount of the actual costs incurred by the city in responding to the false alarm.

Secs. 50-43—50-70. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY

FOOTNOTE(S):
(42) Cross

reference— Injury to fire equipment, § 38-2; injury to park property, § 54-61; injury to water service facilities, § 78-91.

Sec. 50-71. - Larceny.
(a)

Simple larceny. Any person who shall commit the offense of simple larceny, by stealing the property of another, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. This offense shall include any act of taking which is actual or constructive, without permission and with intent to
deprive the rightful owner of the property or its use.

(b)

Fraudulent procurement of goods or services. Any person who shall request and receive any goods or services from a merchant or
proprietor of a business and leave without paying for such goods or services, except when credit is given therefor by express
agreement, with the intent to defraud the merchant or proprietor, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(c)

Penalty for violation of section. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
may be fined up to $100.00 and/or imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both.

(Ord. of 1-20-92, §§ 9.300—9.302)

Sec. 50-72. - Littering of streets.

90/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to place, deposit, throw, scatter or leave in any street, alley or public place, or on the private
property of another, any refuse, waste, garbage, dead animal, washwater or other noxious or unsightly material. No person shall place, deposit,
throw, scatter or leave in any street, alley or public place, any tacks, screws, nails, glass, metal scraps, metal shavings or scrap metal in any other
form. No person shall convey or transport junk, broken glass or scrap metal in any other form over the public streets and alleys of the city unless
the same shall be contained in a body, box or other receptacle, which is so constructed that it is impossible for any such junk, glass or metal to fall
through such receptacle, or off or over the sides of the receptacle, onto the public streets and alleys of the city.
(Code 1977, § 9.12)

Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 58.
Sec. 50-73. - Destroying or defacing public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his own, or
any public school building, or any public building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, streetlight, street sign, traffic control device, railroad sign or
signal, parking meter or shade tree belonging to the city or located in the public places of the city, or make or post handbills on, or in any manner
mar the walls of, any public building, or fence, tree or pole within the city, or damage, destroy, take or meddle with any property belonging to the
city, or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed, or stored, without proper authority.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(31))

Sec. 50-74. - Bill posting.
(a)

Public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement or any
other matter upon any lamppost, electric light, railway, telegraph or telephone pole, shade tree or fire hydrant; or on anything
within any park. Public officers posting any notice required or permitted by law shall be excepted from the provisions of this
subsection.

(b)

Private places. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement or other
matter upon any house, wall, fence, gate, post or tree, without first having obtained the written permission of the owner or
occupants of the premises and having complied with all provisions of this Code pertaining thereto.

(c)

Handbills. It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or distribute on or along any public street or municipally owned parking lot,
or distribute or place, or cause to be distributed or placed, on or in any motor vehicle on any public street or municipally owned
parking lot in the city, any commercial literature, advertising material, commercial handbill, or other advertising paper; provided,
however, that nothing shall legally prevent an enforcing officer from attaching a violation notice on any such motor vehicle;
provided further, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the advertising material of religious, fraternal or charitable
organizations. Any merchant who advertises his goods, wares or merchandise by causing such advertising material to be scattered
or distributed on or along any public street or municipally owned parking lot or placed on or fastened to a motor vehicle located in
any public street or municipally owned parking lot in the city shall be guilty of a violation of this Code.

(Code 1977, §§ 9.18—9.20)

Secs. 50-75—50-105. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON

Sec. 50-106. - Accosting or molesting others.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to improperly, lewdly or wrongfully accost, ogle, insult, swear at or use profane language to any
person or annoy, follow, pursue, lay hands on, or by any gesture, movement of body or otherwise wrongfully molest any person in any public
place or public vehicle.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(13))

Sec. 50-107. - Window peeping, spying or eavesdropping.

91/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

It shall be unlawful for any person to window peep, spy upon or eavesdrop at or on any private residence in the city, or upon any hotel, tourist
court, apartment or trailer house, whether such private residence, hotel, tourist court, apartment or trailer house is occupied by people or not. It
shall not be a defense that such window peeper, eavesdropper or spyer was not trespassing upon private property at the time of such window
peeping, eavesdropping and spying.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(5))

Secs. 50-108—50-140. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE

Sec. 50-141. - Public intoxication.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to be intoxicated or under the influence of any narcotic drug in a public place and:
(1)

Endanger directly the safety of another person or of property; or

(2)

Act in a manner that causes a public disturbance.

(Code 1977, § 9.62(2))

Cross reference— Alcoholic liquors, ch. 6.
Sec. 50-142. - Breach of the peace.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city, with an intent to provoke a breach of the peace or whereby a breach of the peace may be
occasioned, to commit any of the following acts:
(1)

Act in such a manner as to annoy, disturb, interfere with, obstruct or be offensive to others.

(2)

Congregate with others on a public street, place or walk and so engage in such conduct as to disturb or assist in any breach of
the peace.

(Code 1977, § 9.62(17))

Sec. 50-143. - Allowing disorderly conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him to be a location of noisy, boisterous or
disorderly persons.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(26))

Sec. 50-144. - Jostling or crowding others.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to jostle or roughly crowd persons in any street, alley, park or public building.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(16))

Sec. 50-145. - Fighting or quarreling.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage in any disturbance, fight, or quarrel in a public place.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(14))

Sec. 50-146. - Disturbing the peace by loud, vulgar or boisterous conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(25))

Cross reference— Noise generally, § 34-141 et seq.

92/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 50-147. - Assault; assault and battery.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to commit an assault, or an assault and battery on any person.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(1))

Sec. 50-148. - Collection in crowds for illegal or mischievous purposes.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to collect or stand in crowds, or arrange, encourage or abet the collection of persons in crowds
for illegal or mischievous purposes in any public place.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(15))

Secs. 50-149—50-180. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY

Sec. 50-181. - Starting res by smoking.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city in smoking or attempting to light or to smoke a cigarette, cigar or pipe, to set fire to any bed,
bedding, furniture, curtains or draperies in any hotel, motel, lodginghouse or tourist home in the city.
(Code 1977, § 9.99)

Cross reference— Similar provisions, § 38-14; smoking regulations, § 42-66 et seq.
Sec. 50-182. - Discharge, display or possession of reworks.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to fire, discharge, display or possess any fireworks except of the type and under the conditions
permitted by chapter 39 of the penal code of the state or any other state code.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(4))

Cross reference— Fireworks regulations, § 38-5.
Sec. 50-183. - Discharge of weapons.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to discharge any firearm, air rifle, air pistol or bow and arrow in the city, except when in
connection with a regularly scheduled educational or training program under adequate supervision.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(3))

Sec. 50-184. - Skateboards, bicycles, roller skates, coasters and similar devices.
(a)

Sidewalk and pedestrian areas; yielding right-of-way. Any person upon a bicycle, roller skates, skateboard, coaster or similar device
riding on any public sidewalk, public right-of-way or area commonly frequented by pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.

(b)

Central business areas prohibited areas. No person shall ride on any bicycle, roller skates, skateboard, coaster or similar device on
a public sidewalk, parking lot, street, right-of-way or other area commonly frequented by pedestrians within the areas of the city
listed as follows:
(1)

One hundred and 200 block of North Saginaw Street;

(2)

One hundred block of West Clinton;

(3)

One hundred block of East Clinton;

(4)

One hundred and 200 block of East Main Street;

(5)

One hundred and 200 block of West Main Street.

(Ord. of 10-3-88, § 4.57)

Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74.

93/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 50-185. - Abandoned refrigerators.
(a)

It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any
abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock
which may not be released for opening from the inside of such ice box, refrigerator or container.

(b)

It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any
abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snap-lock or
other device thereon without first removing the snap-lock or doors from the ice box, refrigerator or container.

(Code 1977, §§ 9.31, 9.32)

Secs. 50-186—50-215. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS

Sec. 50-216. - Possession of marijuana.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to knowingly or intentionally possess marijuana (cannabis sativa) in any form or any derivative
thereof without having obtained the substance through a valid prescription from a licensed physician.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(32))

Sec. 50-217. - Transportation of persons to places of gambling or other illegal or immoral acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to knowingly transport any person to a place where prostitution or gambling is practiced,
encouraged or allowed for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in gambling or in any illegal or immoral act.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(23))

Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74.
Sec. 50-218. - Soliciting or accosting others to commit illegal or immoral acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of any illegal or
immoral act.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(22))

Sec. 50-219. - Engaging in illegal businesses and occupations.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to engage in prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor or any other illegal or
immoral business or occupation. Proof of recent reputation for engaging in prostitution, gambling, illegal sale of intoxicating liquor or other illegal
or immoral occupation or business shall be prima facie evidence of being engaged or occupied therein.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(21))

Sec. 50-220. - Attending or frequenting, operating places where illegal businesses are conducted.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate of any place where prostitution,
gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor or where any other illegal or immoral business or occupation is permitted or conducted.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(20))

Sec. 50-221. - Soliciting and accosting.
Any person, 17 years of age or older, who shall accost, solicit or invite another in any public place, or in or from any building or vehicle, by
word, gesture or any other means, to commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(19))

State law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.453.

94/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 50-222. - Obscene language or conduct; indecent exposure.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to:
(1)

Utter vile, profane or obscene language in any public place;

(2)

Engage in any indecent, insulting, immoral or obscene conduct in any public place;

(3)

Make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his or her person.

(Code 1977, § 9.62(11))

Sec. 50-223. - Keeping or maintaining gaming room or gambling area.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to keep or maintain a gaming room, gaming tables, or any policy or pool tickets, used for gaming;
or to knowingly suffer a gaming room, gaming tables or any policy or pool tickets to be kept, maintained, played or sold on any premises occupied
or controlled by him.
(Code 1977, § 9.62(24))

Sec. 50-224. - Public nudity.
(a)

Purpose. It is hereby deemed to be in the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city that the city
council, by ordinance, prohibit public nudity as defined below within the boundaries of the city. This section is adopted by authority
granted to the city as a Home Rule City by MCL 117.5h.

(b)

Public nudity defined. For purposes of this section public nudity shall be defined as knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public
place or for payment or promise of payment by any person including, but not limited to, payment or promise of payment of an
admission fee, any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or a female individual's breast with less than
a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. A woman's breastfeeding of a baby does not under any circumstances constitute
nudity irrespective of whether the nipple is covered during or incidental to the feeding.

(c)

Public nudity prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the act of public nudity as defined in subsection (b) of this
section.

(Code 1977, § 9.62(7); Ord. No. 98-3/2, §§ 9.80—9.82, 3-2-98)

Secs. 50-225—50-255. - Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING UNDERAGE PERSONS
FOOTNOTE(S):
(43) Cross

reference— Underaged persons using alcoholic liquors, § 6-36 et seq.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Secs. 50-256—50-275. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW

FOOTNOTE(S):
(44) Cross

reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66.

Sec. 50-276. - Prohibited acts; hours of curfew; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 years to loiter, idle, congregate or remain in or upon any street, alley, park or public
place in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or daylight saving time and 6:00 a.m., immediately following, unless such
person is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other person having legal custody and control of such minor, or unless such minor is in the

95/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

pursuance of an errand directed by his parent, guardian or other person having his care of custody, or while the performance of some lawful
employment of such minor makes it necessary that the minor is upon such street, alley, park or public place during the nighttime, between such
specified hours, and except as provided in this section and this division.
Sec. 50-277. - Students attending school or community-sponsored programs.
Students attending school functions or functions sponsored or authorized by the city public schools or community-sponsored functions shall
be at their respective homes within 60 minutes after such program closes. This shall include sporting events.
Sec. 50-278. - Cards or notes from employer.
A student working during the hours enumerated in section 50-276 shall secure a card or note from his employer if he is upon the streets or
public places between the hours set forth in section 50-276, and shall, between such hours, have the card in his possession and exhibit such card
to any officer upon request.
Sec. 50-279. - Exception for authorized sporting events.
It shall not be a violation of this division for a child to participate in one of the following sporting events until the hour of 11:00 p.m. in an open
public park properly suited for such sport or upon a playing field, court or track provided by a school or church open for public use: baseball,
softball, football, soccer, track, tennis and basketball.
Sec. 50-280. - Parental responsibility.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any person under the age of 17
years, to allow or permit any child, while in his custody, to violate section 50-276.
Sec. 50-281. - Violators may be arrested by authorized law enforcement organizations.
Each member of the city police department, county sheriff department, deputy sheriff or state police, or other police agency, while on duty, is
hereby authorized to arrest, without warrant, any person within his presence violating any of the provisions of section 50-276 and detain such
person for a reasonable time until a complaint can be made and a warrant issued and served.
Sec. 50-282. - Penalty for violation of division.
Any person, either a minor under the age of 17 years, or the parents, guardian or legal custodian of any such minor, violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00, or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court.
Chapter 54 - PARKS AND RECREATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(45) Cross

reference— Parks and recreation board, § 2-301 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66;

vegetation, ch. 82.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION

FOOTNOTE(S):
(46) Cross

reference— Administrative service, § 2-36 et seq.

96/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 54-31. - Director; duties generally.
The department of parks and recreation shall be headed by the director of parks and recreation, who shall be in charge of the planning,
development, maintenance, management and operation of all public parks and recreation facilities and the recreational use of city recreation
areas and facilities.
(Code 1977, § 1.120)

Secs. 54-32—54-60. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS

Sec. 54-61. - Injury to park property.
No person shall obstruct any walk or drive in any public park or playground, and no person shall injure, mar or damage in any manner, any
monument, ornament, fence, bridge, seat, tree, fountain, shrub, flower, playground equipment, fireplaces or other public property within or
pertaining to any park or playground.
(Code 1977, § 3.1)

Cross reference— Offenses against property, § 50-71 et seq.
Sec. 54-62. - Waste containers.
No person shall place or deposit any garbage, glass, tin cans, papers or miscellaneous waste in any park or playground except in containers
provided for that purpose.
(Code 1977, § 3.2)

Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 58.
Sec. 54-63. - Ball games.
No baseball, football or softball throwing, or other violent or rough exercises or play, shall be engaged in, in any public park or other public
place, except in such areas or spaces designated for such exercise or play under rules as adopted by the parks and recreation board.
(Code 1977, § 3.3)

Sec. 54-64. - Picnics.
Picnics may be held in such parts of any park as shall be designated for that purpose, subject to any rules and regulations pertaining thereto.
(Code 1977, § 3.4)

Sec. 54-65. - Open res.
No person shall kindle or build fires in any park or playground except in fireplaces or stoves in any park provided for that purpose. Upon
leaving such fire, it shall be the duty of the person last using it to see that such fire is extinguished.
(Code 1977, § 3.5)

Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.
Sec. 54-66. - Vehicles in parks.
No person shall drive or park any vehicle in any park or playground except in spaces set aside and designated as parking areas or drives
under rules adopted by the parks and recreation board. Driving and parking on all streets and public ways within any park or bordering on the
same, shall be subject to all of the provisions of chapter 74 of this Code regulating traffic generally and to such additional rules and regulations as
the parks and recreation board shall adopt.
(Code 1977, § 3.6)

97/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74.
Sec. 54-67. - Additional rules; penalty for violation.
The parks and recreation board is hereby empowered to make such additional rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the city
council, pertaining to the conduct and use of parks and public grounds as are necessary to administer such rules and regulations and to protect
public property and the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public. Any violation of such rules and regulations shall constitute and may be
punished as a violation of the ordinances of the city and, upon conviction, may be assessed a fine of not to exceed $100.00 and/or sentenced to
the county jail for a period of not to exceed 90 days.
(Code 1977, § 3.7)

Sec. 54-68. - Additional remedy.
(a)

In addition to the penalties provided in this Code for violating its provisions, with respect to damage or injury to public property,
any person convicted of such damage or injury to public property shall reimburse the city for up to three times the amount of the
damage as determined by the court.

(b)

In every case of conviction for such offenses, the court before whom such conviction is obtained shall enter judgment in favor of
the city and against the defendant for liquidated damages as determined under subsection (a) of this section. The city, with the
assistance of the city attorney, shall collect the award by execution or otherwise. If two or more defendants are convicted, the
judgment shall be entered against them jointly. If the defendant is a minor, such judgment shall be entered against his parents.

(c)

Upon collection, the sums shall be credited to the general fund of the city and used for repairs or improvements to parks.

(Ord. of 6-18-79, § 3.8)

Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE
FOOTNOTE(S):
(47) Cross

reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; rubbish storage facilities for housing, § 14-261; responsibilities of owners and

occupants for rubbish, § 14-383; responsibility of owners and occupants for garbage, § 14-384; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42;
littering of streets, § 50-72; waste containers in parks, § 54-62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78.
(47) State

Law reference— Authority to regulate disposal of garbage and rubbish, MCL 123.361 et seq., 324.4301 et seq.; hazardous waste

management, MCL 324.11101 et seq.; solid waste management, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; waste management and resource recovery finance, MCL
324.11901 et seq.; recycling and related subjects, MCL 324.16101 et seq.; disposal of medical waste, MCL 333.13801 et seq.; low-level radioactive
waste authority act, MCL 333.26201 et seq.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 58-1. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Contractor means the person who has the contract with the city for the removal of garbage and refuse.
Department means the public works department of the city.
Downtown district means that area described as follows: Saginaw Street between Main Street and Genesee Street, Main Street between
Marquette Street and Railroad Street on the East and Oak Street on the West, Oak Street between Main Street and Genesee Street and Clinton
Street between Genesee Street and Mercer Street.

Garbage means all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead animals,
but excluding recognizable industrial byproducts, and shall include all such substances from all public and private establishments and from all
residences.

Person means such property owner and/or occupant requiring garbage and/or rubbish pickup services.
98/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Premises means all residences, commercial and industrial buildings.
Rubbish means:
(1)

All ashes, magazines, newspapers, tin cans, glassware, bottles, small automobile parts and other like substances ordinarily
discarded by householders.

(2)

Dirt, ashes, magazines, glassware, bottles, leaves, grass trimmings, tin cans, wastepaper, ashes, straw, shavings, junk and, in
general, nonputrescible wastes normally incident to the lawful use of the premises on which accumulated.

Superintendent means the superintendent of the public works department of the city.
(Code 1977, § 2.1)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Secs. 58-2—58-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 58-31. - Garbage collection.
The garbage collection service of the city shall be under the supervision and direction of the superintendent. The city manager shall make
such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the collection of garbage as he shall deem proper, subject to approval of the council. No person
shall fail to observe any such rule or regulation so adopted and approved. Upon order of the superintendent, the garbage collection service may
be discontinued to any premises where the occupant fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant hereto, and such service need not thereafter be reinstituted until such violation is remedied to the satisfaction of the superintendent.
(Code 1977, § 2.2)

Sec. 58-32. - Garbage containers—Generally.
The occupant of any premises in which any garbage shall be accumulated which is not disposed of by an approved incinerator or approved
garbage grinder shall maintain on such premises, one or more approved garbage containers, each having a capacity of not less than five gallons
nor more than 20 gallons. The number of containers kept on each premises shall be sufficient to conveniently store the normal accumulation of
garbage on such premises over a period of not less than seven days. Such containers shall be constructed of approved material which is not easily
corrodible and shall be rodentproof. Every such container shall be kept tightly covered with an impervious cover except when opened for the
deposit or removal of garbage. Garbage containers shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
(Code 1977, § 2.3)

Sec. 58-33. - Same—Location.
Garbage containers shall be placed at the rear or side of buildings at a place which is reasonably inconspicuous and away from streets and
places occupied by other persons but shall, however, be so placed as to be accessible to the collector. The occupant of the premises served shall
maintain a suitable means of access from the street to each garbage container over which the garbage container can be conveniently carried. Not
in excess of 50 pounds of garbage shall be placed in any one garbage container, and no container shall be filled beyond its capacity. No person
shall prevent or attempt to interfere with any city employee coming upon any premises for the purpose of removing any garbage container or the
contents thereof.
(Code 1977, § 2.4)

Sec. 58-34. - Rubbish collection in the downtown district.

99/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Rubbish shall be collected in the downtown district under the supervision and direction of the superintendent. The city manager shall make
reasonable rules and regulations concerning the collection and disposition of rubbish both within the downtown district and elsewhere in the city.
Such rules and regulations shall be subject to approval of the council. No person shall fail to observe any rule or regulation so adopted and
approved. The collection and disposition of rubbish in the downtown district shall be subject to the following rules:
(1)

No rubbish shall be placed on the curbing or in the alley for pickup unless in a completely covered container.

(2)

No person shall place rubbish for collection upon the curbing in front of his place of business, or in an alley, except between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:30 a.m., Monday through Saturday.

(3)

No person shall place rubbish for collection upon the streets or alleys on Sunday.

(4)

No wastepaper or cardboard containers shall be placed upon the curbing or in the alley for collection unless they are securely
baled or tied.

(5)

No containers of baled papers, or baled cardboard cartons, shall be placed on the sidewalk, street or alley, in a manner to
congest either pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

(6)

All empty containers must be removed from the curbing promptly following the city pickup.

(Code 1977, § 2.5)

Sec. 58-35. - Rubbish collectors.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of rubbish within the city without first obtaining a license
therefor. Licenses shall be issued upon application to the city clerk on forms provided by him and upon payment of such fee as shall be from time
to time prescribed by resolution of the council. No such license shall be issued except upon certification by the superintendent that the equipment
and the ability of the licensee is such that the licensee is able to conduct a rubbish collection business in accordance with the terms of this article
and rules and regulations adopted by the superintendent under this article. The superintendent shall make such rules and regulations governing
the operation of the business of rubbish collection, transportation and disposition as he may deem necessary. The superintendent shall revoke
the license of any rubbish collector who fails to abide by any such rule or regulation adopted by the superintendent or any provision of this article.
Prior revocation of a license shall be sufficient grounds for the refusal by the superintendent to certify any future application by such licensee.
(Code 1977, § 2.6)

Sec. 58-36. - Littering and accumulation.
No person shall throw or deposit any garbage or rubbish upon or into any street, alley or other property, public or private. It shall be the duty
of every occupant of property and of the owner of unoccupied property, at all times, to maintain the premises occupied or owned by him in a
clean and orderly condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of garbage or rubbish upon such premises, unless stored or accumulated as
permitted by this article.
(Code 1977, § 2.7)

Sec. 58-37. - Disposition of garbage.
No person shall dispose of any garbage within the city other than by means of an approved incinerator, approved garbage grinder or the city
collection service.
(Code 1977, § 2.8)

Sec. 58-38. - Accumulation and disposition of rubbish.
Any rubbish accumulated or stored outside of a dwelling or building on any premises shall be placed in containers of not less than one bushel
capacity, which containers shall be placed at the rear or side of buildings at a place which is reasonably inconspicuous and away from streets and
places occupied by other persons. No rubbish may be stored or accumulated which is contaminated by any garbage, unless stored as garbage.
Ashes shall be stored in metal containers. Rubbish shall be disposed of only to a licensed rubbish collector or the city collection service, except
that any person may dispose of his own rubbish:
(1)

By an approved incinerator located within a building.

(2)

If permitted by the superintendent, by transporting the same to a city dump, but only in accordance with the rules and

100/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
regulations pertaining thereto. No person transporting any rubbish in accordance with this section shall fail to securely cover
and secure the load so that no part of such load shall be lost while being transported.

(Code 1977, § 2.9)

Sec. 58-39. - Land ll.
No person shall use any land in the city as a dump for garbage or rubbish, unless operated by the city as a part of the city garbage or rubbish
collection service. Clean fill dirt may be placed upon land within the city by the owner thereof and, upon written authorization of the
superintendent, other types of rubbish may be used for landfill purposes, but no such authorization shall be given unless the superintendent is
satisfied that the rubbish proposed to be used is suitable for landfill purposes and does not contain garbage or objectionable rubbish.
(Code 1977, § 2.10)

Secs. 58-40—58-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - USER REGULATIONS AND RATES

Sec. 58-61. - Regulations for users of municipal refuse collection service.
All persons who shall use the municipal refuse collection service are subject to the following regulations:
(1)

The occupant of any premises in the city in which garbage or rubbish is accumulated shall maintain approved, watertight
garbage containers of from five-gallon to 20-gallon capacity, complete with rodentproof tightfitting cover and handles,
sufficient to store seven days accumulation of refuse. In addition, the occupant of any premises will be allowed one metal tub
for garden and lawn clippings only.

(2)

Garbage must be drained of all liquids and wrapped in paper or plastic before being deposited in containers.

(3)

Rubbish and garbage must be placed in the same containers, observing a loaded weight limitation of 50 pounds per
container.

(4)

Containers must be stored on private property at all times except on the regularly scheduled day of the pickup. No earlier
than 8:00 p.m. on the evening prior to pickup, they must be set out at the front curbline, or at the edge of the nearest public
street abutting the dwelling unit, or at the public alley at the rear of the property, at the city's discretion. Empty containers
must be returned to private property by 8:00 p.m. the day of the pickup.

(5)

Approved garbage containers are the only receptacles permitted for the storage of garbage and rubbish. Properly sealed
approved plastic bags may be used on the date of the pickup. Containers must be kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all
times.

(6)

Newspapers and magazines shall be tied securely in bundles or placed in covered containers.

(7)

Garden and lawn trimmings shall be placed in sealed plastic containers or open metal tubs for the weekly pickup.

(8)

The following items will not be collected under the contractor's agreement: building construction or demolition materials,
rocks, bricks, stones, dirt, tree limbs or stumps, or any material not suitable for loading into a packer type truck.

(9)

Supplemental agreements may be entered into between the property owners or tenants and the contractor covering
additional service.

(Code 1977, § 2.81; Ord. No. 86-3, § 2.81, 4-21-86)

Sec. 58-62. - Garbage and rubbish removal rates.
For each dwelling unit within the city, the monthly charge for garbage and rubbish collection shall be as set by resolution of the city council
from time to time. Charges for this service shall be billed and paid along with the water and sewer bills issued to residents within the city.
(Ord. of 3-18-92(1), § 1(2.82))

Sec. 58-63. - Due date.

101/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The charges shall be billed, together with the water and sewer bill each month, which shall be due the 15th of the month, and shall be
charged a ten percent penalty if not paid on time.
(Ord. No. 86-3, § 2.83, 4-21-86)

Sec. 58-64. - Collection.
The payment of charges for garbage and rubbish collection may be enforced by an action of assumpsit against the owner and occupant, and
such charges are made a lien on the premises receiving such services. The city clerk shall, annually, on the regular April meeting of the city council,
report to the council all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises which, on March 31 preceding, have remained unpaid for a
period of six months. The city council may thereupon, after due notice to the owners of the premises so served, assess the amount so found to be
due as a tax against such premises, and such assessment amount shall be certified to the city assessor who shall place such assessment amount
on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes.
(Code 1977, § 2.84)

Sec. 58-65. - Senior citizens rate.
Senior citizens or disabled veterans who have qualified for a property tax exemption or credit shall pay 90 percent of the rates as set in
section 58-62 only if they occupy a single-family house.
(Ord. of 3-18-92(1), §§ 2, 3(2.87))

Sec. 58-66. - Vacant dwellings.
The owners of dwelling units that are vacant for a consecutive quarterly period beginning July 1, October 1, January 1 or April 1 shall be
entitled to a refund or credit in an amount set by resolution of the city council from time to time, per unit, per quarter, upon filing an affidavit of
vacancy with the city clerk.
(Ord. No. 86-3, §§ 2.86, 2.88, 4-21-86)

Secs. 58-67—58-100. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - LEAF PICKUP

Sec. 58-101. - Policy.
The city council by resolution shall establish a leaf pickup policy for the city. The policy shall specify the dates to be set aside for leaf pickup
from residential properties, the notification requirements and any other relevant factors deemed necessary by the council.
(Ord. of 12-5-94, § 1)

Sec. 58-102. - Prohibited acts.
(a)

No person shall place leaves in the city street or at such a location so as to interfere with traffic or the clear vision of motorists.

(b)

All leaves shall be placed in compliance with the leaf pickup policy as adopted by the city council, or as directed by city personnel, in
the absence of a strict policy requirement.

(Ord. of 12-5-94, § 2)

Sec. 58-103. - Exceptions.
Under special circumstances as determined by the city manager or his designate, the strict compliance with this article may be waived. Any
waiver shall set forth the altered requirements. The altered requirements must be strictly complied with.
(Ord. of 12-5-94, § 3)

Sec. 58-104. - Penalty for violation of article.

102/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined up to $500.00 and/or
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both.
(Ord. of 12-5-94, § 4)

Secs. 58-105—58-135. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - BRUSH REMOVAL

Sec. 58-136. - Policy.
The city council by resolution shall establish a brush removal policy for the city. The policy shall specify the dates to be set aside for brush
removal from residential properties, the notification requirements and any other relevant factors deemed necessary by the council.
(Ord. of 6-5-95, § 1)

Sec. 58-137. - Prohibited acts; penalty for violation of section.
(a)

No person shall place brush for pickup earlier than one week before the scheduled removal.

(b)

No person shall place brush in the city street or at such a location so as to interfere with traffic or the clear vision of motorists.

(c)

All brush shall be placed in compliance with the brush removal policy as adopted by the city council, or as directed by city
personnel in the absence of a strict policy requirement.

(d)

Any person who places brush for pickup without making the appropriate notice to the city pursuant to section 58-136 shall be guilty
of a civil infraction. A civil fine of $25.00 shall be assessed to the person violating this section for a first violation. A second violation
shall cause a civil fine of $50.00 to be assessed. Any third or subsequent violation shall be a misdemeanor and shall be punished
pursuant to section 58-139

(Ord. of 6-5-95, § 2)

Sec. 58-138. - Exceptions.
Under special circumstances, as determined by the city manager or his designate, strict compliance with this article may be waived. Any
waiver shall set forth the altered requirements. The altered requirements must be strictly complied with.
(Ord. of 6-5-95, § 3)

Sec. 58-139. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined up to $500.00 and/or
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both.
(Ord. of 6-5-95, § 4)

Chapter 62 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(48) Cross

reference— Any ordinance authorizing public improvements saved from repeal, § 1-11(7); assessment board of appeals, § 2-211 et seq.;

finance, § 2-371 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66.
Sec. 62-1. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

103/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Cost (when referring to the cost of any improvement) means the cost of surveys, plans, rights-of-way, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising,
financing and construction, and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessment therefor and the financing
thereof.

Improvement means any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels of land to be
especially benefited thereby in proportion to the benefits to be derived therefrom.
(Code 1977, § 1.201)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 62-2. - Council authority.
The council shall have the power to determine that the whole or any part of the cost of any improvement shall be defrayed by special
assessment upon the property especially benefited.
(Code 1977, § 1.202)

Sec. 62-3. - Time of levy.
Special assessments to pay the estimated cost of any improvement may be levied before making such improvements, or after the completion
thereof, as may be determined by the city council.
(Code 1977, § 1.203)

Sec. 62-4. - Initiation of proceedings.
Proceedings for making improvements may be initiated by resolution of the city council or by petition of a majority of the owners of land
liable to be assessed in any proposed special assessment district; provided, however, that all improvements shall be made at the discretion of the
city council, and any petition therefor shall be advisory only and not mandatory upon the city council.
(Code 1977, § 1.204)

Sec. 62-5. - Preliminary proceedings.
Before determining to make any improvements, any part of the cost of which is to be defrayed by special assessment, the city council shall
require the city manager to prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications therefor and an estimate of the cost thereof, and to file the
plans and specifications and cost estimates with the city council, together with his recommendation as to what portion of the cost should be paid
by special assessment and what part, if any, should be a general obligation of the city, the number of installments in which the assessment may be
paid, and the lands which should be included in the proposed special assessment district.
(Code 1977, § 1.205)

Sec. 62-6. - Filing of report.
Upon receipt of the report of the city manager, if the city council shall determine to proceed with the improvement, it shall so declare by
resolution, stating therein the nature of the proposed improvement, the estimated cost thereof, what portion of the cost (if any) shall be defrayed
by special assessments, what portion of the cost (if any) shall be paid from the general funds of the city, designating therein the lands or premises
to be included in the proposed special assessment district, and specifying whether special assessment shall be levied according to benefits or
frontage. The city council shall thereupon order the report filed with the city clerk for public examination, and shall mail notice of its intention to
make the improvement by certified return receipt mailing. Such notice shall describe the property to be included in the proposed special
assessment district, the nature of the improvements, the estimated cost of the improvements, and what portion of the cost shall be defrayed by
special assessment, and shall set a time not less than ten days following the date of mailing thereof when the council will meet and hear
objections to the proposed improvements or to the inclusion of any property within the proposed special assessment district. The notice shall be
served by the city clerk to each owner of property proposed to be assessed, as indicated by the records of the office of the city assessor.
(Code 1977, § 1.206)

Sec. 62-7. - Notice; inclusions.

104/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The notice shall include a statement that appearance and protest at the hearing in the special assessment proceedings is required in order to
appeal the amount of the special assessment to the state tax tribunal, and that an owner or party in interest, or his agent, may appear in person
at the hearing to protest the special assessment, or may file his appearance or protest by letter, and his personal appearance shall not be
required. The notice shall further include a statement that the owner or any party having an interest in the real property may file a written appeal
of the special assessment with the state tax tribunal within 30 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll if that special assessment
was protested at the hearing held for the purpose of confirming the roll.
Sec. 62-8. - First public hearing.
At the time and place specified in such notice for the public hearing, the city council shall meet and hear any person affected by the proposed
improvements. The city council may, at or after the public hearing, modify the proposed improvements or district in any respect which it shall
deem in the best interests of the city at large; provided, however, that if the amount of work is increased or the boundaries of the district
enlarged, then another hearing shall be held pursuant to the notice. Any hearing may be adjourned from time to time without further notice.
(Code 1977, § 1.207)

Sec. 62-9. - Council determination.
After hearing any objections, the city council may, by resolution, determine to make the improvements and to defray the whole or any part of
the cost of the improvements by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits thereto or the frontage
thereof. By such resolution, the city council shall approve the plans and specifications for the improvement; determine the estimated cost thereof;
determine what proportion of such cost shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, shall be
a general obligation of the city; determine by resolution the rate of interest to be charged installments and designate the district of land and
premises upon which special assessment shall be levied; and direct the city assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the
determination of the city council.
(Code 1977, § 1.208)

Sec. 62-10. - Completion of improvement before levy.
Any provisions of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the city council may, in its discretion, delay the preparation of the special
assessment roll until after the completion of the improvements in which case the special assessment roll shall then be made in accordance with
the actual cost of the improvements.
(Code 1977, § 1.209)

Sec. 62-11. - Determination of actual cost.
Upon completion of the improvement and the payment of the cost thereof, the city clerk shall certify to the city manager the total cost of such
improvement. The city manager shall forward this report to the city council, which shall by resolution approve or disapprove. If approved, the
council shall direct the city assessor to spread the amount of the exact cost of such improvement upon the special assessment roll.
(Code 1977, § 1.210)

Sec. 62-12. - Preparation of roll.
If the assessment is required to be made according to frontage, the city assessor shall assess to each lot, premises or parcel of land such
relative proportion of the whole amount to be levied as the frontage thereof bears to the total frontage of all the lots or premises to be assessed,
unless the shape or size of any lot or premises shall make assessment in a different manner more equitable. If the assessment is directed to be
according to benefits, the assessor shall assess to each lot, premises or parcel of land such relative proportion of the whole amount to be levied as
shall be proportionate to the estimated benefit resulting to such lot or premises from such improvement. When the city assessor shall have
completed the assessment roll, he shall report the completion to the city council, together with his certificate that the assessment roll conforms to
the direction of the city council and the provisions of this Code.
(Code 1977, § 1.211)

Sec. 62-13. - Assessing single lots.

105/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
(a)

When any expense or cost shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to any single lot or premises, either by way of impro
abatement of public hazards or nuisances, or otherwise, which expense or cost is chargeable against such lot or premises and the own
under the provisions of the city Charter, or any ordinance of the city, or law of the state, and is not of that class required to be prorate
several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of labor, material or service for which such expense or cost
incurred, with the description of the premises, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the city manager, who shall
immediately charge and bill the owner thereof, if known. The city manager shall annually direct the city treasurer to prepare a special
assessment roll covering all such charges which shall not have been paid. Such assessment rolls shall be reported to the council in the
manner as other rolls.

(b)

The provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter with reference to special assessments generally and the proceedings and
notice necessary to be had before making improvements shall not apply to assessments contemplated in this section.

(c)

Upon confirmation of any special assessment roll authorized by this section, the special assessments shall constitute a lien upon
the premises and a charge against the owner thereof until paid. The city council shall determine the number of installments in
which assessments may be paid and the rate of interest to be charged on installments.

(Code 1977, § 1.212)

Sec. 62-14. - Filing roll.
Upon receipt of the special assessment roll from the assessor, the city council shall order it filed in the office of the city clerk for public
examination; shall fix the time and place where it will meet and review the roll; and shall direct the city clerk to give notice of such hearing. Such
notice shall set forth that the roll is on file for public examination; shall specify the time and place of the hearing on the roll; and shall be sent by
certified (return receipt) mail not less than ten days prior to the date of hearing, to each owner of property subject to assessment as indicated by
the records of the office of the city assessor.
(Code 1977, § 1.213)

Sec. 62-15. - Aggrieved persons.
Any person deeming himself aggrieved by the special assessment roll may appear and be heard at the hearing specified in section 62-8.
(Code 1977, § 1.214)

Sec. 62-16. - Second public hearing.
The city council shall meet and review the special assessment roll at the time and place appointed, or at any adjourned date, and shall
consider any objections thereto. During the course of such hearing the city council may correct the roll in any manner it deems necessary. Any
changes made in such roll shall be noted in the minutes of the council. After such hearing and review, the city council may confirm such special
assessment roll with such corrections as it may have made, if any, or may refer it back to the city assessor for revision, or may annul it and any
proceedings in connection therewith. The date of confirmation of each special assessment roll shall be noted thereon.
(Code 1977, § 1.215)

Sec. 62-17. - Con rmation of roll.
When any special assessment roll shall have been confirmed as set forth in section 62-16, such roll shall be final and conclusive.
(Code 1977, § 1.216)

Sec. 62-18. - Attachment of lien.
All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date of
confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed and until paid shall be a charge against the
respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created for city taxes and
shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree, nor any action of the city council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy
or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same, or as
by a regular mode of proceeding might be lawfully assessed thereon.
(Code 1977, § 1.217)

106/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 62-19. - Due date.
All special assessments shall be due and payable upon confirmation unless divided into installments by the city council as provided in section
62-5. If the assessment is divided into installments, the city council shall fix the date on which each installment shall be due and payable, and it
shall be the duty of the city treasurer to render annual statements for the respective installments.
(Code 1977, § 1.218)

Sec. 62-20. - Handling of assessment roll.
Upon confirmation, the assessment roll shall be transmitted by the clerk to the treasurer for collection, and the treasurer shall give notice by
mail that the special assessment roll has been filed in his office setting forth the date and place where payments thereon may be paid. The whole
or any part of any such special assessment thereon may be paid. The whole or any part of any such special assessment may be paid during the
period of 60 days from the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll without interest or penalty. At the expiration of the 60-day period,
the treasurer shall divide any remaining balance of each assessment into such number of equal installments as shall have been fixed by the city
council; provided, however, that if such division operates to make any installment less than $10.00, the treasurer shall reduce the number of
installments so that each installment shall be above and as near to $10.00 as possible.
(Code 1977, § 1.219)

Sec. 62-21. - Delinquent installments.
If any installment shall not be paid when due, the installment shall be spread upon the city tax roll in a column headed "Delinquent Special
Assessments," together with interest upon all unpaid installments from the date of confirmation of the roll or the date of the last payment of
interest as the case may be to and including May 20 of the year in which such tax roll is made; provided, however, that any fraction of a month
shall be considered as a full month.
(Code 1977, § 1.220)

Sec. 62-22. - Collection remedies.
Whenever a delinquent installment is placed on the tax rolls, the delinquent installment shall be collected by the city treasurer with the same
rights and remedies and the same penalties and interest as provided in the city Charter for the collection of taxes.
(Code 1977, § 1.221)

Sec. 62-23. - De ciency assessments and refunds.
Should the assessments in any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient for any reason to
pay the cost of the improvement for which they were made, then the city council shall make additional assessments against the city and the
several lots and parcels of land, in the same ratio as the original assessments, to supply the deficiency. The total amount assessed against any lot
or parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvements. The additional assessments mentioned in this section
may be made without further notice. Should the assessments levied prove to be more than five percent larger than necessary to defray the cost of
the improvement, the city council shall, by resolution, order the excess over five percent to be applied to the unpaid installments of such special
assessment against each lot or parcel of land, in the inverse order in which they are payable. Any amount of such excess as to any lot or parcel of
land which cannot be applied as aforesaid shall be credited upon the next city tax levied against the same.
(Code 1977, § 1.222)

Sec. 62-24. - Reassessment in event of illegality.
Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the city council, be invalid by reason of irregularity in the proceedings, or if any court
of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the city council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or
whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the
former assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as
provided for the original assessment. Whenever the assessment, or any part thereof, levied upon any premises has been so set aside, if the same
has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be
deemed satisfied.

107/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

(Code 1977, § 1.223)

Sec. 62-25. - Collection by court action.
In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and
penalties, may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the city against the person assessed in any court having jurisdiction. If in any
such action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant
or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city which is
a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant
or upon such premises.
(Code 1977, § 1.224)

Sec. 62-26. - Division of land assessed.
Should any lot, premises or parcel of land be divided after a special assessment has been levied thereon and confirmed and divided into
installments, and before the collection of all the installments thereof, the city council may require the city assessor to apportion the uncollected
amount upon the several parts of such lot, premises or parcel of land so divided. Upon receipt of the special assessment roll apportioned as
aforesaid from the assessor, proceedings shall be taken leading to the review and confirmation of the roll as apportioned in the same manner as
proceedings are taken for the review and confirmation of special assessments generally. When the special assessment roll as apportioned shall
have been confirmed it shall be conclusive upon all parties in interest.
(Code 1977, § 1.225)

Chapter 66 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(49)

Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or

public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(11); any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-11(12);
buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; cable telecommunications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; curfew for underaged persons, § 50-276 et seq.;
parks and recreation, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; special assessments, ch. 62; subdivisions and land division, ch. 70; street improvements for
subdivisions, § 70-157; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 66-1. - Safeguards.
All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with
red warning lights. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of traffic shall not be more than three feet apart, and parallel to the flow of traffic not
over 15 feet apart.
(Code 1977, § 4.23)

Sec. 66-2. - Shoring excavations.
All openings and excavations shall be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent caveins or
washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street.
(Code 1977, § 4.24)

Sec. 66-3. - Moving of buildings, or other heavy or bulky objects.
No person shall move, transport or convey any building or other similar bulky or heavy object, including machinery, trucks and trailers larger
in width than 14 feet, into, across or along any street, alley or other public place in the city, without first obtaining a permit from the
superintendent. The applicant shall file written clearances from the light, telephone, gas and water utilities, stating that all connections have been
properly cut off and, where necessary, all obstructions along proposed route of moving will be removed without delaying moving operations. In
addition, clearance shall be obtained from the police department, approving the proposed route through the city streets and the time of moving,

108/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

together with an estimated cost to the police department due to the moving operations. The applicant shall deposit with the city the total
estimated cost to the police department and department of public works, plus a cash deposit as required by section 66-87 and shall file with the
city a liability insurance policy in the amount of $100,000.00 for injury to one person and $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person and
property damage insurance in the amount of $15,000.00.
(Code 1977, § 4.26)

Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14.
Sec. 66-4. - Additional regulations.
The city manager may make additional regulations pertaining to openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street obstructions and
house moving, which regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city council. No person shall fail to comply with any such regulations.
(Code 1977, § 4.27)

Sec. 66-5. - Removal of encroachment.
Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged
to the abutting landowner when made or permitted by him or suffered to remain by him, otherwise than in accordance with the terms and
conditions of this chapter. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in section 62-13.
(Code 1977, § 4.28)

Sec. 66-6. - Temporary street closing.
The superintendent shall have the authority to temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when he shall deem such street to be unsafe
or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. He shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on such street, indicating that the street
is closed to public travel. When any street or portion thereof shall have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over
such street except as such driving may be necessary incidentally to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public
travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the superintendent.
(Code 1977, § 4.29)

Secs. 66-7—66-40. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - STREETS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 66-41. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Department means the department of public works of the city.
Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn
extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet constructed.

Superintendent means the superintendent of public works of the city.
(Code 1977, § 4.1)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Secs. 66-42—66-60. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - NAMES AND NUMBERS

109/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 66-61. - Street names.
All streets shall be known and designated by the names applied thereto on the map of the city known as the street plan, filed with the
department of public works of the city. The naming of any new street or the changing of the name of any street shall be done by resolution, which
resolution shall amend the map.
(Code 1977, § 1.20)

Sec. 66-62. - Vacating streets.
Vacated portions of streets and alleys shall be eliminated from the street plan map. The vacating of any street or alley shall be done by
resolution adopted in accordance with section 7.6, chapter 7 of the city Charter, which resolution shall amend the map.
(Code 1977, § 1.21)

Sec. 66-63. - Street numbers.
All premises shall bear a distinctive street number on the front at or near the front entrance of the premises in accordance with and as
designated upon the street plan map on file in the office of the department of public works.
(Code 1977, § 1.22)

Sec. 66-64. - Numbering buildings.
The owners and occupants of all buildings in the city shall cause the correct numbers to be placed thereon in accordance with the street plan
map. Such numbers shall be not less than three inches high, and shall be facing the street and adjacent to the principal entrance, and in such
position as to be plainly visible from the street.
(Code 1977, § 1.23)

Secs. 66-65—66-85. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - EXCAVATIONS OR OPENINGS

Sec. 66-86. - Damage and obstruction.
No person shall make any excavation in, or cause any damage to any street in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner
permitted in this division. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any street, except under the conditions and in the manner
permitted in this division, but this section shall not be deemed to prohibit such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious
movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises, nor to the lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for
vehicular traffic.
(Code 1977, § 4.2)

Sec. 66-87. - Permits and bonds.
(a)

Where permits are authorized in this article, they shall be obtained upon application to the superintendent, upon such forms as he
shall prescribe, and there shall be a charge of $1.00 for each such permit, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the council.
Such permit fee amount may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time. Such permit shall be revocable by the
superintendent for failure to comply with this article, rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, and the lawful orders of the
superintendent or his duly authorized representative, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. Application
for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work
permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street
surface and installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or

110/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under
the permit or in connection therewith. Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed on making application for a permit,
they shall be in not less than the following amounts, except as otherwise specified in this article:
(1)

On account of injury to, or death of, any person in any one accident .....$1,000,000.00

(2)

On account of any one accident resulting in injury to, or death of, more than one person .....1,000,000.00

(3)

On account of damage to property in any one accident .....500,000.00

Such amounts may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.
(b)

A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such insurance policy, approved as to form by the city attorney
shall be filed with the city clerk.

(c)

Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit under this article, such deposit shall be in the amount of
$50.00, except as otherwise specified in this article, and such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city arising out of
the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Such deposit amount may be changed by
resolution of the city council from time to time. Six months after completion of the work done under the permit, any balance of
such cash deposit unexpended shall be refunded. In any case where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city,
the deficit shall be paid by the applicant.

(Code 1977, § 4.3)

Sec. 66-88. - Opening prerequisites.
No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. No
permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by section 66-87.
(Code 1977, § 4.4)

Sec. 66-89. - Emergency openings.
The superintendent may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an
emergency, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of this article shall be complied with.
(Code 1977, § 4.5)

Sec. 66-90. - Back lling and restoration.
All excavations in a public street or other public place, except by special permission, shall be excavated, backfilled and restored in accordance
with regulations developed by the department of public works and approved by the council. Any further settlement shall be so corrected within
eight hours after notification to do so.
(Code 1977, § 4.6)

Sec. 66-91. - Sidewalk vaults.
Openings through the sidewalk for the delivery of fuel when lawfully in existence shall not be greater than 30 inches in diameter, shall be
circular in form, and shall be effectually closed when not in actual use by an iron cover set flush within the surface of the sidewalk, level with the
sidewalk, and securely locked in place. All openings in the sidewalk for the admission of light and air shall be closed and protected either by
substantial iron grating or illuminating pavement of a design and so placed as to be satisfactory to the superintendent.
(Code 1977, § 4.7)

Sec. 66-92. - Utility poles.
Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the superintendent shall prescribe and shall be located thereon in accordance with the
directions of the superintendent. Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the superintendent shall from time to time direct.
(Code 1977, § 4.8)

Sec. 66-93. - Maintenance of installations in street.

111/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate hereafter maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation,
or any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon, any street which is adjacent to or a part of his estate,
shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part with the city to keep the same and the
covers thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and condition at all times during his ownership or control
thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought by reason of such
excavation or structure being under, over, in or upon the street, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control.
(Code 1977, § 4.9)

Sec. 66-94. - New paving.
Whenever the city council shall determine to pave or resurface any street, the superintendent shall, not less than 30 days prior to
commencement of construction, serve notice upon all public utilities, requiring them to install all necessary underground work.
(Code 1977, § 4.10)

Sec. 66-95. - Sewer and water connections—Generally.
When such paving or resurfacing shall have been ordered or declared necessary by the city council, such sewer and water connections as are
necessary shall be installed in advance of such paving or resurfacing, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the premises adjacent thereto,
as a part of the special assessment for such paving or resurfacing. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed otherwise than by special
assessment, the cost of the sewer and water connections so installed, shall be a lien on such premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby,
and shall be collected as provided for assessments on single lots pursuant to the provisions of section 62-13.
(Code 1977, § 4.11)

Sec. 66-96. - Same—Determination of necessity.
The necessity for the sewer and water connections shall be determined by the superintendent, which determination shall be based upon the
size, shape and area of each abutting lot or parcel of land, the lawful use of such land under the zoning regulations of the city, the character of the
locality and the probable future development of each abutting lot or parcel of land. The superintendent shall give written notice of the intention to
install such sewer and water connections and to charge the cost of the installations to the premises, each owner of land abutting the street to be
furnished with such connections as shown by the records of the city assessor in accordance with section 1-15. Any owner objecting to the
installation of any such sewer or water connection, shall file his objections in writing, within seven days after service of such notice, with the
superintendent who shall, after considering each such objection made in writing, make a final determination of the sewer and water connections
to be installed.
(Code 1977, § 4.12)

Sec. 66-97. - Prohibited openings.
No permit to make any opening or excavation in or under a paved street shall be granted to any person within a period of three years after
the completion of any paving or resurfacing thereof. If a street opening is necessary as a public safety measure, the superintendent may suspend
the operation of this section, as to such street opening.
(Code 1977, § 4.13)

Secs. 66-98—66-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - CURB CUTS

Sec. 66-131. - Permit required; speci cations for access to private property.
No opening in or through any curb or any street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. Curb cuts
and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property shall comply with the following:
(1)

No single curb cut shall exceed 25 feet nor be less than ten feet.

112/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
(2)

The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk shall be five feet.

(3)

The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving residential property, shall be 25 feet.

(4)

The maximum number of lineal feet of sidewalk driveway crossings permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or
enterprise shall be 45 percent of the total abutting street frontage up to and including 200 lineal feet of street frontage plus
20 percent of the lineal feet of street frontage in excess of 200 feet.

(5)

The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catchbasins, street or railway signs, signals or other
public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city.

(6)

All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the superintendent.

(Code 1977, § 4.18)

Secs. 66-132—66-160. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALKS
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 66-161. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Sidewalk means the portion of the street right-of-way designed for pedestrian travel.
Superintendent means the superintendent of public works of the city.
(Code 1977, § 4.41)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 66-162. - Ordering construction.
The city council may, by resolution, require the owners of lots and premises to build sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and abutting
upon such lots and premises. When such resolution shall be adopted, the city clerk shall give notice thereof, in accordance with section 1-15, to
the owner of such lot or premises requiring him to construct or rebuild such sidewalk within 20 days from the date of such notice.
(Code 1977, § 4.46)

Sec. 66-163. - Construction by city.
If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to build any particular sidewalk as described in such notice, and within the time and in the
manner required thereby, the superintendent is hereby authorized and required, immediately after the expiration of the time limited for the
construction or rebuilding by the owner, to cause such sidewalk to be constructed and the expense thereof shall be charged to such premises and
the owner thereof, and collected as provided for single lot assessments in section 62-13.
(Code 1977, § 4.47)

Sec. 66-164. - Maintenance.
No person shall permit any sidewalk which adjoins property owned by him to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe.
(Code 1977, § 4.48)

Sec. 66-165. - Repair.
Whenever the superintendent shall determine that a sidewalk is unsafe for use, notice may be given to the owner of the lot or premises
adjacent to and abutting upon such sidewalk of such determination, which notice shall be given in accordance with section 1-15. Thereafter, it
shall be the duty of the owner to place the sidewalk in a safe condition. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than seven days,

113/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

within which such work shall be commenced, and shall further provide that the work shall be completed with due diligence. If the owner of such
lot or premises shall refuse or neglect to repair the sidewalk within the time limited therefor, or in a manner otherwise than in accordance with
this article, the superintendent shall have the sidewalk repaired. If the superintendent determines that the condition of the sidewalk is such that
immediate repair is necessary to protect the public, he may dispense with the notice. The cost of repairs under this section shall be charged
against the premises which such sidewalk adjoins, and the owner of the premises, and shall be collected as provided for single lot assessments in
section 62-13.
(Code 1977, § 4.49)

Sec. 66-166. - Financing by city.
Whenever an owner who has been given notice to construct or repair any sidewalk is not able immediately to finance such construction or
repair, such owner may file with the city clerk a written statement under oath to that effect, and shall sign an agreement providing that the city
shall finance the required construction or repair, that the owner shall reimburse the city for the total costs thereof in three equal installments with
interest to be charged thereon at the rate as set by law to be charged by the county treasurer upon the collection of delinquent taxes by the
county treasurer, that the first payment shall be due and payable within 90 days from the date of such agreement, and the total cost thereof shall
be a lien against the property until paid. Whenever such an agreement has been signed, the owner may employ a contractor bonded to the city to
complete the required construction or repair. Upon approval by the owner of an invoice submitted by the contractor, the city clerk shall draw a
warrant on the city treasurer in the amount of the invoice submitted in favor of such contractor. The city treasurer shall then immediately furnish
the owner with an invoice showing the three equal payments required, the date each is due, and the interest charge thereon. In the case of
property being purchased under a land contract, the signature of both the seller and the purchaser shall be required for such agreement.
(Ord. No. 84-5, § 4.50, 9-17-84)

Sec. 66-167. - Bonded contractors.
Any contractor who wishes to be approved by the city for the construction or repair of sidewalks shall file with the city clerk a bond in the
penal sum of $500.00, with two sureties approved by the city clerk, conditioned that the contractor shall comply with all of the provisions and
specifications contained in this article. Such bond shall be for a period of five years. The bond shall further provide that if the superintendent shall
find any construction or repair to be defective within the period of five years, the contractor shall take up and reconstruct the sidewalk at his own
expense. If the contractor shall fail to make such replacement after 30 days' notice from the superintendent, the owner may do so and recover the
cost thereof from the bond. The city council may at any time on cause shown declare forfeited the bond of any contractor who shall violate any of
the provisions of this article, or who shall fail to take up and replace any walk constructed or repaired by him which is found to be defective within
five years after the sidewalk shall have been completed.
(Code 1977, § 4.51)

Sec. 66-168. - Delinquent payments.
If any payment due the city under this article shall become delinquent, the city clerk shall, at the first meeting in April of each year, certify such
delinquency together with a penalty of ten percent to the city council, and the city council by resolution shall direct the city assessor to spread the
same on the next succeeding July tax roll.
(Code 1977, § 4.52)

Secs. 66-169—66-190. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - OBSTRUCTIONS

Sec. 66-191. - Construction, demolition or repair prerequisites.
No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building
adjacent to such street, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent and posting a cash deposit and filing
an insurance policy as required by section 66-87.
(Code 1977, § 4.20)

114/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 66-192. - Pedestrian passage.
At least six feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the free passage of pedestrians, and, if the building operations are such
that such free passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk with substantial railings or sidewalk shelter built in accordance with
chapter 14 of this Code, shall be provided around such construction.
(Code 1977, § 4.21)

Sec. 66-193. - Sidewalks to be cleared.
The occupant of every lot or parcel of land adjoining any sidewalk, or the owner of such lot or parcel of land, if not occupied, shall clear all ice
and snow from sidewalks adjoining such lot or parcel of land within the time required in this section. When any snow shall fall or drift upon any
sidewalk, the owner or occupant of the lot or parcel of land adjacent to the sidewalk shall remove such snow as shall have fallen or accumulated
during the nighttime by 12:00 noon. Snow falling or drifting during the day shall be removed before 12:00 noon of the following day. When any ice
shall form on any sidewalk, the owner or occupant of the lot or parcel of land adjoining such sidewalk shall, if practicable, immediately cause sand
or salt to be spread upon the ice in such manner and in such quantity as to prevent the sidewalk from being slippery and dangerous to
pedestrians, and shall remove the ice as soon thereafter as shall be practicable.
(Code 1977, § 4.53)

Sec. 66-194. - Failure to clear.
If any occupant or owner shall neglect or fail to clear ice or snow from the sidewalk adjoining his lot or parcel of land within the time limited
and required in section 66-193, or shall otherwise permit ice or snow to accumulate on such sidewalk, he shall be guilty of a violation of this Code,
and, in addition, the superintendent may cause such ice or snow to be cleared and the expense of removal shall become a debt to the city from
the occupant or owner of such lot or parcel of land and may be collected as a single lot assessment under section 62-13.
(Code 1977, § 4.54)

Sec. 66-195. - Sidewalk displays.
It shall be unlawful for any persons, merchants or otherwise to exhibit or display goods, wares or provisions of any sort on the sidewalk in
front of their prospective abodes extending beyond their own property line in the city.
(Code 1977, § 4.55)

Sec. 66-196. - Special events or occasions.
On special occasions and events and also special circumstances, citizens may petition the city council for a permit to exhibit or display such
wares, merchandise, etc., for a limited period of time.
(Code 1977, § 4.56)

Secs. 66-197—66-220. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - SPECIFICATIONS AND PERMITS

Sec. 66-221. - Permit requirements.
No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk except in accordance with the line, grade, slope, and specifications established by
the superintendent nor without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent, except that sidewalk repairs of less than 50 square feet
of sidewalk may be made without a permit. The written permit shall be prominently displayed on the construction site. The fee for such permit
shall be $0.02 per square foot up to 275 square feet and a minimum of $2.00; $0.015 per square foot from 275 square feet to 800 square feet and
$0.01 per square foot in excess of 800 square feet. Such fees may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.
(Code 1977, § 4.42)

Sec. 66-222. - Line and grade stakes.

115/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The superintendent shall furnish line and grade stakes as may be necessary for proper control of the work, but this shall not relieve the owner
of responsibility for making careful and accurate measurements in constructing the work to the lines furnished by the superintendent. Where it is
necessary to replace the engineer's stakes disturbed or destroyed without fault on the part of the city or its employees, a charge of $1.00 per
stake shall be paid.
(Code 1977, § 4.43)

Sec. 66-223. - Sidewalk speci cations.
All sidewalks within the city shall be constructed in accordance with the following specifications:
(1)

All walks must be at least four feet in width unless a different width is approved by the superintendent.

(2)

On all clay soil the trench shall be excavated to a depth of eight inches below the established grade and then filled with gravel
or good filling dirt free from clay to a depth of four inches. Where the topsoil is not clay, the trench shall be excavated to a
depth of four inches below the established grade, and no foundation shall be required.

(3)

Forms shall be of wood or metal, straight and free from warp, and of sufficient strength to resist springing. Forms shall be
used to the full depth of the concrete and shall be so installed as to provide a transverse slope to one-quarter of an inch per
foot toward the street.

(4)

In all new construction, where practicable, the sidewalk grade shall be established at not less than three inches nor more than
six inches above the grade of the top of the curb.

(5)

Sidewalks shall be constructed of thoroughly mixed concrete of a minimum thickness of four inches at all points except for
driveways where the minimum thickness shall be six inches. All concrete used shall consist of one part cement to two parts
very clean, sharp sand and 2½ parts clean, hard gravel or crushed stone well graded from one-quarter of an inch to one inch
in size, or transit mix of a mixture approved by the superintendent.

(6)

All surfaces shall be finished to a true contour and granular surface.

(7)

One-half-inch expansion joints shall be provided at intervals of approximately 25 feet and wherever the walk abuts a curb or
another walk or building. Joining materials shall extend from the surface of the subgrade, shall be at right angles to the
sidewalk surface and shall extend the full width of the walk. Surface edges of each slab shall be rounded to one-quarter of an
inch radius. Marking shall be exactly at cuts between slabs.

(Code 1977, § 4.44)

Sec. 66-224. - Permit revocation.
The superintendent may revoke any permit issued under the terms of this article for incompetency or failure to comply with the terms of this
article, or the rules, regulations, plans and specifications established by the department of public works for the construction, reconstruction or
repair of any sidewalk. The city manager may cause work to be stopped under any permit granted for the construction, reconstruction or repair of
any sidewalk for any of the causes enumerated in this section, which stop order shall be effective until the next regular meeting of the city council.
If confirmed by the council, at its next regular meeting, such stop order shall be permanent and shall constitute a revocation of the permit.
(Code 1977, § 4.45)

Chapter 70 - SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND DIVISION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(50) Cross

reference— Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use saved from repeal, § 1-11(10);

buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66.
(50) State

Law reference— Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 70-1. - Purpose of chapter.

116/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate
traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities; to achieve
individual property lots of maximum utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage, and
other health requirements; to secure adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites and other public facilities; and to provide logical
procedures for the achievement of these purposes.
(Code 1977, § 5.322)

Sec. 70-2. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Alley means a dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic
circulation.

Block means that property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such
street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the
continuity of development.

Clerk means the city clerk.
Commission means the planning commission of the city.
Easement means a specific area of land over which a liberty, privilege or advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation or
some particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes, and which shall be designated a "public" or "private" easement,
depending on the nature of the user.

Governing body means the city council.
Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, culverts, bridges and other additions to the natural state of land which increase its value, utility or habitability.

Lot means a parcel of land separated from other parcels on a preliminary or recorded plat for the purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
Master plan means the comprehensive land use plan for the municipality, including graphic and written proposals indicating the general
locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts, and all physical developments of the municipality,
including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof adopted by the planning
commission.

Municipal engineer and engineer mean the staff engineer or consulting engineer of the municipality.
Municipal planner and planner mean the staff planner or consulting planner of the municipality.
Municipality means the city.
Parcel and tract mean a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the subdivision act.
Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land.
(1)

Preliminary plat (stage 1) means a map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision in sufficient detail to provide
adequate basis for review and meet the requirements and procedures set forth in this chapter.

(2)

Preliminary plat (stage 2) means a map showing all requisite details of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving
authority for purposes of preliminary consideration, prepared in conformance with the subdivision act.

(3)

Final plat means a map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to the preliminary plat (stage 2) of the
subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the subdivision act and this chapter and suitable for recording
by the county register of deeds.

117/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Proprietor means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them, which may hold any ownership
interest in land, whether recorded or not.

Public reservation means a portion of a subdivision which is set aside for public use and made available for public use and acquisition.
Public utility means any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission, duly authorized to furnish, and furnishing
under governmental regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water.

Public walkway means a right-of-way dedicated for the purpose of a pedestrian access through residential areas, and located so as to connect
to two or more streets, or a street and a public land parcel.

Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway; a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. A street includes the land between the street right-of-way lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and lawns.
(1)

Major thoroughfare means an arterial street of great continuity which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for
both the immediate municipality area and region beyond, and may be designated on the city's major thoroughfare plan, as a
major thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, or equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the
street plan.

(2)

Collector street means a street used primarily to carry traffic from minor streets to major thoroughfares.

(3)

Minor street means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting residential properties.

(4)

Marginal access street means a minor street paralleling and adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.

(5)

Boulevard street means a street developed to two two-lane, one-way pavements, separated by a median.

(6)

Turnaround means a short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.

(7)

Cul-de-sac street means a minor street of short length, having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at
the other end by a vehicular turnaround.

(8)

Loop street means a minor street of short length with two openings to traffic beginning from the same street, and projecting
parallel to each other and connecting at their termination by a loop.

Subdivision act means the subdivision control act, Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
Subdivision means the partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators,
legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development, where the act of
division creates five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land each of which is ten acres or
less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of ten years.

Thoroughfare plan means the part of the master plan which sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed
streets and thoroughfares.

Words. Singular words shall include the plural, and masculine words shall include the feminine and neuter.
Zoning ordinance means the city zoning ordinance.
(Code 1977, § 5.325)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 70-3. - Penalty for violation of chapter.
Any person or anyone acting in behalf of such person, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine
of not more than $500.00 and the costs of prosecution or in default of the payment thereof, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate violation.
(Code 1977, § 5.368)

118/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 70-4. - Compliance standards.
(a)

The approvals required under the provisions of this chapter shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project
improvements within the municipality, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way and public easements, or under the
ultimate jurisdiction of the municipality. All subdivision or project improvements within the municipality installed in public streets,
public alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements, or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the municipality shall comply with all of
the provisions and requirements of this chapter, any related ordinance or code provision.

(b)

A certificate by the project engineer shall be provided, at the completion of the improvements, stating that all improvements have
been constructed according to plans and specifications approved by the governing body. A form shall be provided by the city for
this purpose.

(Code 1977, § 5.361)

Sec. 70-5. - Interpretation of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public health,
safety and general welfare of the city. The regulations of this chapter are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any manner interfere with
existing regulations or laws of the city nor conflict with any statutes of the state or the county, except that this chapter shall prevail in cases where
these regulations impose a greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or regulations.
(Code 1977, § 5.362)

Sec. 70-6. - Review fees.
Preliminary and final plat review fees, planning fees, engineering fees, inspection fees, water and sewer connection charges and other
applicable development charges shall be paid by the proprietor as may be provided for in this chapter, or by ordinance of the municipality.
(Code 1977, § 5.363)

Sec. 70-7. - Planning review fees.
Fees shall be charged for the review of preliminary plats on the basis of the schedule contained in this section. There shall be no additional
plat review fee charged for final plats which are in substantial conformance to a previously approved preliminary plat.
(1)

Conventional subdivision plats: $50.00, plus $1.00 per lot;

(2)

Subdivision open space plan: $150.00, plus $1.00 per lot;

(3)

Multiple-family residential plats: $50.00, plus $1.00 per dwelling unit.

Such fees may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.
(Code 1977, § 5.364)

Sec. 70-8. - Engineering review fees.
Engineering review fees shall be as required for city compliance.
(Code 1977, § 5.365)

Sec. 70-9. - Municipal review, inspection and administrative fees.
Municipal review, inspection and administrative fees shall be $100.00, plus $1.00 for each dwelling unit. Such fees may be changed by
resolution of the city council from time to time.
(Code 1977, § 5.366)

Sec. 70-10. - Other fees.
Other city expenses necessitated by subdivision development shall be reimbursed to the city at cost.
(Code 1977, § 5.367)

119/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 70-11. - Variance for hardship.
The governing body or commission may authorize a variance from this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict
compliance and provided the variance does not pertain to requirements of the zoning ordinance. In granting any variance, the governing body or
commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required in this
section, the governing body or commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the
vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic
conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the governing body or commission finds that:
(1)

There are special circumstances or conditions affecting such property such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land.

(2)

The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.

(3)

The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in
which such property is situated.

(Code 1977, § 5.371)

Sec. 70-12. - Platting procedure generally.
The preparation of a subdivision for platting may be preceded by an initial investigation and shall go through two phases: Preliminary Plat
(Stages 1 and 2) and Final Plat, all in accordance with the procedures set forth in articles II and III of this chapter.
(Code 1977, § 5.329)

Secs. 70-13—70-45. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - PRELIMINARY PLAT

FOOTNOTE(S):
(51) State

Law reference— Preliminary plats, MCL 560.111 et seq.

Sec. 70-46. - Initial plat investigation.
Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, it is suggested that the proprietor meet informally with the municipal departments concerned to
investigate the procedures and standards of the municipality with reference to this chapter and with the proposals of the master plan as they
affect the area in which the proposed subdivision is located. The proprietor should concern himself with the following factors:
(1)

The proprietor should secure a copy of the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, engineering specifications, and other
similar ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement of land so as to make himself aware of the
requirements of the municipality.

(2)

The area for the proposed subdivision should be properly zoned for the intended use.

(3)

An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the adequacy of public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to
serve the proposed subdivision should be made by the proprietor.

(4)

The relationship of the proposed subdivision to major thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares should be
investigated by the proprietor.

(5)

Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the municipality should be investigated by the proprietor.

(Code 1977, § 5.330)

Sec. 70-47. - Stage 1.
The procedure, under this stage 1, for preparation and submittal of a preliminary plat of the land area to be subdivided shall be as follows:
(1)

Filing. The following filing procedure shall be followed:
a.

Ten copies of the preliminary plat (stage 1) of the proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate,

120/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
shall be submitted to the clerk for the planning commission.
b.

Submittal with the clerk shall be at least ten days prior to the regular commission meeting (which meeting shall be
considered as the date of filing) at which the proprietor will be scheduled to appear. Should any of the data required in
this section be omitted, the clerk shall notify the proprietor of the additional data required, and commission action shall
be delayed until the required data are received. The commission shall act on the preliminary plat (stage 1) within 30 days
after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees to an extension of time in writing.

(2)

Identification and description. The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall include the following identifications and descriptions:
a.

Proposed name of subdivision.

b.

Location by section, town and range, or by other legal description.

c.

Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner proprietor, and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who
designed the subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his interest in the land.

(3)

d.

Scale of plat: one inch equals 100 feet as minimum acceptable scale.

e.

Date and northpoint.

Preparation. The preliminary plat (stage 1) should be drawn to scale and show the arrangement of lots, blocks and streets.
Dimensions of all lots shall be shown, but may be approximated. It is the intent of this chapter that the preliminary plat (stage
1) need not be done in precisely engineered plans but be only in sufficient detail to permit planning review. At this stage, the
proprietor should expect that the planning commission may require major alterations to be made in the plat if it is found
necessary. It is not necessary that the preliminary plat (stage 1) be prepared by and sealed by a surveyor; provided, however,
that the outside dimensions of the plat shall be based upon an accurate boundary survey prepared by a surveyor.

(4)

Existing conditions. The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall show existing conditions as follows:
a.

An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet showing the relationship of the subdivision to
its surroundings within one-half mile such as section lines or major streets or collector streets shall be provided.

b.

Boundary line of proposed subdivision, section or corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property
dimensions.

c.

Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being proposed for
subdivision, including those of areas across abutting roads.

d.

Location, widths and names of existing or prior platted streets and private streets and public easements within or
adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision including those located across abutting roads.

e.

Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract
being proposed for subdivision.

f.
(5)

Topography drawn as contours with an interval of not less than two feet. Topography to be based on USGS datum.

Proposed conditions. The preliminary plat (stage 1) shall include proposed conditions as follows:
a.

Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and connections with adjoining platted streets
and also the widths and locations of alleys, easements and public walkways.

b.

Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots, including building setback lines, showing dimensions.

c.

Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the
subdivision.

d.

An indication of the ownership, and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as excepted on the preliminary
plat. If the proprietor has an interest or owns any parcel so identified as excepted, the preliminary plat shall indicate how
this property could be developed in accordance with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located
and with an acceptable relationship to the layout of the proposed preliminary plat.

e.

An indication of the the system proposed for sewage disposal by a method approved by the governing body and the
municipal engineer.

f.

An indication of system proposed for water supply by a method approved by the governing body and the municipal
engineer.

g.

An indication of storm drainage proposed by a method approved by the governing body and the municipal engineer and,
if involving county drains, the proposed method of drainage shall be acceptable to the county drain commissioner.

h.

In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total

121/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
area, the preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout for the entire area. The part which is proposed to be
subdivided first shall be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order to illustrate clearly the method of
development which the proprietor intends to follow. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same procedure until the
entire area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided.
(6)

Review by planning commission. The planning commission shall review the stage 1 plat as follows:
a.

The clerk shall receive and check for completeness the preliminary plat as required under subsections (1) through (4) of
this section. If complete and basically in conformance with applicable municipal requirements, the clerk shall place the
proposal on the agenda of the next regular commission meeting.

b.

The clerk shall transmit a copy of the preliminary plat to the municipal engineer and the municipal planner for their
technical review and recommendation and transmit a copy to the school board having jurisdiction in the area where the
plat is located.

c.

The commission shall review all details of the proposed subdivision within the framework of the zoning ordinance, within
the various elements of the master plan and within the standards of this chapter.

d.

The commission shall approve conditionally, disapprove or approve the preliminary plat as follows:
1.

Should the approval be a conditional approval, such conditions shall be satisfied by the proprietor within a time set
by the commission or the plat shall be rejected.

2.

Should the commission disapprove the preliminary plat, it shall record the reasons in the minutes of the regular
meeting. A copy of the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor.

3.

Should the commission find that all conditions have been satisfactorily met, it may give approval to the preliminary
plat. The chairman shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the preliminary plat and distribute copies of
such plat as follows:

(7)

i.

Return one copy to the proprietor;

ii.

Retain one copy which shall become a matter of permanent record in the commission files;

iii.

Forward one copy to the school board having jurisdiction in the area concerned;

iv.

File the remaining copies with the clerk's office.

Action taken unless proprietor files request for hearing. The action of the commission shall become the action of the
governing body unless the governing body shall decide upon a hearing or unless, within ten days after the approval or
rejection of the preliminary plat, the proprietor shall file with the clerk a written request for hearing before the governing
body. Such hearing, if requested, shall be held by the governing body at its next regular meeting occurring not less than ten
days after filing of such request. Following such hearing, the governing body shall approve or reject the preliminary plat in
accordance with section 112 of the subdivision act.

(8)

Approval procedures. Approval of the preliminary plat (stage 1) shall be effective for a period of nine months. Should a
preliminary plat (stage 2) not be submitted for tentative approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat (stage 1) must
again be submitted for approval unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor and such request is granted in writing by
the planning commission or governing body, whichever body gave approval to the preliminary plat (stage 1).

(Code 1977, § 5.331)

Sec. 70-48. - Stage 2.
The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat (stage 2) requires tentative and final approval as follows:
(1)

Tentative approval. Tentative approval shall be required as follows:
a.

Filing. Filing shall be as follows:
1.

The preliminary plat (stage 2) shall conform substantially to the subdivision act.

2.

The preliminary plat (stage 2) shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat (stage 1), as approved, and it may
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposes to record and develop
at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this chapter.

3.

Ten copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with written application in triplicate, shall
be submitted to the clerk at least ten days prior to the regular commission meeting, which meeting shall be
considered as the date of filing.

122/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
4.

The clerk shall check the proposed plat for completeness. Should any of the data required in the subdivision act, or se
omitted, the clerk shall be directed to inform the proprietor of the data required, and that the application will be delay
are received.

5.

The clerk shall transmit a copy of the valid and complete preliminary plat to the municipal engineer for technical
review and recommendation.

b.

Planning commission review; tentative approval. Planning commission review for tentative approval shall be as follows:
1.

The clerk shall place the preliminary plat on the next regular planning commission agenda, at which meeting the
proprietor will be scheduled to appear. The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within 30 days
after the date of filing unless the proprietor agrees to an extension, in writing, of the time required for approval by
the governing body and planning commission.

2.

It shall be the duty of the clerk to send a notice by registered or certified mail to the owners of land immediately
adjoining the property to be platted of the presentment of the preliminary plat and the time and place of the
meeting of the commission to consider such preliminary plat. Such notice shall be sent not less than five days
before the date fixed therefor.

3.

The preliminary plat (stage 2) shall be reviewed by the municipal engineer as to conformity with the approved
preliminary plat (stage 1) and plans for utilities and other improvements.

4.

The municipal engineer shall notify the commission of his recommendation for either approval or rejection of the
preliminary plat.

5.

The preliminary plat (stage 2) documents shall be reviewed by the commission as to conformity with the approved
preliminary plat (stage 1) and compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

6.

Should the commission find that the preliminary plat (stage 2) is in satisfactory conformance with the preliminary
plat (stage 1) and with the requirements of this chapter, it shall approve such plat and notify the governing body of
this action in its official minutes and forward the same, together with all accompanying data, to the governing body
for their review.

7.

Should the commission find that the preliminary plat (stage 2) does not conform satisfactorily to the previously
approved preliminary plat (stage 1) or with the requirements of this chapter, and that it is not acceptable, they shall
record the reason in their official minutes and forward such plat together with all accompanying data to the
governing body, and recommend that the governing body disapprove the preliminary plat until the objections
causing disapproval have been changed to meet the approval of the commission.

c.

Governing body; tentative approval. Tentative approval by the governing body shall be required as follows:
1.

The governing body will not review a preliminary plat (stage 2) until it has received the review and
recommendations of the commission. Following the receipt of such recommendations, the governing body shall
consider the preliminary plat at such meeting that the matter is placed on the regularly scheduled agenda. The
governing body shall take action on the preliminary plat (stage 2) within 60 days of the date of initial filing of the
plat with the clerk, as required in subsection (1)b.1 of this section.

2.

Should the governing body tentatively approve the preliminary plat, they shall record their approval on the plat and
return one copy to the proprietor.

3.

Tentative approval shall not constitute final approval of the preliminary plat.

4.

Tentative approval of the governing body shall be effective for a period of 12 months. Should the preliminary plat in
whole or in part not be submitted for final approval within this time limit, the preliminary plat must again be
submitted to the commission and governing body for approval unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor,
and such request is granted in writing by the governing body.

d.

Preliminary plat (stage 2) review by governing body; final approval. Final approval by the governing body of a stage 2
preliminary plat shall be required as follows:
1.

The proprietor shall file a valid preliminary plat with the clerk together with a certified list of all authorities required
for approval in sections 112 to 119 of the subdivision act. The proprietor shall also provide approved copies of
preliminary plats (stage 2) from each of the required authorities.

2.

The governing body shall take action on the preliminary plat within 20 days of the submission of all necessary
approved plats.

123/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
3.

If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to the plat tentatively approved by the governing body and meets all con
tentative approval, the governing body shall give final approval to the preliminary plat.

4.

The clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing. If rejected, reasons shall be given
to the proprietor.

5.

Final approval shall be effective for a period of two years from the date of final approval. The two-year period may
be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the governing body in writing.

6.

No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made before the preliminary plat has received final
approval of the governing body, engineering plans have been approved by the municipal engineer, and any
deposits required under article V of this chapter have been received by the municipality.

(Code 1977, § 5.332)

Secs. 70-49—70-80. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - FINAL PLAT

FOOTNOTE(S):
(52)

State Law reference— Final plats, MCL 560.131 et seq.; general requirements of plats, MCL 560.132 et seq.; submission of final plat,

procedure, MCL 560.162 et seq.; submission to clerk, MCL 560.166; filing and recording fee, MCL 560.241, 560.241a; furnishing of abstract of title
or title policy, MCL 560.245.
Sec. 70-81. - Procedure for preparation and review.
The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as follows:
(1)

Preparation. Preparation of the final plat shall be as follows:
a.

The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the subdivision act.

b.

The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and it may constitute only that portion of
the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that
such portion conforms to this chapter.

c.

The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title, an abstract of title certified to date with the written opinion of an
attorney-at-law thereon, or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for examination in order to
ascertain whether the proper parties have signed the plat.

(2)

Final plat review. Final plat review shall be as follows:
a.

Original copies of the plat, as required by the state department of the treasury, and four paper prints of the final plat
shall be filed by the proprietor with the clerk and shall deposit such sums of money as the governing body may require
in this chapter or by other ordinances.

b.

The final plat shall be reviewed by the municipal engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat (Stage 2)
and plans for utilities and other improvements.

c.

The municipal engineer shall notify the governing body of his recommendation for either approval or rejection of the
final plat.

d.

The governing body shall review all recommendations and take action on the final plat within 20 days of its date of filing.

e.

Upon the approval of the final plat by the governing body, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth
in the subdivision act. The four prints of the final plat shall be forwarded: two to the clerk, one to the planning
commission, and one to the building department. The original copies shall be forwarded to the clerk of the county plat
board.

(Code 1977, § 5.333)

Secs. 70-82—70-115. - Reserved.

124/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE IV. - DESIGN LAYOUT STANDARDS

Sec. 70-116. - Development guides.
The subdivision design layout standards set forth under this article are development guides for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plans
must be reviewed and approved by the governing body.
(Code 1977, § 5.340)

Sec. 70-117. - Streets.
Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the general specifications and typical cross sections as set forth in this article
and other conditions set forth by the governing body.
(1)

Location and arrangement. Location and arrangement of streets shall be as follows:
a.

The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the master plan and shall be considered in relation to
the existing and planned major thoroughfares and collector streets, and such part shall be platted in the location and
width indicated on such plan.

b.

The street layout shall provide for continuation of collector thoroughfares in the adjoining subdivisions or the proper
projection of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided; or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit drawn up
and adopted by the commission.

c.

The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged.

d.

Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the commission may
require marginal access streets, reverse frontage, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection
of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic hazards.

e.

Should a proposed subdivision border on a railroad, expressway, or other limited access highway right-of-way, the
commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a
distance suitable for the development of any use of the intervening land. Such distances shall be determined with due
consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future grade separation.

f.

Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in
conformity with the other requirements of this chapter, and where the commission finds it will be practicable to require
the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is developed. Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract to
be subdivided a dedicated or platted and recorded half street, the other half shall be platted.

(2)

Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to at least the following minimum requirements:

Street Type
a.

Right-of-Way Widths
Major thoroughfare

120 feet, or in conformance with the
major thoroughfare plan of the
municipality

b.

Collector streets

86 feet

c.

Industrial local streets

60 feet

d.

Industrial collector streets

86 feet

e.

Multiple-family residential streets (where

60 feet

platted)
f.

Local (single-family residential) streets

60 feet

125/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

g.

Marginal access streets

h.

Turnaround (loop) street

i.

Alley

j.

Cul-de-sac streets, turnarounds

k.
(3)

34 feet
110 feet
20 feet

1.

Industrial

75 foot radius

2.

Residential and others

60 foot radius

Length for cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 600 feet.

Street geometrics. Standards for maximum and minimum street grades, vertical and horizontal street curves and sight
distances shall be established by resolution of the governing body and approved by the municipal engineer.

(4)

Street intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible to 90 degrees. Curved streets, intersecting
with major thoroughfares and collector thoroughfares, shall do so with a tangent section of centerline 50 feet in length,
measured from the right-of-way line of the major or collector thoroughfare.

(5)

Acceleration-deceleration lanes. Streets which intersect with major or secondary thoroughfares shall be provided with paved
acceleration and deceleration lanes and passing lanes on both sides of the thoroughfare. Such lanes shall be provided in
keeping with the standards approved by the governing body for this type of improvement.

(Code 1977, § 5.341)

Sec. 70-118. - Blocks.
Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards:
(1)

Sizes. Standards for block size are as follows:
a.

Blocks shall not exceed 1,400 feet in length, except where, in the opinion of the commission, conditions may justify a
greater distance.

b.
(2)

Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of the layout and shall be suited to the intended layout.

Public walkways. Standards for public walkways are as follows:
a.

Location of public walkways or crosswalks may be required by the commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian access
to public or private facilities or where blocks exceed 900 feet in length.

b.
(3)

Public walkways shall be dedicated for this purpose.

Easements. Easement standards are as follows:
a.

Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the rear or side lot lines as necessary for utility lines.
Easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds. Such easements shall be a total of not less than 12 feet
wide, six feet from each parcel.

b.

Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and electric company easements should be sought from all of
the utility companies serving the area. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the preliminary
(stage 2) plat to all appropriate public utility agencies.

c.

Easements three feet in width shall be provided where needed along side lot lines so as to provide for streetlight
dropouts. Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall be obtained from the
appropriate public utility indicating that easements have been provided along specific lots. A notation shall be made on
the final plat indicating: "The side lot lines between lots (indicating lot numbers) are subject to streetlight dropout rights
granted to the (name of utility company)."

(Code 1977, § 5.342)

126/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 70-119. - Lots.
Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards:
(1)

Sizes and shapes. Standards for size and shape of lots are as follows:
a.

The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed for residential uses shall be appropriate for the location
and the type of development contemplated.

b.

Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance for the district in
which the subdivision is proposed.

c.

Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance.

d.

Corner lots in residential subdivisions shall be platted at least ten feet wider than the minimum width permitted by the
zoning ordinance.

e.

Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of three to one shall normally be
considered a maximum.

f.

Lots intended for purposes other than residential use shall be specifically designed for such purposes, and shall have
adequate provision for off-street parking, setback and other requirements in accordance with the zoning ordinance.

(2)

Arrangement. Lot arrangements shall be as follows:
a.

Every lot shall front or abut on a street.

b.

Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines.

c.

Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or collector thoroughfares, where marginal access streets are not
desirable or possible to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots, or with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic
streets, or shall be platted with extra depth to permit greater distances between building and such trafficway.

d.

Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets, where possible.

(Code 1977, § 5.343)

Sec. 70-120. - Natural features.
The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as
large trees, natural groves and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of
drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor, and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where
appropriate, shall be required.
(Code 1977, § 5.344)

Sec. 70-121. - Floodplains.
Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or in part within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or
any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by stormwater shall require specific compliance with the subdivision act and its review
by the water resources commission of the state department of natural resources.
(Code 1977, § 5.345)

Sec. 70-122. - Subdivision open space plan.
The following requirements apply in addition to all other requirements of this chapter where a preliminary plat is filed for approval under the
subdivision open space plan section of the zoning ordinance.
(1)

Statement of principles. Consideration by the commission and the governing body of proposed optional use of subdivision
open space plan shall reflect the following basic principles:
a.

The subdivision open space plan section of the zoning ordinance provides an optional method of subdividing property,
and approval of any subdivision open space plan is subject to the discretion of the municipality.

b.

Particular attention shall be given to the effect of a subdivision open space plan upon the immediate area, where the
character of that area has been established by previous development. Major attention shall be given by the commission

127/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
and the governing body to the benefits to be derived by the residents of the proposed subdivision and the municipality
because of the subdivision open space plan, with minor consideration to be given to the proprietor.
c.

The following objectives shall govern the approval or disapproval of the proposed subdivision open space plan:
1.

Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees,
brooks, hills and similar natural assets.

2.

Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of residential areas.

3.

Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of the land while recognizing a reduction in development
costs and by allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles on the site.

4.

Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance of all lot development so benefits may accrue to
the subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities and areas.

(2)

Application; contents. The application for approval of the subdivision open space plan shall contain the following in addition
to the information required by other sections of this chapter:
a.

A complete description of the land proposed to be dedicated to common use (open land) shall be provided, including the
following as a minimum:
1.

Legal description of open land.

2.

Topographical survey of open land.

3.

Type of soil in open land.

4.

Description of natural features on open land (stands of trees or other vegetation, streams or other bodies of water,
etc.).

5.
b.

Other relevant factors.

The proposed plan of development of the open land shall be contained in the application and shall include the following
as a minimum:
1.

How legal title is to be held.

2.

How such property shall be regulated.

3.

Provisions for the payment of taxes.

4.

Persons or corporations to be responsible for maintenance.

5.

How maintenance is to be guaranteed.

6.

How maintenance and development are to be financed.

7.

Proposed uses of open land.

8.

What improvements are to be constructed by the developer and an estimate of the cost thereof prepared by a
landscape architect or civil engineer, licensed to practice in the state.

9.
c.

Other relevant facts related to the proposed uses of open land.

The application shall contain a statement of the benefits to be realized by the residents of the proposed subdivision and
the municipality by approval of the proposed subdivision open space plan with particular reference to the objectives of
this section.

(3)

Review and recommendation. Before any action is taken upon any subdivision open space plan filing, copies of the
preliminary plat, application and supporting data shall be submitted by the clerk to the municipal planner and to the
municipal attorney for review and recommendation.
a.

The municipal planner shall review and render an opinion upon the proposed subdivision open space plan from the
materials furnished and from visits to the site or such other information as he may deem necessary and render his
opinion with respect to the following:
1.

The suitability of the proposed open land for purposes proposed.

2.

The need for the proposed uses in the general area.

3.

The location and layout of the open spaces with relation to the lots within the subdivision.

4.

The effect upon neighboring areas which would result by the subdivision open space plan and the appropriateness
of the development of the lot sizes proposed under the subdivision open space plan in the particular area involved.

5.

Any other factor related to the development and proper design of the proposed subdivision.

128/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
b.

(4)

The municipal attorney shall review the proposed subdivision open space plan and render his opinion with respect to the fo
1.

The proposed manner of holding title to the open land.

2.

The proposed manner of payment of taxes.

3.

The proposed method of regulating the use of the open land.

4.

The proposed method of maintenance of property and financing thereof.

5.

Any other factor related to the legal or practical problems of ownership, use and maintenance of the open land.

Tentative approval by planning commission; action by governing body. If the commission is satisfied that the proposed
subdivision open space plan meets the letter and spirit of this section and the zoning ordinance and should be approved, it
shall give tentative approval to the plat with the conditions upon which such approval should be based. Thereafter, the
governing body shall take action upon such application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(5)

Disapproval; hearing. If the commission is not satisfied that the proposed subdivision open space plan meets the letter and
spirit of the zoning ordinance or finds that the approval of the subdivision open space plan will be detrimental to existing
development in the general area and should not be approved, it shall communicate such disapproval to the governing body
with the reasons therefor. The proprietor shall be entitled to a hearing upon such proposal before the governing body upon
written request therefor filed with the clerk.

(6)

Contract; required approvals. If the governing body gives preliminary approval of the proposed subdivision open space plan, it
shall instruct the municipal attorney to prepare a contract setting forth the conditions upon which such approval is based,
which contract, after approval thereof by the governing body, shall be entered into between the municipality and the
proprietor prior to the approval of any final plat based upon the approved preliminary plat.

(7)

Bond required. At the time of application for final approval, the proprietor shall deposit a cash or corporate surety bond in the
amount of the estimated cost of the proposed improvement to the open land guaranteeing the completion of such
improvements within a time to be set by the governing body.

(Code 1977, § 5.346)

Secs. 70-123—70-155. - Reserved.
ARTICLE V. - IMPROVEMENTS

Sec. 70-156. - Minimum standards.
(a)

The improvements set forth under this article are to be considered as the minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements
for which standards are not specifically set forth shall have such standards set by ordinance or published rules of the governing
body. All improvements must meet the approval of the governing body.

(b)

Prior to the undertaking of any improvements, the proprietor shall deposit with the clerk cash, a certified check or irrevocable bank
letter of credit, whichever the proprietor selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the governing body to ensure faithful completion
of all improvements within the time specified. The amount of the deposit shall be set by the governing body, based on an estimate
by the engineer. The governing body shall release funds for the payment of work as it is completed and approved by the
municipality.

(c)

Prior to the acceptance by the municipality of improvements, a two-year maintenance bond in an amount set by the governing
body shall be posted by the proprietor.

(d)

Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with the standards and requirements established in this article
and/or any other such standards and requirements which may from time to time be established by ordinance or published rules of
the municipality.

(Code 1977, § 5.351)

Sec. 70-157. - Streets.
All streets and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed in accordance with details and specifications approved by the governing body as
follows:

129/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
(1)

Pavement width standards. Street pavement width standards are as follows:

Street Type

Pavement Width
(measured from back
of curb to back
of curb )

a.

Major thoroughfare

In conformance with the standards and
speci cations established by the
municipal engineer or the governing
body. This width is generally
established as 48 feet.

b.

Collector streets

41

c.

Industrial streets

41

d.

Multiple-family residential streets (where

36

dedicated)
e.

Minor residential streets

31

f.

Marginal access streets

22

g.

Turnaround (loop) streets

Not less than 80 feet diameter at
termination loop, 36 feet wide
pavement

h.

Alley

i.

Cul-de-sac streets, turnarounds

(2)

20

1.

Industrial

65 foot radius

2.

Residential and others

45 foot radius

Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be improved in accordance with details and specifications prescribed by the
governing body.

(3)

Roadway pavements. Roadway pavements shall be improved in accordance with details and specifications prescribed by the
governing body.

(Code 1977, § 5.352)

Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66.
Sec. 70-158. - Utilities.
(a)

Requirements for underground wiring. The proprietor shall make arrangements for all lines for telephone, electric, television and
other similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, except for
major thoroughfare rights-of-way. Such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service

130/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
companies by the proprietor or within dedicated public ways, provided only that overhead lines may be permitted upon written
recommendation of the engineer, planner and commission and the approval of the governing body at the time of final plat
approval where it is determined that overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare, plat
design and character of the subdivision. All such facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with
other underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the
state public service commission. All drainage and underground utility installations which traverse privately owned property shall be
protected by easements granted by the proprietor. All junction boxes for utilities shall be buried so as not to be visible above the
ground level unless such utilities are located in the rear or side yards.
(b)

Storm drainage system and other drainage improvements. Storm drainage systems and other drainage improvements shall be per
plans approved by the governing body. Where county drains are involved, a letter or document of approval from the county
commissioner must be submitted by the proprietor.
(1)

Sewer system. Sewer system improvements shall be per plans approved by the governing body and the requirements of the
county health board or other appropriate public health authority.

(2)

Water supply. The water distribution system shall be per plans approved by the governing body and in conformance with the
regulations of the state department of health relating to municipal water supplies.

(Code 1977, § 5.353)

Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78.
Sec. 70-159. - Other improvements.
(a)

Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on the sides of all road rights-of-way adjacent to the subdivision being developed. In those
instances where no good purpose would be served, the governing body may waive this requirement. All sidewalks shall be made of
concrete four feet wide, four inches thick, and located one foot from the property line.

(b)

Public walkways. Walkways shall be at least ten feet in width. Planting pockets shall be provided in public walkways for tree and
shrub planting. The planting plan and surface treatment shall meet the approval of the commission. Fences or other improvements
may also be required if the commission or governing body determines they are necessary to protect the adjacent property owners.

(c)

Trees. Existing trees near street rights-of-way shall be preserved by the subdivider. Street trees shall be provided at least one per
lot in the street right-of-way between sidewalk and curb in accordance with regulations established by the governing body.

(d)

Street signs. Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections and shall be of a permanent weather-resistant
construction, with street names visible from two directions, as approved by the governing body. Traffic regulation signs, as may be
required, will be located as required by the governing body.

(e)

Streetlights. Streetlights shall be placed at all intersections and other locations as recommended by the governing body. Streetlight
design shall be approved by the governing body.

(Code 1977, § 5.354)

Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(53)

Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets saved from repeal, § 1-11(14);

transport of alcoholic liquor in motor vehicles, § 6-40; taxicabs and drivers, § 18-566 et seq.; junk vehicles, § 34-71 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 46;
offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; use of skateboards, bicycles, roller skates, coasters and similar devices, § 50-184; transportation of
persons to places of gambling or other illegal or immoral acts, § 50-217; vehicles in parks, § 54-66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch.
66; trimming and corner clearance, § 82-73.
(53)

State Law reference— Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610.

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 74-1. - Code adopted.

131/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The city does hereby amend chapter 74 to adopt the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et
seq.). Specifically included are any and all amendments thereto currently scheduled to be effective on October 1, 1999.
(Ord. No. 99-9/20, § 1, 9-20-99)

Secs. 74-2—74-65. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(54) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2.

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Secs. 74-66—74-85. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS BUREAU

FOOTNOTE(S):
(55) Cross

reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-186 et seq.; municipal civil infractions, § 2-501 et seq.

Sec. 74-86. - Established.
A traffic violations bureau is hereby created in and for the city.
(Code 1977, § 10.21)

Sec. 74-87. - Clerk.
The clerical dispatcher for the city police department is hereby appointed clerk of the traffic violations bureau, and the dispatchers are each
hereby appointed deputy clerks of the traffic violations bureau. The clerical dispatcher and dispatchers are hereby authorized to collect and
account for all fines paid to the traffic violations bureau as set forth in section 74-96.
(Code 1977, § 10.22)

Sec. 74-88. - Location.
The traffic violations bureau shall be located at the office of the police department in the city hall.
(Code 1977, § 10.23)

Secs. 74-89—74-95. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - VIOLATIONS, CITATIONS AND FINES

Sec. 74-96. - Reports.
The clerk of the traffic violations bureau shall prepare each month a detailed traffic violations report for the previous month. This report shall
list all traffic violation tickets issued according to their respective categories of violations, all tickets processed during the month that have not
been received for processing and a total of all monies received for fines collected.
(Code 1977, § 10.26)

Sec. 74-97. - Citation procedure.

132/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of the city or by state law,
the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify
its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a traffic citation. A duplicate copy of such ticket or notice shall forthwith be delivered to the
city traffic violations bureau.
(Code 1977, § 10.24)

Sec. 74-98. - Collection of nes.
The traffic violations bureau shall have the authority and power to process such traffic violation tickets issued by the police department of the
city, assess and collect all fines in accordance with the schedule set forth in section 74-103, make regular accountings of such collections, and
deposit all such deposits with the city treasurer to the credit of the general fund.
(Code 1977, § 10.25)

Sec. 74-99. - Time to appear.
All persons to whom such a traffic violation ticket or notice shall have been issued may appear before the traffic violations bureau, on or
before three days from the issuing date thereof, pay the fine so assessed and deposit the ticket with the bureau, which shall constitute full
satisfaction for the offense charged. Upon and after payment of the prescribed penalty, no other or further arrest or prosecution of such person
shall be had in respect to the particular violation for which the penalty was paid.
(Code 1977, § 10.27)

Sec. 74-100. - Appearance options.
Appearance before the traffic violations bureau may be made in person, by representation or by registered mail.
(Code 1977, § 10.28)

Sec. 74-101. - Right of accused to judicial process.
(a)

The right of any accused to judicial process shall be preserved, and nothing in this division shall deprive any person from having a
full and impartial hearing in court in accordance with due process of law.

(b)

The accused may appear before the traffic violations bureau and file a written request, on forms provided, demanding a judicial
hearing upon the charge, in which event a complaint shall be filed with the district court having jurisdiction, and prosecution shall
take place according to law.

(c)

If the accused does not appear before the traffic violations bureau within three days from the date of the traffic violations ticket or
notice which was issued to the accused, the traffic violations bureau shall return the duplicate copy of the ticket or notice forthwith
to the officer who issued the ticket or notice, and such officer shall file a complaint with the district court having jurisdiction relative
to the violation charged upon the traffic violations ticket or notice. Prosecution shall take place according to law.

(Code 1977, § 10.29)

Sec. 74-102. - Nonresidents of state charged with tra c violations.
(a)

When any person not a resident of the state shall be charged without warrant for any violation of a traffic ordinance of the city, the
officer making such charge shall, upon demand of the accused, forthwith take the accused before the district court having
jurisdiction to answer to the complaint made against him. If no district judge is available, and immediate trial cannot be had, the
person so arrested may recognize to such officer for his appearance by depositing with such officer a sum of money not to exceed
$25.00. Such amount may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time. Such officer shall, in all cases, give a
receipt to the person arrested for the money so deposited with such officer, together with a written summons or traffic violations
ticket as provided in this division.

(b)

If the accused fails to appear as required in the summons or traffic violation notice, such deposit shall be forfeited as in other cases
of default upon bail and, in addition thereto, pay any other penalty provided by law. Every officer taking a deposit under this
division shall, within 48 hours thereafter, deposit the money with the district judge mentioned in the summons or traffic violations
notice, together with the statement of facts relating to such arrest and/or deposit.

(Code 1977, § 10.30)

133/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 74-103. - Schedule of parking nes.
The following is the city's schedule of parking fines:

Parking

Penalties

(1)

Overtime:
a.

If paid within 24 hours of the time ticket was issued .....$ 1.00

b.

If paid within 72 hours of the time ticket was issued .....3.00

c.

After 72 hours have elapsed it shall be a court matter

(2)

Improperly .....3.00

(3)

In prohibited zone .....3.00

(4)

On sidewalk or driveway .....3.00

(5)

Double .....5.00

(6)

Within 15 feet of fire hydrant .....5.00

(7)

Between sidewalk and curb .....3.00

(8)

Parking in a handicapped zone:
a.

If paid within 24 hours of the time ticket was issued .....10.00

b.

If paid within 72 hours of the time ticket was issued .....25.00

c.

After 72 hours have elapsed it shall be a court matter.

Such fines may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.
(Code 1977, § 10.31)

Sec. 74-104. - Display of schedule.
A printed list of the violations and penalties referenced in section 74-96 shall be conspicuously displayed at the traffic violations bureau.
(Code 1977, § 10.32)

Sec. 74-105. - Violations notice.
(a)

There shall be established a notice to appear for violations of the Code of the city, other than violations of the traffic or parking
sections, which shall be hereinafter referred to as a violations notice, whereby a police officer of this city may serve such violations
notice on any person found violating any section of the Code, in lieu of immediate arrest or service of warrant.

(b)

In addition to police officers of this city, the county dog warden is empowered to issue such notices for violations of chapter 10 of
this Code.

(c)

Such violations notice shall enumerate the section number of the Code alleged to have been violated, and a brief description of the
charge. It shall contain spaces for the date, day of week, time of day and location of the alleged offense; the name and address of
the person charged; his age, date of birth, race, sex, height and weight; make and license number of vehicle, if any involved; a space
for the signature of the issuing officer; and such other information as may be prescribed by the duly authorized court of the city.

(d)

The violations notice shall be answerable to the duly authorized court of the city within a specified number of days. Failure to
appear as ordered shall result in a formal complaint to the court and the issuance of a criminal warrant.

(Code 1977, § 10.33)

Secs. 74-106—74-115. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - STORAGE OF IMPOUNDED MOTOR VEHICLES

134/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 74-116. - Public policy.
It is hereby deemed to be necessary by the city council to establish a policy for the impounding of motor vehicles which are required to be
impounded by the laws of any governmental unit or which are found to be in violation of the ordinances of the city or which are a hazard to public
safety because of their location upon a public street during a declared emergency or during snow-removal operations.
(Ord. No. 01-011, § 2.151, 4-16-01)

Sec. 74-117. - General policy.
It is hereby declared to be the general policy of the city that any vehicle to be impounded shall be stored by the towing company engaged to
remove the vehicle. Such towing company shall establish its own fees and charges. The city shall not be responsible for the subject vehicle in any
manner.
(Ord. No. 01-011, § 2.152, 4-16-01)

Sec. 74-118. - Storage area.
The city manager, with the approval of the city council, shall establish a secure area for the storage of motor vehicles which are impounded
under section 74-116, above. The storage area shall be utilized only when the towing company engaged to remove the vehicle is not able to store
the vehicle as provided in section 74-117, above. The storage area shall be made secure and shall be maintained in a secure manner during any
time a vehicle is stored in the area.
(Ord. No. 01-011, § 2.153, 4-16-01)

Sec. 74-119. - Fees.
At the inception of this division the fee for storage of a vehicle shall be $15.00 for any calendar day or portion of calendar day that the vehicle
is stored. Payment in full of the storage fees and any towing charges shall be received by the city prior to releasing the vehicle. The fee for storage
may be amended from time to time by the city council by resolution.
(Ord. No. 01-011, § 2.154, 4-16-01)

Sec. 74-120. - Lien.
The city shall have a lien interest against any vehicle stored for the full amount of any storage charges and for any towing charges charged by
the towing company engaged by the city. Enforcement of the lien shall comply strictly with MCL 570.301 through 570.309.
(Ord. No. 01-011, § 2.155, 4-16-01)

Secs. 74-121—74-130. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - BICYCLES
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 74-131. - Dealers—Report of purchases.
Persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make a weekly report to the police department
specifying:
(1)

The name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased;

(2)

The description of each bicycle purchased;

(3)

The frame number thereof;

(4)

The number of the reflectorized sticker found thereon, if any.

(Code 1977, § 10.64)

135/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 74-132. - Same—Report of sales.
All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make a weekly report to the police
department giving a list of all sales made by such dealers, which list shall include:
(1)

The name and address of each person to whom a bicycle was sold;

(2)

The kind of bicycle sold;

(3)

A description and frame number thereon;

(4)

The number of the sticker attached thereto, if any.

(Code 1977, § 10.65)

Secs. 74-133—74-155. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE

Sec. 74-156. - Required.
No person shall operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscle power upon any street or public highway of the city without
first obtaining from the police department a license therefor.
(Code 1977, § 10.61)

Sec. 74-157. - Issuance requirements; inspection; denial.
The police department is hereby authorized and directed upon written application for a license to:
(1)

Inspect each bicycle for:
a.

Brakes;

b.

Horn, bell or proper-sounding device;

c.

Lights;

d.

Reflectors placed on wheels, pedals, frame and fenders so as to assist motor vehicles to see such bicycles at night from
the front, rear and sides.

(2)

Deny a license for any bicycle not meeting the requirements set forth in sections 6.20, 6.21 and 6.22 of the Uniform Traffic
Code of the city and subsection (1)d of this section.

(3)

Issue bicycle licenses which shall be effective for one calendar year. All licenses shall be dated January 1 of the year issued.
When issued such license shall entitle the licensee to operate such bicycle for which the license has been issued subject to the
provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.).

(Code 1977, § 10.62)

Sec. 74-158. - Re ectorized stickers.
(a)

The city shall annually provide reflectorized stickers, together with registration cards. Such stickers and registration cards shall have
numbers stamped thereon in numerical order, beginning with the number "1," and shall indicate the year for which they are issued,
and shall have the words "City of Durand, Bicycle License" stamped thereon. It shall be the duty of the police department to attach
one such sticker to the frame of each bicycle and to issue a corresponding registration card to the licensee upon the payment of
the license fee.

(b)

Such sticker shall remain attached during the valid period of such license. The police department shall keep a record of the date of
issuance of each license, the person to whom issued and the number thereof.

(Code 1977, § 10.63)

Sec. 74-159. - Transfer report required.

136/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle, to report such sale or transfer by returning to the police
department the registration card issued to such person as licensee of such bicycle, together with the name and address of the persons to whom
the bicycle was sold or transferred. Such report shall be made within five days of the date of the sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the
purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration thereof, within five days of the sale or transfer.
(Code 1977, § 10.66)

Sec. 74-160. - Removal of numbers.
No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this article.
(Code 1977, § 10.67)

Sec. 74-161. - Destruction of stickers.
No person shall remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license sticker or registration card during the time in which such license sticker or card
is operative. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the police department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial
number can be found or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification.
(Code 1977, § 10.68)

Sec. 74-162. - Fees.
(a)

For the first annual license issued pursuant to this article, the sum of $1.00 shall be paid. For each annual renewal of such license
the sum of $0.50 shall be paid.

(b)

In cases where a transfer of ownership is made in the manner prescribed by section 74-159, the fee for transfer of the license shall
be the sum of $0.50.

(c)

Such fees may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.

(Code 1977, § 10.69)

Secs. 74-163—74-195. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - RAILROADS

Sec. 74-196. - Unguarded crossings.
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company and for any officer, agent or employee of a railroad company in charge of any train, to propel or
permit to be propelled any cars in advance of any locomotive engine over or across any street in the city where there is not stationed a crossing
watchman or where such crossing is not equipped with automatic signals, unless a member of the train crew of such train shall be posted at the
crossing in advance of such train or cars to warn persons desiring to cross such railroad crossings.
(Code 1977, § 10.91)

Sec. 74-197. - Standing of trains on crossings; time limit.
No railroad engine, car or train of cars shall be left standing on a railroad track at a street, avenue or highway crossing within the city for a
longer period of time than five minutes at any one time.
Chapter 78 - UTILITIES
FOOTNOTE(S):
(56) Cross

reference— Any ordinance establishing utility rates saved from repeal, § 1-11(5); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building

regulations, ch. 14; minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for housing, § 14-256 et seq.; minimum standards for light, ventilation
and heating for housing, § 14-286 et seq.; general requirements relating to maintenance of housing, § 14-316 et seq.; responsibilities of owners
and occupants for plumbing fixtures, § 14-387; businesses, ch. 18; cable telecommunications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation,
ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utility improvements in subdivisions, § 70-158.

137/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Sec. 78-1. - Department of public works—Director; duties generally.
The public works department shall be headed by the director of public works and utilities. He shall be experienced in municipal engineering
works. He shall be responsible for all matters relating to construction, management, maintenance and operation of all the physical properties of
the city, except as otherwise provided by the city Charter or this Code. He shall also be responsible for planning in connection with such changes
or improvements to the physical properties of the city as are consistent with and necessary to the future growth and development of the city.
(Code 1977, § 1.90)

Cross reference— Administrative service, § 2-36 et seq.
Sec. 78-2. - Same—Speci c functions.
The department of public works shall have the following specific functions:
(1)

It shall coordinate all engineering services for the department, as authorized by the city clerk or city manager.

(2)

It shall have charge of the construction, operation and maintenance of the city sewage system. It shall have charge of the
construction and maintenance of all improved and unimproved street surfaces, the cleaning of improved streets, the removal
of snow, the construction and maintenance of sidewalks and bridges, the operation of city dumps and the operation of the
garbage and rubbish disposal service of the city.

(3)

It shall have charge of the control and regulation of municipal parking lots.

(4)

It shall be responsible for the control and regulation of the planting of trees, and the planning, development, maintenance
and management of all boulevards. The department shall care for all shade trees located on lands devoted to public purposes
and shall control all lawn extensions between sidewalks and street curbs.

(Code 1977, § 1.91)

Sec. 78-3. - Division of building inspection.
The division of building inspection shall be a division of the department of public works and shall be headed by the building inspector. This
division shall be responsible for the issuance of all permits and the inspection of all work involved in the construction of sewer and water services,
sidewalks, curb cuts, street openings and the inspection of all work done under the provisions of the electrical, plumbing and building codes of the
city and the safety inspection of all premises, including structures thereon.
(Code 1977, § 1.92)

Sec. 78-4. - Building inspector designated as enforcing agency of state law provisions.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 9 of Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1509), as amended, the building inspector
of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1972. The city hereby assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of such act throughout its corporate limits.
(Code 1977, § 1.93)

Sec. 78-5. - Water department—Head; department responsibilities.
The water department shall be headed by the superintendent of the water department who shall serve under the authority of the director of
public works and utilities. It shall be responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of city water mains and connections and other
facilities pertaining to the water distribution system. It shall have charge of the pumping of water into and through the city water distribution
system. It shall have charge of the construction, operation and maintenance of city water mains and connections and other facilities pertaining to
the city water distribution system.
(Code 1977, § 1.100)

Cross reference— Administrative service, § 2-36 et seq.

138/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 78-6. - Same—Water connections.
The water department shall be responsible for the installation of water connections and water meters and the issuance of permits for the
inspection of all work involved in such installation.
(Code 1977, § 1.101)

Sec. 78-7. - Discharge of rainwater or runo ; duty of occupant or owner.
It shall be the duty of the occupant of every premises and the owner of unoccupied premises within the city to prohibit the discharge of
rainwater or the runoff of rainwater:
(1)

In such a manner that it causes dirt, soil or gravel to discharge into the street or into the sanitary sewer system or into the
storm sewer system.

(2)

In such a manner that it causes an erosion of the soil or support of any sidewalk, porch or street curb.

(Code 1977, § 9.40)

Secs. 78-8—78-40. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER RATES

FOOTNOTE(S):
(57)

Cross reference— Any ordinance establishing utility rates saved from repeal, § 1-11(5).

Sec. 78-41. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Person means any individual, firm, association, public or private corporation or public agency or instrumentality.
Premises means each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having any connection to the water distribution system of the city, or the
sanitary sewer system of the city.
(Code 1977, § 2.61)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 78-42. - Basis of charges.
All water service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed as determined by the meter installed in the premises of water service
customers by the city water department. All sanitary sewer service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed, to the extent that such
consumption reflects the return of water to the sanitary sewers as provided in this article. No free water service or sanitary sewer service shall be
furnished to any person.
(Code 1977, § 2.62)

Sec. 78-43. - Water rates.
Water rates are to be as follows:
(1)

Any customer connected by a five-eighths-inch or three-quarters-inch meter shall pay a minimum monthly charge of $10.50
for the first 1,000 gallons and $1.90 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(2)

Any customer connected by a one-inch meter shall pay a minimum monthly charge of $26.25 for the first 2,500 gallons and
$1.90 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(3)

Any customer connected by a 1¼-inch meter shall pay a minimum monthly charge of $37.50 for the first 3,500 gallons and
$1.90 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

139/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
(4)

Any customer connected by a 1½-inch meter shall pay a minimum monthly charge of $47.75 for the first 4,500 gallons and
$1.90 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(5)

Any customer connected by a two-inch meter shall pay a minimum monthly charge of $57.75 for the first 5,500 gallons and
$1.90 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(6)

Any customer connected by a three-inch meter shall pay a minimum monthly charge of $68.25 for the first 6,500 gallons and
$1.90 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(7)

Any customer connected by a four-inch meter shall pay a minimum monthly charge of $78.75 for the first 7,500 gallons and
$1.90 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(8)

In addition to the water rates designated in this section, each user connected to the water system shall pay a meter rental fee
as follows:

⅝-inch or ¾-inch meter .....

$1.00 per month

1-inch meter .....

2.50 per month

1¼-inch meter .....

3.50 per month

1½-inch meter .....

4.50 per month

2-inch meter .....

5.50 per month

3-inch meter .....

6.50 per month

4-inch meter .....

7.50 per month

Rates may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.
(Ord. of 6-20-94, § 1(2.63))

Sec. 78-44. - Sewer rates for sanitary sewer.
Sewer rates are to be computed on the basis of a flat fee and water used for all users having a sewer connection with the sanitary sewer
system and shall be billed in conjunction with the water bill at the following rates:
(1)

For each user connected to the water system with a five-eighths-inch or three-quarter-inch meter, the monthly fee shall be
$10.50 for the first 1,000 gallons of water used and $2.30 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100gallon increments.

(2)

For each user connected to the water system with a one-inch meter, the monthly fee shall be $26.25 for the first 2,500 gallons
of water used and $2.30 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(3)

For each user connected to the water system with a 1¼-inch meter, the monthly fee shall be $37.50 for the first 3,500 gallons
of water used and $2.30 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(4)

For each user connected to the water system with a 1½-inch meter, the monthly fee shall be $47.25 for the first 4,500 gallons
of water used and $2.30 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(5)

For each user connected to the water system with a two-inch meter, the monthly fee shall be $57.75 for the first 5,500 gallons
of water used and $2.30 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(6)

For each user connected to the water system with a three-inch meter, the monthly fee shall be $68.25 for the first 6,500
gallons of water used and $2.30 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

(7)

For each user connected to the water system with a four-inch meter, the monthly fee shall be $78.75 for the first 7,500 gallons
of water used and $2.30 for each additional 1,000 gallons, or portion thereof, billed in 100-gallon increments.

140/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
For each user not connected to the water system, rates shall be established by the city based upon similar users within the city. Rates
may be changed by resolution of the city council from time to time.

(Ord. of 6-20-94, § 2(2.64))

Sec. 78-45. - Private water supply.
Where any sanitary sewer service customer uses any private water supply, any portion of which reaches the public sanitary sewers, such
private supply shall be metered at the customer's expense. The consumption therefrom shall be added to the consumption from the public water
supply, and the total shall be used to establish the sanitary sewer service charges, based on water consumed. Failure to meter any water supply
shall not release the customer from paying the sanitary sewer service charge thereon. In such case, the total water consumption shall be
estimated by the clerk and shall be conclusive.
(Code 1977, § 2.65)

Sec. 78-46. - Optional arrangement.
Any customer may elect to rearrange his water supply pipes and metering for the purpose of eliminating from the total water consumption
the water not disposed of to the public sanitary sewers, or he may elect to establish metering facilities registering the discharge from his premises
to the public sanitary sewers. All such arrangements shall be subject to the prior approval of the city clerk. The expense, including installation,
maintenance and operation, shall be borne by the customer. While such an approved installation shall be in effect, the rates specified in section
78-44 shall be applied only to the water passing through the meter for water to be returned to the public sanitary sewers or to the sewage actually
discharged to the public sanitary sewers. No person shall divert any water metered as water not entering the public sanitary sewers into the
public sanitary sewers. Where any water metered as not entering the public sanitary sewers does enter the public sanitary sewers, the premises
shall be billed at the regular sanitary sewer rates for all water used during all billing periods in which the unlawful diversion of water occurred, if it
can be determined; otherwise, for a period to be determined in the discretion of the city clerk, but not in excess of five years.
(Code 1977, § 2.66)

Sec. 78-47. - Outside service.
The rates for water or sanitary sewer service to premises outside the city shall be double the rates charged to users within the city, unless
contracts have been signed providing for the payment of sums in lieu of taxes, in which case the contract terms shall prevail.
(Code 1977, § 2.67)

Sec. 78-48. - Special rates.
(a)

All water and sewer charges may be changed by resolution of the city council.

(b)

Special rates for water or sanitary sewer service may be fixed by resolution of the city council for customers outside the city,
customers not having a metered water supply, customers using large quantities of water not discharged into the sanitary sewers
and in other cases where special considerations are applicable, in the discretion of the city council, anything contained in this
chapter to the contrary notwithstanding.

(Code 1977, § 2.68; Ord. No. 01-010, § 2.68, 3-5-01)

Sec. 78-49. - Water and sewer extensions.
Water and sewer extensions outside the limits of the city shall be subject to the following. The city shall require that proposed users of city
water and/or sanitary sewers must first petition the city council for annexation to the city. If it is not possible to annex to the city, proposed
services may be obtained as follows:
(1)

Extensions will be granted by petition only, and petitioners will be required to pay all expenses for such extensions from
existing mains capable of providing required capacities. Such extensions shall be at the discretion of the city council who shall
take into consideration the existing water supply and/or sanitary treatment facilities.

(2)

The city shall charge the regular water rate to such outside users, plus an annual charge equivalent to the personal and real
property taxes of the user based on the state equalized rate of property involved at the city tax rate.

(Code 1977, § 2.69)

141/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 78-50. - Billing.
Billing for water service and sanitary sewer service shall be the responsibility of the city clerk. All water meters shall be read every quarter,
and bills shall be rendered every quarter. All billings shall be subject to a ten percent penalty if not paid on or before the due date.
(Code 1977, § 2.70)

Sec. 78-51. - Collection.
The payment of charges for water service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing the water service to any premises, and the
payment of charges for sanitary sewer service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing either the water service or the sanitary sewer
service to such premises, or both, and an action of assumpsit may be instituted by the city against the customer. The charges for water service
and sanitary sewer service, which, under the provisions of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), as amended,
are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien. The city clerk shall, annually, at the first
meeting in April of the city council, report to the council all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises which, on March 31
preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of six months. The city council may thereupon, after due notice to the owners of the premises so
served, assess the amount so found to be due, as a tax against the premises, and the assessment shall be certified to the city assessor, who shall
place the assessment on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes. In
cases where the city is properly notified in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), as amended,
that a tenant is responsible for water or sanitary sewer service charges, no such service shall be commenced or continued to such premises until
there has been deposited with the city clerk a sum sufficient to cover twice the average monthly bill for such premises as estimated by the city
clerk. Where the water service to any premises is turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges or sanitary sewer services charges,
the water service shall not be recommenced until all delinquent charges have been paid and a deposit as in the case of tenants is made, and there
shall be a water turn-on charge determined by resolution of the city council from time to time. In any other case where, in the discretion of the city
clerk, the collection of charges for water or sanitary sewer service may be difficult or uncertain, the clerk may require a similar deposit. Such
deposits may be applied against any delinquent water or sanitary sewer service charges, and the application thereof shall not affect the right of
the city to turn off the water service to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear interest, and such deposit,
or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the customer making the deposit, when he shall discontinue receiving water and sanitary
sewer service.
(Code 1977, § 2.71)

Sec. 78-52. - Water and sewer tap-in fees.
For all new service to new or existing residences, the following fees shall be charged, unless they are changed by resolution of the city council
from time to time:
(1)

Water tap-in, $300.00.

(2)

Sewer tap-in, $265.00.

(3)

Water and sewer main installation, actual cost to the city of main installation.

(4)

Meter charges shall be as set by resolution of the city council from time to time.

(5)

Water meters larger than three-quarter-inch and multiple installations shall be controlled by section 70-10

(6)

A permit and inspection fee of $20.00 shall be paid at the time of connection of the sewer line to the city main.

(7)

New subdivisions and multiple dwelling units, fees in accordance with section 70-10

(8)

There will be a charge of $15.00 for installation of an outside meter reader on existing installations, unless the regular reader
kit will not be appropriate, in which case the actual costs to the city will be charged.

(9)

All new users shall pay to the city a water service deposit of $150.00 except in those instances where the responsible party is
the fee title owner of the property to be served. This deposit shall be returned after three years if the customer has a payment
record of no more than three late payments within the three-year period, or may be used as a payment or partial payment on
any delinquent bill, and the balance shall be refunded upon the termination of service and settlement of the bill.

(Code 1977, § 2-72; Ord. of 11-21-94, § 1)

Sec. 78-53. - Deferred tap-in fees.

142/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

The owner of an existing residential home, located within the corporate limits of the city, may apply for the deferral of the water and/or sewer
tap-in fees (capital recovery fees). The payment schedule shall be one-third of the fee at the time of connection; one-third plus accrued interest
one year from the date of connection; and the entire balance two years from the date of connection. Interest shall be at the rate of 6 percent per
annum. This option is not available to newly constructed homes or rebuilt or replacement homes.
(Ord. No. 99-11/1, § 2.74, 11-1-99)

Sec. 78-54. - Collection agents.
The city clerk is authorized to enter into agreements providing for the collection of water and sewer charges by other than the city treasurer.
These agreements must provide for regular remittance to the city treasurer and may not authorize collection of delinquent charges. Any
agreements must first be approved by council resolution.
(Code 1977, § 2.73)

Sec. 78-55. - Nonresident properties.
This article is designed to establish the water rates and sewer rates for in-city properties only. Rates for nonresident properties shall be based
upon these rates, multiplied by the nonresident property factor.
(Ord. of 6-20-94, § 3)

Secs. 78-56—78-85. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - WATER SERVICE
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 78-86. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Department means the water department.
Lot means each lot as platted or equivalent frontage as would normally be divided into a lot, if platted.
Superintendent means the superintendent of the water department.
Water connection means that part of the water distribution system connecting the water main to a point between the curbline and property
line, including a curb box and curbstop.

Water main means that part of the water distribution system located within easement lines of streets and designed to supply more than one
water connection.

Water service pipe means that part of the water distribution system between the water connection and the premises served.
(Code 1977, § 2.21)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 78-87. - Water connections.
(a)

Water connections shall not be made unless the water main extends across the total frontage of the lot to be served, or across the
total frontage of the lot facing one street in the case of a corner lot. Water connections or water service pipes shall not cross one lot
to serve another lot. Water connections and water service pipes shall be installed in a separate trench not closer than four feet
from the sewer service.

(b)

The water connection shall be made by the water department upon payment of a connection fee based on current costs. All new

143/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
connections and service pipes, if installed by the department, shall be guaranteed for a period of ten years from the date installed.
Any repairs to any water connection and water service pipe shall be made at the expense of the owner whose premises are served
by the water connection and water service pipe, except where such repairs are made necessary by reason of defective material or
workmanship occurring within ten years after the connection and/or service pipe were made, in which event, under the service
guarantee of the city, such repairs shall be made at the expense of the city.

(Code 1977, § 2.22)

Sec. 78-88. - Turning on.
No person other than an authorized employee of the department shall turn on or off any water service, except that a licensed plumber may
turn on any water service for testing his work (when it must be immediately turned off) or upon receiving a written order from the department.
(Code 1977, § 2.23)

Sec. 78-89. - Hydrant use.
No person, except an employee of the city, in the performance of his duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant, except in case of emergency,
without first securing a written permit from the department. In no case shall any hydrant be opened or closed except with a hydrant wrench
provided by the city.
(Code 1977, § 2.29)

Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38.
Sec. 78-90. - Additional regulations.
The city manager may make and issue additional rules and regulations concerning the water distribution system, connections thereto, meter
installations and maintenance, hydrants and water mains and appurtenances thereto, not inconsistent herewith. Such rules and regulations shall
be effective upon approval by the city council.
(Code 1977, § 2.30)

Sec. 78-91. - Injury to facilities.
No person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city
water system.
(Code 1977, § 2.31)

Cross reference— Offenses against property, § 50-71 et seq.
Sec. 78-92. - Cross connections.
(a)

Adoption of state rules. The city adopts by reference the water supply cross connection rules of the state department of public
health being R 325.431 to R 325.440 of the Michigan Administrative Code.

(b)

Inspections. It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply
where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based
on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city and as approved by the state department of public health.

(c)

Right of entry of inspecting officials. The representative of the city water department shall have the right to enter at any reasonable
time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping
systems for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping systems on such property. The refusal of such information or
refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections.

(d)

Discontinuance of service; other precautionary measures. The superintendent of the water department is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section
exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public
water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connections have been eliminated in
compliance with the provisions of this section.

144/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
(e)

Labeling of nonpotable water supply. The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply sh
protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state and city plumbing codes. Any water outlet which c
used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
Water Unsafe
For Drinking

(f)

Authority of section. This section does not supersede the state plumbing code and city plumbing regulations, but is supplementary
to them.

(Code 1977, § 2.32)

Sec. 78-93. - Fluoride use.
Pursuant to ordinance adopted November 17, 1969, the city shall not at this present time add fluoride to the drinking water of the city in the
proportion of one part to 1,000,000 parts.
(Code 1977, § 2.33)

Secs. 78-94—78-115. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - WATER METERS

Sec. 78-116. - Use required.
All premises using water shall be metered. Water meters shall be of a make approved by the department and shall be purchased by the
property owner and installed by the department. No person except an authorized department employee shall break or injure the seal or change
the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any water meter. When a single water meter shall serve two or more rental units, the owner or
his agent shall be responsible for payment of water used on the premises. All new residential units in the city must have outside water meters.
(Code 1977, § 2.24)

Sec. 78-117. - Access.
The department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any premises when the department is not able to obtain access to the
meter. Water meters shall be so located as to be readily accessible for reading and repairing. Any qualified employee of the department shall, at
all reasonable hours, have the right to enter the premises where such meters are installed for the purpose of reading, testing, removing or
inspecting such meters. No person shall hinder, obstruct or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of his duties in relation to the
care and maintenance of such water meters.
(Code 1977, § 2.25)

Sec. 78-118. - Reimbursement for damage.
Any damage which a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the owner, agent or tenant, or from neglect of either of them, to
properly secure and protect the meter, as well as any damage which may be wrought by frost, hot water or steam backing from a boiler, shall be
paid by the owner of the property to the department on presentation of a bill therefor. In cases where the bill is not paid, the water shall be shut
off and shall not be turned on until all charges have been paid to the city.
(Code 1977, § 2.26)

Sec. 78-119. - Failure.
If any meter shall fail to register properly, the department shall estimate the consumption on the basis of former consumption and bill for
such consumption accordingly.
(Code 1977, § 2.27)

Sec. 78-120. - Inaccurate meters.

145/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

A customer may request that the meter be tested. If the meter is found defective, such meter will be replaced or repaired, and no service
charge will be made.
(Code 1977, § 2.28)

Secs. 78-121—78-150. - Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY

Sec. 78-151. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.

Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil and waste pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside of the inner face of the building wall.

Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
Debt service charge means the charge to defray all costs, direct and indirect, necessary to repay the local costs of capital improvements
allocable to the construction of facilities necessary to ensure adequate wastewater treatment.

Department means the city department of public works.
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and the handling, storage and
sale of produce.

Industrial cost recovery means the recovery from each industrial user a portion of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency grant which is
allocable to the construction of facilities for the treatment of wastes from such industries.

Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial, manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Major contributing industry means an industrial user that discharges a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday, a flow exceeding
five percent of the total treatment plant flow, toxic pollutants in toxic amounts as defined in the NPDES permit, or a flow with a significant impact
on the treatment plant when considered alone or in combination with other industrial users.

Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
Normal domestic sewage means a sanitary wastewater flow containing an average daily BOD of not more than 200 mg/l or an average daily
suspended solids concentration of not more than 250 mg/l.

Operation and maintenance means the necessary work, tests, repairs, cleaning and replacement of the sewage works to ensure performance
and continued operation in a manner which will conform to the design standards.

Operation and maintenance costs means all costs, direct and indirect (other than debt service), necessary to ensure adequate wastewater
treatment on a continuing basis, conforming with all related federal, state and local requirements, and to ensure optimal longterm facility
management (these O & M costs include depreciation and replacement costs).

pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

146/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Properly shredded garbage means wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in sewers, and no particle greater than one-half inch in any
dimension.

Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners or abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
Replacement means necessary expenditures made during the service life of the wastewater treatment facilities to replace equipment and
plant appurtenances required to maintain the intended performance of the treatment facilities.

Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
Sewer service charge means the charge to defray all costs, direct and indirect, necessary to repay the local costs of capital improvements
allocable to the construction of collecting, transporting and pumping facilities necessary to ensure adequate wastewater treatment.

Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
Slug means any discharge or water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeding for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, is more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.

Storm drain (storm sewer) means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but which excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.

Superintendent means the superintendent of public works of the city.
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.

Unit means that measure of potential sewage production which is equivalent to the quantity of sewage produced by or emanating from a
single-family residence occupied by any average family.

User means any premises connected to a public sewer and includes appurtenant land and improvements.
User charge means the charge levied on all users of the sewage works for the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement and
repair of such facilities.

User classes means the division of sanitary sewer customers into classes by similar process or discharge flow characteristics, as follows:
(1)

Commercial user means any retail or wholesale business engaged in selling merchandise or a service and that discharges only
segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.

(2)

Industrial user means any manufacturing establishment which produces a product from raw or purchased material. This
category shall also refer to any user of the publicly owned treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, under divisions A, B, D, E or I, excluding those users already identified in one of the other user classes. A user
may also be excluded from the industrial user class if it is determined that such user will discharge only segregated domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.

(3)

Institutional user means any educational, religious or social organization such as a school, church, nursing home, hospital or
other similar entity that discharges only segregated domestic wastes from sanitary conveniences.

(4)

Residential user means an individual home or dwelling unit including mobile homes, apartments, condominiums or
multifamily dwellings that discharge only segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.

Wastewater treatment facilities means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.41, 6-6-83)

147/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 78-152. - Privies and septic tanks.
Except as provided in division 3 of this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.42, 6-6-83)

Secs. 78-153—78-175. - Reserved.
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

FOOTNOTE(S):
(58) Cross

reference— Administration, ch. 2.

Sec. 78-176. - Protection of public health by withholding use of city water.
(a)

For the purpose of protecting the public health, the city council is hereby vested with the power to withhold the use of water from
the municipal water system from any person who has refused or is unable to comply with the terms of this article, or is a habitual
violator of this article.

(b)

Action to withhold use of city water may be taken by the city council on its own motion, or upon recommendation of the city
manager, based upon reasons assigned by him. Before withholding the use of water from the municipal water system, written
notice shall be given to the person to be affected stating the action contemplated and giving the reasons therefor. Such notice shall
be served in the manner provided in chapter 1 of this Code. The person affected may present evidence of a relevant nature at such
hearing, and the council shall decide the question in such a manner as to appear just and right and to the best interest of the public
health.

(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.53, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-177. - Actions.
The council is hereby authorized to bring any appropriate action in the name of the city, as may be necessary or desirable to restrain or enjoin
any public nuisance, to enforce any of the provisions of this article and, in general, to carry out the intents and purposes of this article.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.54, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-178. - Inspection and protection of sewers.
(a)

The city and duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing. While performing the necessary work
on private properties, the duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the owner or proprietor, who shall be held harmless for injury or death to such employees, and the city shall indemnify such
owner or proprietor against loss or damage to his property by such employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against such owner or proprietor and growing out of the gaging and sampling
operation, except as such as may be caused by negligence or failure of such owner or proprietor to maintain safe conditions.

(b)

No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city system.

(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.55, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-179. - Penalty for violation of article.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $100.00 and not more than $300.00 per day
for each and every day of such violation.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.56, 6-6-83)

148/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 78-180. - Rate structure.
Rate structure shall mean the established charges set by council action to defray the costs of operation and maintenance, debt service
charges and sewer service charges as separate items. Charges for all classes of users may be adjusted to reflect strength and other characteristics
described in this article which may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes or equipment. This charge as well as industrial
cost recovery shall be developed at the time such additional strengths or other characteristics or industry are noted or connected to the system.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.57, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-181. - Annual review.
The rate structure which provides the system income for operation and maintenance, debt service and sewer service charges shall be
reviewed annually to ensure adequate revenue to meet the costs being incurred as well as to ensure proportionality of charges to the various user
classes.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.58, 6-6-83)

Secs. 78-182—78-200. - Reserved.
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM

Sec. 78-201. - To be used where public sewer unavailable.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of division 4 of this article, the building sewer shall be
connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.44, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-202. - Standards.
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department
of public health, and shall be constructed and connected in accordance with the plumbing regulations of the city. No septic tank or cesspool shall
be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.45, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-203. - Discontinuance.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in division 4 of this
article, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.46, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-204. - Maintenance.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.47, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-205. - Additional requirements.
Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer,
or otherwise limit his powers.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.48, 6-6-83)

Secs. 78-206—78-225. - Reserved.
DIVISION 4. - SEWER CONNECTIONS

149/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 78-226. - Required.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer
of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division and regulations supplementary hereto, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do
so; provided, however, that such public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.43, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-227. - Permit requirements.
Neither the city nor any person shall connect any public sewer or system of public sewers to any city sewer, without first obtaining a permit
therefor from the city. Each such connection permit shall show the location and extent of the work, information regarding the owner, the
contractor and the engineer, and any other pertinent information as shall be determined to be necessary. All permits shall be obtained from the
offices of the city, for which a fee of $10.00 will be charged, by the city (except where the connection is made as a part of a sewer construction
program of the city) to cover the cost of inspection of the connection and to verify the result of the infiltration test. The city may change by
resolution the amount of this fee from time to time.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-228. - Water in ltration and ex ltration testing; standard air testing.
(a)

A test for water infiltration into such public sewer or system of public sewers shall be performed by the owner or contractor, after
completion thereof, in accordance with procedures established by the city. When such party has determined that the sewer or
system meets the following requirements for maximum infiltration, he shall arrange for the results of such tests to be verified by
the city. Groundwater infiltration at any time shall not exceed 200 U.S. gallons per inch of pipe diameter, per mile of sewer, per 24hour period. It shall be the responsibility of the city or other party constructing the sewer or system to make whatever correction
may be necessary to the same to meet the infiltration requirements prior to using the city sewers to which a connection is made. If,
in the opinion of the city, groundwater conditions at the time of the test would not provide a conclusive test of the extent of
infiltration, then an exfiltration test shall be required. If an exfiltration test is determined to be necessary, the maximum exfiltration
rate shall be the same as that permitted for infiltration.

(b)

In lieu of infiltration or exfiltration testing, the sewer line may be tested using standard air testing. The minimum holding time shall
be as follows:
MCPI Air Test Tables
Minimum Holding Time in Seconds Required for
Pressure to Drop from 3½ to 2½ PSIC
Pipe Diameter

Length

4

6

8

10

12

15

18

21

24

27

30

33

34

39

of Line

inches

inches

inches

inches

inches

inches

inches

inches

inches

inches

inches

inches

inches

inches

in Feet
25

4

10

18

28

40

62

89

121

138

200

248

299

356

418

30

9

20

35

55

79

124

178

243

317

401

495

399

713

837

75

13

30

53

83

119

186

267

346

473

601

743

898

1,020

1,105

100

18

40

70

110

158

248

356

485

634

745

851

935

150/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

125

22

50

88

138

198

309

446

150

26

59

106

165

238

371

310

175

31

69

123

193

277

425

200

35

79

143

220

317

225

40

89

158

248

340

250

44

99

174

275

275

48

109

194

283

300

53

119

211

350

62

139

227

400

70

158

450

79

170

500

88

550

97

600

106

650

113

170

227

283

340

425

510

595

680

595

680

765

851

825

1,020

1,105

Note: To be used when testing one diameter only
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-229. - Obtaining city approval for connection; requirements.
No building sewer shall be directly connected to any city sewer by any person without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city. The city
approval shall be obtained from the city upon payment of sewer connection charges as provided in section 78-44. The party to whom such
permits are issued shall be responsible for notifying the city at least 24 hours in advance of the date and time when such a connection is to be
made so that proper inspection of the connection can be made.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-230. - Construction procedures generally; sewer materials and joints.
(a)

Construction procedures. All connections to city sewers shall be made in a workmanlike manner and in accordance with the
procedures established by the city.

(b)

Building sewer materials and joints. Building sewers from the lateral sewer in the street or easement to within five feet from a
house shall be:
(1)

Six-inch-diameter C-200 vitrified sewer pipe with tylox (type B) wedglock (types 1 and 3) or amvit joints or other approved
joint;

151/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
(2)

Six-inch-diameter class 2400 asbestos cement pipe with ringtite or approved joint;

(3)

Six-inch-diameter, service strength, cast iron soil pipe with hot poured lead joint, or approved equal. All sewer lines within 50
feet of a private well and 75 feet of a semipublic well shall be cast iron soil pipe with hot poured lead joints, or approved
equal;

(4)

Six-inch-diameter C14X concrete pipe with O-ring joints or approved equal;

(5)

Six-inch-diameter material meeting the requirements of the state plumbing code; or

(6)

The crock to iron joint shall be sealed by an approved bituminous joint filler, encased in concrete to provide a watertight seal.
The iron pipe inside the building shall be plugged and leaded and remain plugged and watertight until such time as the
plumbing is carried on to the first floor, the basement is backfilled and the roof is on the building, thereby providing that no
water from the excavated basement will enter the sanitary sewer.

(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-231. - Licensing and permit requirements for construction.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without
being licensed to do such work by the city and without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-232. - Costs and expenses.
All cost and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-233. - Separate, independent sewer per building.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-234. - Materials and methods.
The size, slope alignment, material or construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the regulations and standard specifications of the city and other applicable rules and
regulations of the state.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-235. - Elevation of sewer and lifting of waste.
Whenever possible, the building sewer should be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary waste carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-236. - Guarding of excavations; restoration of public property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Secs. 78-237—78-260. - Reserved.
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC SEWER USE

152/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

Sec. 78-261. - Prohibited discharges.
(a)

No person shall connect or cause to be connected any downspouts, foundation drains, yard drains, areaway drains, catchbasins,
weep tile, perimeter drains or other sources of storm surface runoff or groundwater to any public sewers or to any building sewer
or drain which is connected to a public sewer, nor shall any person discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water into
any public sewer or into any building sewer or drain which is connected to a public sewer.

(b)

Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or
to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the
city, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.

(c)

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
(1)

Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.

(2)

Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity (either singly or by interaction
with other wastes) to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create
a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant (including, but not limited to,
cyanides in the excess of two mg/l and CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer).

(3)

Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.

(4)

Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair, fleshing,
entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.

(d)

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property or constitute a nuisance:
(1)

Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius).

(2)

Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l; or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees
Fahrenheit.

(3)

Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage shredder equipped with a
motor of three-quarters horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city.

(4)

Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or
not.

(5)

Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the
sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials.

(6)

Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding
limits which may be established by the city as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements
of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.

(7)

Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.

(8)

Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.

(9)

Materials which exert or cause:
a.

Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).

b.

Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).

c.

Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on
the sewage treatment works.

153/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances
(10)

Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment only to
such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.

(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.49, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-262. - Action by city.
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section 78-261, and which, in the judgment of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
(1)

Reject the wastes.

(2)

Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers.

(3)

Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.

(4)

Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes and sewer
charges.

(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-263. - Pretreatment subject to review and approval by city.
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to
the review and approval of the city.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-264. - Control manhole—When required.
Whenever the superintendent shall determine that any person using any property served by a sewer is discharging industrial wastes into the
sewer, the superintendent may require the person to install a suitable control manhole in the sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the person at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be
safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.52, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-265. - Same—Installation.
When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such a manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-266. - Measurements, tests and analyses; methods.
All measurement, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined
in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for, or
upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which a building sewer is connected.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-267. - Special agreements between city and industrial users.

154/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and an
industry, and any industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial
concern.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-268. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the judgment of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be substantially constructed, watertight, and equipped with easily
removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(Ord. No. 83-3, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-269. - Declaration of nuisance.
The limitations and requirements contained in this division are deemed to be absolutely essential for the preservation of the public health
and safety and the effective operation of the city sewage disposal plant, and the discharge into any sewer or drain in the city of any substance
which exceeds the limitations contained in this division is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and a violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.50, 6-6-83)

Sec. 78-270. - Discharge of stormwater.
No substance, other than stormwater, which contains appreciable amounts of organic matter, bacteria biochemical oxygen demand, or any
other substance which will cause pollution in the receiving stream, or which fails to conform to the general requirements contained in this
division, shall be placed or poured into any storm sewer. Stormwater from any street, sidewalk or yard, or roof water from any building now being
constructed, shall not be poured or delivered, or in any manner permitted to be introduced into any sanitary sewer, nor may the same be diverted
or emptied into any cistern or well which permits an overflow into a sanitary sewer system; provided, however, that when there is not a storm
sewer adjacent to such property, then such stormwater may be discharged into the ground.
(Ord. No. 83-3, § 2.51, 6-6-83)

Chapter 82 - VEGETATION
FOOTNOTE(S):
(59) Cross

reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other

public places, ch. 66.
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL

Secs. 82-1—82-30. - Reserved.
ARTICLE II. - GRASS AND WEEDS

FOOTNOTE(S):
(60) State

Law reference— Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq.

Sec. 82-31. - Cutting.

155/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

No person occupying or owning any premises shall fail to cut down or mow any grass, ragweed, Canada Thistles, burdocks, crab grass, quack
grass, wild growing bushes, milk weeds, wild carrots, oxeye daisies or other grass or weeds growing on property occupied by or owned by him or
growing on that portion of a street which adjoins property occupied by or owned by him.
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 1)

Sec. 82-32. - Duty of occupant or owner.
It shall be the duty of the occupant or the owner of every premises within the city to cut or mow any grass and to cut, mow, remove or destroy
by lawful means any such weeds whenever such grass or weeds have grown to a length of six inches.
(Ord. of 8-21-95, § 2)

Secs. 82-33—82-65. - Reserved.
ARTICLE III. - TREES

FOOTNOTE(S):
(61)

State Law reference— Planting of trees along highways, MCL 247.231 et seq.; care of trees and shrubs along highways, MCL 247.241 et seq.;

obnoxious plants and trees, MCL 124.151 et seq.
Sec. 82-66. - De nitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:

Department means the department of public works of the city. The word "superintendent" shall mean the superintendent of public works.
Park means all public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.
Prohibited species means any tree of the species of poplar (Populus Sp.), willow (Salis Sp.) and box elder (Acer Negundo).
Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, highways and boulevards in the city.
Tree means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation.
The terms of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated in this section, shall apply only to public streets, parkways, parks and other land
publicly owned or controlled by the city.
(Code 1977, § 3.11)

Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 82-67. - Departmental responsibility.
The department shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this article under the supervision of the superintendent.
(Code 1977, § 3.12)

Sec. 82-68. - Permits for tree planting, care and removal.
The superintendent shall have control over all trees located within the street rights-of-way and parks in the city and the planting, care and
removal thereof, subject to the regulations contained in this article. The owner of land abutting on any street may, upon obtaining prior written
permission of the superintendent, prune, spray, plant or remove trees in that part of the street abutting on his land not used for public travel, but
no person shall otherwise prune, spray, plant or remove any tree in any street or park. Every such permit shall specify the extent of the
authorization and the conditions to which it is subject. Where an owner of the abutting property requests the removal of a tree, the
superintendent is authorized, in his discretion, to require as a condition to granting of approval for such removal that such property owner make

156/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

the removal in accordance with regulations established by the department and assume all or any part of the costs of removing such tree, and also
to require that the tree removed be replaced at some other nearby location by planting another tree, not necessarily of the same type. No person
shall plant any tree of a prohibited species.
(Code 1977, § 3.13)

Sec. 82-69. - Tree protection.
No person shall, without authority, break, injure, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, or set any fire, or permit any fire, or the heat thereof, to
injure any portion of any tree. No person owning or using, or having control or charge of gas or other substance deleterious to tree life, shall allow
such gas or other deleterious substance to come in contact with the soil surrounding the roots of any tree, shrub or plant. No person shall attach
or keep attached to any tree or shrub, or to the guard or stake intended for the protection of such tree or shrub, any rope, wires, chains, signs or
other device whatsoever, except for the purpose of protecting it or the public.
(Code 1977, § 3.14)

Sec. 82-70. - Public tree care.
The department shall have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of the streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure safety or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public
grounds. The superintendent may remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition, or which by
reason of its nature is injurious to sewers or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest.
(Code 1977, § 3.15)

Sec. 82-71. - Private grounds.
The superintendent shall also have power to enter upon any private grounds in the city and to spray or otherwise treat or cause or order to
be sprayed or otherwise treated, any tree or shrub or plant infected or infested by any parasite or insect pest when it shall be necessary in his
opinion to do so; to prevent the breeding or scattering of any parasite or animal pests; to prevent danger therefrom to trees and shrubs planted
in public streets or other public places; and whenever in the opinion of the superintendent, trimming, treatment or removal of any such tree or
shrub located on private grounds shall be deemed otherwise, he shall have the power to trim, treat or remove any such tree or shrub or cause the
tree or shrub to be removed, treated or trimmed.
(Code 1977, § 3.16)

Sec. 82-72. - Inspection.
The superintendent is authorized to inspect any tree within the city reported or supposed to be infected with Dutch elm disease or the virus
phloem necrosis, commonly known as elm blight. If upon such inspection the superintendent determines that such tree is infected with either of
such diseases, he shall, if the tree is in any public street, ground or place within the city, immediately remove and burn the same in such manner
as to prevent as fully as possible the spread of such disease. If such tree is located on private property, the superintendent shall immediately
serve upon the owner of such property a written notice that such tree is so infected and that the tree must be removed and burned under the
supervision of the superintendent within five days of the service of such notice. If such owner cannot be found, a copy of the notice shall be
posted upon the infected tree. If the tree is not so removed and burned within five days after the service or posting of the notice, the
superintendent shall cause the tree to be so removed and burned. The cost of the removal and burning may be collected from the owner of the
property in the manner specified in section 62-13.
(Code 1977, § 3.17)

Sec. 82-73. - Trimming and corner clearance.
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall trim the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct
the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the
surface of the street or right-of-way. Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which
constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with
the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. Such trimming shall be
confined to the area immediately above the right-of-way. All shrubs and bushes located on the triangle formed by two right-of-way lines at the

157/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

intersection of two streets, and extending for a distance of 25 feet each way from the intersection of the right-of-way lines on any corner lot within
the city, shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than 30 inches above the sidewalk grade, in order that the view of the driver of a
vehicle approaching a street intersection shall not be obstructed. Trees may be planted and maintained in this area, provided that all branches are
trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of eight feet above the roadway surface. Any owner of any property failing to trim any
trees, shrubs or bushes in conformity with this section shall be notified by the superintendent to do so, and such notice shall require trimming in
conformity with this section within five days after the date of such notice. Upon the expiration of such period, the superintendent may cause the
trimming to be done, and the costs of such work may be collected from the owner of the property in the manner specified in section 62-13.
(Code 1977, § 3.18)

Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74.
Sec. 82-74. - Interference with superintendent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the superintendent, or any of his employees, agents or servants, while
engaged in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any trees, plants or shrubs in or upon any public
highway or public place or upon any private grounds as authorized in this article.
(Code 1977, § 3.19)

Sec. 82-75. - Additional rules and regulations.
The city manager may make additional rules and regulations pertaining to the planting, removal and care of trees, bushes and shrubs not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article, subject to approval by the city council. No person shall fail to obey any such rule or regulation.
(Code 1977, § 3.20)

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1977 CODE
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1977 Code, as updated through July 6, 1977, which are included herein.
Sections of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and
permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table.

1977 Code

Section

Section

this Code

1.20—1.23

66-61—66-64

1.30—1.32

26-2

1.36

26-1

1.40

2-36

1.41—1.45

2-86—2-90

1.50

2-111

1.60

2-131

1.70—1.76

46-31—46-37

1.80—1.84

38-81—38-85

1.90—1.93

78-1—78-4
158/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

1.100, 1.101

78-5, 78-6

1.110—1.112

42-31—42-33

1.120

54-31

1.130

2-151

1.140—1.144

2-61—2-65

1.145

2-371

1.146, 1.147

2-1, 2-2

1.150

2-186

1.151

2-251

1.153—1.155

2-253—2-255

1.160—1.170

2-326—2-336

1.172

2-231

1.176

2-211

1.178—1.182

2-301—2-305

1.190—1.193

2-391—2-394

1.201—1.206

62-1—62-6

1.207—1.225

62-8—62-26

1.231—1.235

2-416—2-420

1.236

2-441

1.241—1.251

30-1—30-11

2.1

58-1

2.2—2.10

58-31—58-39

2.21—2.23

78-86—78-88

2.24—2.28

78-116—78-120

2.29—2.33

78-89—78-93

2.61, 2.62

78-41, 78-42
159/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

2.65—2.72

78-45—78-52

2.73

78-54

2.81

58-61

2.84

58-64

3.1—3.7

54-61—54-67

3.11—3.20

82-66—82-75

4.1

66-41

4.2—4.13

66-86—66-97

4.18

66-131

4.20, 4.21

66-191, 66-192

4.23, 4.24

66-1, 66-2

4.26—4.29

66-3—66-6

4.41

66-161

4.42—4.45

66-221
66-224

4.46—4.49

66-162
66-165

4.51, 4.52

66-167
66-168

4.53—4.56

66-193
66-196

5.322

70-1

5.325

70-2

5.329

70-12

5.330—5.332

70-46—70-48

5.333

70-81

5.340—5.346

70-116
70-122
160/173

7/12/2019

5.351—5.354

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

70-156
70-159

5.361—5.367

70-4—70-10

5.368

70-3

5.371

70-11

7.61

18-692

7.62

18-691

7.63—7.65

18-693
18-695

7.71

18-306

7.72

18-331

7.73—7.76

18-307
18-310

7.77

18-332

7.81

18-506

7.82—7.84

18-531
18-533

7.85

18-507

7.91, 7.92

18-271
18-272

7.93, 7.94

18-246
18-247

7.121—7.125

18-366
18-370

7.129—7.133

18-436
18-440

7.135—7.137

18-176
18-178

7.151, 7.152

18-211
18-212

161/173

7/12/2019

7.153, 7.154

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

18-656
18-657

7.191

18-471

7.192

18-472,18-473

7.211—7.215

18-141
18-145

7.231

18-566

7.232—7.239

18-591
18-598

7.240

18-567

7.241—7.243

18-621
18-623

7.244, 7.245

18-568
18-569

7.247

18-570

7.301, 7.302

18-751
18-752

7.303

18-754

7.304

18-753

7.305

18-726

7.306, 7.307

18-755
18-756

8.21

14-516

8.22—8.26

14-551
14-555

8.27

14-517

8.28, 8.29

14-523
14-524

8.30

14-526

8.31

14-528
162/173

7/12/2019

8.32—8.36

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

14-518
14-522

8.37

14-525

8.38

14-527

8.39, 8.40

14-529
14-530

8.61, 8.62

14-586
14-587

8.63—8.72

14-587
14-596

8.401—8.407

34-31—34-37

9.1

34-107

9.12

50-72

9.18—9.20

50-74

9.25, 9.26

34-141
34-142

9.31, 9.32

50-185

9.40

78-7

9.41—9.44

10-1—10-4

9.49—9.53

10-36—10-40

9.61

50-1

9.62(1)

50-147

9.62(2)

50-141

9.62(3)

50-183

9.62(4)

50-182

9.62(5)

50-107

9.62(6)

50-3

9.62(7)

50-224
163/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

9.62(11)

50-222

9.62(13)

50-106

9.62(14)

50-145

9.62(15)

50-148

9.62(16)

50-144

9.62(17)

50-142

9.62(18)

50-5

9.62(19)

50-221

9.62(20)

50-220

9.62(21)

50-219

9.62(22)

50-218

9.62(23)

50-217

9.62(24)

50-223

9.62(25)

50-146

9.62(26)

50-143

9.62(27)

50-41

9.62(29)

50-4

9.62(30)

50-2

9.62(31)

50-73

9.62(32)

50-216

9.65

46-1

9.90—9.93

38-1—38-4

9.94

38-12

9.96

38-6

9.98

38-7

9.99

38-14
164/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

50-181
9.100—9.103

38-8—38-11

9.104

38-5

9.151—9.153

6-1—6-3

9.155

6-37

9.156, 9.157

6-4, 6-5

9.158

6-38

9.222, 9.223

34-73, 34-74

10.21—10.23

74-86—74-88

10.24, 10.25

74-97, 74-98

10.26

74-96

10.27—10.33

74-99—74-105

10.61—10.63

74-156
74-158

10.64, 10.65

74-131
74-132

10.66—10.69

74-159
74-162

10.91

74-196

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1977 Code, as updated through July 6, 1977, which are
included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1977 Code. Ordinances adopted since July 6, 1977, and not
listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature.

Ordinance

Date

Section

Number

Section
this Code

Ord. of

6-18-79

3.8

54-68

Ord. of

12- 7-81

1, 2

18-401, 18-402

165/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

82-5

8-16-82

83-3

6- 6-83

9.97

38-13
78-227—78-236
78-262, 78-263
78-265—78-268

2.41, 2.42

78-151, 78-152

2.43

78-226

2.44—2.48

78-201—78-205

2.49

78-261

2.50, 2.51

78-269, 78-270

2.52

78-264

2.53—2.58

78-176—78-181

9.221

34-71

83-6

8-15-83

83-8

11-21-83

84-2

4- 2-84

8.209(1)—8.209(4)

14-411—14-414

84-5

9-17-84

4.50

66-166

85-3

6-17-85

1.183—1.187

2-276—2-280

85-4

7- 1-85

9.54, 9.55

10-41, 10-42

86-3

4-21-86

2.81

58-61

2.83

58-63

2.86, 2.88

58-66

9.222

34-72

8.82—8.87

14-96—14-101

4.57

50-184

87-1

12-15-86

34-142

Ord. of

3- 7-88

Ord. of

10- 3-88

Ord. of

1-20-92

9.300—9.302

50-71

Ord. of

3-18-92

1(2.82)

58-62

2

58-65
166/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

3(2.87)

58-65

Ord. of

2-21-94

1—3

42-66—42-68

Ord. of

6-20-94

1(2.63)

78-43

2(2.64)

78-44

3

78-55

Ord. of

11-21-94

1

78-52

Ord. of

12- 5-94

1—4

58-101—58-104

Ord. of

6- 5-95

1—4

58-136—58-139

Ord. of

8-21-95

1, 2

82-31, 82-32

Ord. of

11- 5-95

1(8.125)

14-144

98-11/6>

11- 6-95

14-131, 14-132
1(8.93)

14-133

1(8.95)—1(8.97)

14-181—14-183

1(8.101)—1(8.106)

14-161—14-166

1(8.111), 1(8.112)

14-151, 14-152

1(8.121)

14-134

1(8.122)—1(8.125)

14-141—14-144

1(8.136)

14-135

1(8.141)—1(8.153)

14-256—14-268

1(8.156)—1(8.164)

14-286—14-294

1(8.171)—1(8.174)

14-316—14-319

1(8.175)—1(8.178)

14-321—14-324

1(8.179)

14-320

1(8.181)—1(8.187)

14-346—14-352

1(8.189)—1(8.193)

14-354—14-358

1(8.201)—1(8.208)

14-381—14-388
167/173

7/12/2019

Ord. of

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

11- 6-95

1(8.211)—1(8.214)

14-436—14-439

1(8.216)

14-440, 14-441

1(8.217)—1(8.221)

14-442—14-446

1(8.226)—1(8.238)

14-461—14-473

1 (8.91)—

14-131—14-133

1(8.93)
1(8.95)—1(8.97)

14-181—14-183

1(8.101)—1(8.105)

14-161—14-165

1(8.111), 1(8.112)

14-151, 14-152

1(8.121)

14-134

1(8.122)—1(8.124)

14-141—14-143

1(8.136)

14-135

1(8.141)—1(8.148)

14-256—14-263

1(8.156)—1(8.164)

14-286—14-294

1(8.171)—1(8.174)

14-316—14-319

1(8.176)—1(8.179)

14-321—14-324

1(8.181)—1(8.187)

14-346—14-352

1(8.189)—1(8.193)

14-354—14-358

1(8.201)—1(8.208)

14-381—14-388

1(8.211)—1(8.221)

14-436—14-446

1(8.226)

14-62

1(8.227)

14-61

1(8.228)—1(8.238)

14-63—14-73

97-6/16

6-16-97

1.163

2-329

98-3/2>

3- 2-98

9.80—9.82

50-224

99-9/20

9-20-99

1

74-1
168/173

7/12/2019

99-11/1>
01-02

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

11- 1-99
3- 5-01

2.74

78-53

1.231—1.235

2-416—2-420

1.236

2-441

01-03

3- 5-01

1, 2

6-6

01-05

3- 5-01

1.151

2-251

1.153—1.155

2-253—2-255

7.1—7.7

18-31—18-37

7.8

18-39

7.9

18-43

7.10—7.12

18-40—18-42

7.13—7.15

18-44—18-46

7.17

18-38

01-06

3- 5-01

01-07

3- 5-01

1—7

6-37

01-08

3- 5-01

1.163

2-329

01-09

3- 5-01

1.178—1.181

2-301—2-304

01-010

3- 5-01

01-011

4-16-01

78-48
2.151—2.155

74-116—74-120

STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Compiled Laws.

MCL

Section
this Code

8.3 et seq.

1-2

14.301 et seq.

Ch. 18, Art. XIII

15.231 et seq.

Ch. 2

15.261 et seq.

Ch. 2
169/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

2-302
15.341 et seq.

Ch. 2

29.1 et seq.

Ch. 38

35.441 et seq.

Ch. 18, Art. VIII

41.801 et seq.

Ch. 38

117.4i

1-16

117.4l(3), (4)

Ch. 2, Art. V

117.5b

1-1

117.5h

50-224

123.361 et seq.

Ch. 58

124.151 et seq.

Ch. 82, Art. III

125.31 et seq.

Ch. 2, Art. III,
Div. 7
2-326
2-331
2-336

125.401 et seq.

Ch. 14, Art. V
14-134

125.539 et seq.

Ch. 14, Art. III

125.1509

78-4

141.101 et seq.

78-51

141.261 et seq.

2-391

168.1 et seq.

Ch. 26

211.1 et seq.

14-71

211.1—211.157

14-471

247.61 et seq.

Ch. 82, Art. II

170/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

247.231 et seq.

Ch. 82, Art. III

247.241 et seq.

Ch. 82, Art. III

257.1 et seq.

34-71
Ch. 74
74-1
74-157

257.319

6-37

257.605, 257.606

Ch. 74

257.610

Ch. 74

257.951 et seq.

2-461

287.261 et seq.

Ch. 10, Art. II

287.290

Ch. 10

324.101 et seq.

Ch. 34
34-32
34-37

324.4301 et seq.

Ch. 58

324.9101 et seq.

34-31

324.11101 et seq.

Ch. 58

324.11501 et seq.

Ch. 58

324.11901 et seq.

Ch. 58

324.16101 et seq.

Ch. 58

333.6103

6-37

333.6107

6-37

333.7101 et seq.

2-463

333.7501 et seq.

2-461

333.12601 et seq.

Ch. 42, Art. III
171/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

333.13801 et seq.

Ch. 58

333.26201 et seq.

Ch. 58

400.271 et seq.

Ch. 18, Art. XIII

434.21 et seq.

2-461

434.181 et seq.

2-461

436.1 et seq.

Ch. 6
6-1

436.1101 et seq.

6-37

445.111 et seq.

Ch. 18, Art. XIII

445.371 et seq.

Ch. 18, Art. XVI

445.481 et seq.

18-401

560.101 et seq.

Ch. 70
70-2

560.111 et seq.

Ch. 70, Art. II

560.131 et seq.

Ch. 70, Art. III

560.132 et seq.

Ch. 70, Art. III

560.162 et seq.

Ch. 70, Art. III

560.166

Ch. 70, Art. III

560.241

Ch. 70, Art. III

560.241a

Ch. 70, Art. III

560.245

Ch. 70, Art. III

570.301—

74-120

570.309
600.101 et seq.

2-501

600.470 et seq.

2-461

600.3801

Ch. 2, Art. IV,
Div. 4
172/173

7/12/2019

Durand, MI Code of Ordinances

600.4701 et seq.

2-463

600.8396

2-503

600.8701 et seq.

Ch. 2, Art. V

722.1—722.6

6-37

750.49 et seq.

Ch. 10

750.239

2-461

750.240 et seq.

Ch. 38

750.453

50-221

173/173



City of Durand Zoning Ordinance
February 2004 TOC-1
C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND ZO TOC
UPDATE 7_2005.DOC
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
ARTICLE I ZONING ORDINANCE
Section 101. Short Title .................................................................................. 1
Section 102. Purpose and Objectives ............................................................ 1
Section 103. Date of Adoption ........................................................................ 1
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS
Section 201. Rules Applying to the Text ......................................................... 2
Section 202. Definitions ................................................................................. 2
ARTICLE III ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS
Section 300. Districts Established ................................................................ 19
Section 301. District Boundaries .................................................................. 19
Section 302. District Boundaries Interpreted ................................................ 19
Section 303. Zoning of Vacated Areas ......................................................... 20
Section 304. Zoning of Annexed Areas ........................................................ 20
ARTICLE IV R-1, R-2, and R-3 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section 400. Intent ....................................................................................... 21
Section 401. Principal Uses Permitted ......................................................... 21
Section 402. Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions .......... 21
Section 403. Area and Bulk Requirements ................................................... 23
ARTICLE V R-O RESIDENTIAL/OFFICE DISTRICTS
Section 500. Intent ....................................................................................... 24
Section 501. Principal Uses Permitted ......................................................... 24
Section 502. Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions .......... 24
Section 503. Area and Bulk Requirements ................................................... 25
ARTICLE VI R-M MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Section 600. Intent ....................................................................................... 26
Section 601. Principal Uses Permitted ......................................................... 26
Section 602. Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions .......... 26
Section 603. Required Conditions ................................................................ 28
Section 604. Area and Bulk Requirements ................................................... 28
ARTICLE VII C-1 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section 700. Intent ....................................................................................... 29
Section 701. Principal Uses Permitted ......................................................... 29
Section 702. Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions .......... 30
Section 703. Required Conditions ................................................................ 30
Section 704. Area and Bulk Requirements ................................................... 31
ARTICLE VIII C-2 SERVICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
Section 800. Intent ....................................................................................... 32
Section 801. Principal Uses Permitted ......................................................... 32

Zoning Ordinance 
City of Durand 
Shiawassee County, Michigan 

City of Durand hereby ordains these regulations for the use of land and structures within the City. 
Section 101. Short Title 
This Ordinance shall be known as the City of Durand Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 102. Purpose and Objectives 
It is the general purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public safety, health, morals, convenience, and general welfare. To accomplish this purpose, the Ordinance will address the following objectives: 
1. 	
Guide the use and development of land, buildings, and natural resources according to their suitability for particular activities. 

2. 	
Protect the community’s quality of life and enhance the social and economic stability of the City. 

3. 	
Reduce congestion on public streets and highways, and facilitate safe and convenient access to buildings and land uses. 

4. 	
Guide efforts to provide public services such as water supply, sewers, storm drainage, waste disposal, transportation, education, recreation, and public safety. 

5. 	
Establish standards to guide physical development of each Zoning District and of the City as a whole, and provide for enforcement of said standards. 

6. 	
Educate citizens and public officials about their shared responsibilities for wise use of community resources. 

7. 	
Strive to balance one property owner’s right to the peaceful use and enjoyment of his or her parcel with the rights of neighboring property owners to the peaceful use and enjoyment of theirs. 

8. 	
Direct the removal of nonconforming uses. 

9. 	
Act as a primary tool for the implementation of the Community Master Plan. 


Section 103. Date of Adoption 
The Ordinance was adopted by the Durand City Council on October 6, 2003. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004  -1-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND ZONING  
ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

Article II 
Definitions 


Section 201. Rules Applying to the Text 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain rules of construction apply to the Text, as follows: 
1. 	
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; and the singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 

2. 	
The word “person” includes a corporation or firm, as well as an individual. 

3. 	
The word “structure” includes the word “building.” 

4. 	
The word “lot” includes the words “plot,” “tract,” or “parcel.” 

5. 	
The term “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word “may” is permissive. 

6. 	
The words “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or structure shall be construed to include the words “intended, arranged, or designed used or occupied.” 

7. 	
The term “he” shall be read as he, she, or they. 

8. 	
Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction “and,” “or,” “either…or,” the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 

a. 	
“And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 

b. 	
“Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 

c. 	
“Either…or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 



9. 	
Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 


Section 202. Definitions 
1. 	
ABUT: To physically touch or border upon; to share a common property line. 

2. 	
ACCESSORY OCCUPATION: An accessory occupation is an occupation carried on within the walls of an accessory building and not visible or noticeable in any manner or form from outside the accessory structure 

3. 	
ACCESSORY USE: An accessory use includes a building or structure and is a use clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and located on the same lot as the principal use to which it is related. 

4. 	
ACTIVITY: See “Use.” 

5. 	
ADJACENT: A lot or parcel of land which shares all or part of a common lot line with another parcel of land. 

6. 	
ADULT BUSINESS: Refer to Section 1337. 

7. 	
ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITIES: A governmental or non-governmental establishment that provides foster care to six (6) or more adults. This includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. “Adult Foster Care Facility” does not include nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, or residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility. 

a. 	
ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME: A private residence with the approved capacity to receive six (6) or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for five (5) or more days a week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 

b. 	
ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME: An adult Foster Care Facility with the approved capacity to receive at least thirteen (13), but not more than twenty 

(20) adults who shall be provided foster care. 

c. 	
ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME: An adult Foster Care Facility with the approved capacity of not more than twelve (12) adults who shall be provided foster care. 



8. 	
AUTOMOBILE CAR WASH: An establishment being housed in a building or portion thereof together with the necessary mechanical equipment used for washing automobiles and using production line methods. 

9. 	
AUTOMOBILE SALES AND REPAIR SHOP: An auto sales or repair business is an establishment engaged in the sale, rental, or leasing of new or used automobiles, vans, or pickup trucks, or a business performing repairs on such vehicles, including work which requires the engine to be removed, replacement, or modification of the frame, body, transmission, or suspension systems, glass, or upholstery replacement, or the painting or undercoating of vehicles. 

10. 	
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building, land area, other premises, or portion thereof, used for the retail sales of gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and other operational fluids and accessories for automobiles, and the installation of such items, and for other minor automobile repair not to include auto refinishing, body work or painting, dismantling of vehicles for the purpose of reuse or resale of parts, or storage of automobiles other than those in for immediate repair. Such use shall be permitted to include an additional retail use, which may include but not be limited to a restaurant, gift shop, and convenience store. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

11. 	
BANK: A business establishment authorized to perform one or more of the following services: receive and safeguard money and other valuables; lend money at interest; execute bills of exchange; and, issue notes of circulation or currency. 

12. 	
BAR: A structure or part of a structure used primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by the drink. 

13. 	
BASE AREA: The area, which is the length times the width, in square feet as of the effective date of this Ordinance. 

14. 	
BASEMENT: A story having part, but not more than one half (1/2) of its height above finished grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than five (5) feet or is used for business or dwelling purposes. 

15. 	
BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling where meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for compensation and where one or more rooms are occupied by persons by prearrangement for definite periods of not less than one month. A boarding house is to be distinguished from a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast establishment, or a convalescent, nursing, or group home. 

16. 	
BUILDING: Any structure erected on site, a manufactured home or mobile structure, pre­manufactured or pre-cut structure, above or below ground, intended primarily for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 

17. 	
BUILDING ENVELOPE: That portion of a parcel or lot remaining after excluding required yard setback areas. 

18. 	
BUILDING, FRONT LINE OF: The line that coincides with the face of the building nearest the front of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and enclosed porches, but does not include the steps. Said line shall be parallel to the front line and measured as a straight line between the intersecting points with the side yard. 

19. 	
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of the finished grade line of the at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eave and ridges for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. 

20. 	
BUILDING LINE: A line defining the minimum front, side or rear yard requirement outside of which no building or structure may be located. 

21. 	
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main principal use of the lot on which it is located. 

22. 	
BULK STATION: A place where crude petroleum, gasoline, naphtha, benzene, kerosene, or any other flammable liquid is stored for wholesale purposes only, where the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks is more than six thousand (6,000) gallons. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

23. 	
BUSINESS SERVICES: A business service establishment provides services to other businesses as their primary clientele, and may involve some outside storage of equipment or vehicles, but not of inventory. Business services include, but are not limited to, employee training, audio or visual communication media (including broadcast antennas, sign production and installation, equipment rental or repair, building maintenance, and self service storage). 

24. 	
CLINIC: An establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, or similar professionals. 

25. 	
CLUB: An organization catering exclusively to members and their guests, or premises and buildings for recreational, artistic, political, or social purposes, which are not conducted primarily for gain and which do not provide merchandise, vending, or commercial activities, except as required incidentally for the membership and purpose of such club. 

26. 	
COMMERCIAL RECREATION: Commercial recreational facilities are for profit establishments providing recreational activities for a fee. Commercial recreational facilities include such uses as bowling alleys, roller rinks, etc. 

27. 	
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL: A commercial school is a private educational facility not operated as a nonprofit entity, and offering instruction in art, business, music, dance, trades, continuing professional education or other subjects. 

28. 	
COMMON LAND: A parcel or parcels of land together with the improvements thereon, the use, maintenance, and enjoyment of which are intended to be shared by the owners and occupants of the individual building units in a planned unit development. 

29. 	
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY: A building or group of buildings containing dwellings where the occupancy of the dwellings is restricted to persons sixty-two (62) years of age or older, or couples where either spouse is sixty-two (62) years of age or older. This does not include a foster care home, nursing home, or convalescent home. 

30. 	
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME: A building wherein infirm or incapacitated persons are furnished shelter, care, food, lodging, and needed attention for a compensation. 

31. 	
CONVENIENCE STORE: A retail operation selling a variety of items which are primarily grocery products. They include items that may be required by neighborhood residents on a day to day basis. Non-grocery items frequently sold in this kind of establishment include newspapers, magazines, seasonal needs, etc. 

32. 	
COVERAGE, LOT: That percent of the plot or lot covered by the building area. 

33. 	
CUL-DE-SAC: A street with only one outlet having sufficient space at the closed end to provide vehicular turning area. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004  -2-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND ZONING  
ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
34. 	
DAY CARE, FAMILY HOME: A private home in which six (6) or fewer minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 

35. 	
DAY CARE, GROUP HOME: A private home in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group day care home includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 

36. 	
DEPTH: For the purposes of interpreting the Dimensions Table, depth is the distance from a property line to a structure. 

37. 	
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 

38. 	
DWELLING TYPES: For the purposes of this Ordinance, dwellings are separated into the following categories: 

a. 	
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING is a detached building containing one (1) dwelling unit only, and complying with the regulations of Article 15, Section 1526. 

b. 	
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING is a building containing not more than two (2) dwelling units, and complying with the regulations of Section 1300. 

c. 	
MULTIPLE DWELLING is a building or portion thereof containing three (3) or more dwelling units, and complying with the regulations of Section 1300. 

d. 	
TOWNHOUSE is a one-family dwelling in a row of two (2) but no more than four 

(4) such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls. 

e. 	
MANUFACTURED HOMES is a factory built, single-family dwelling that meets the national Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, commonly known as the HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development) Code. 



39. 	
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms, including a single kitchen, in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes. 

40. 	
ELDERLY HOUSING: A building or group of buildings containing dwellings where the occupancy of the dwellings is restricted to persons 62 years of age or older, or couples where either spouse is 62 years of age or older. This does not include a foster care facility, home for the aged, or nursing home. 

41. 	
ENTERTAINMENT: For the purposes of this Ordinance, “entertainment” means live performance. Video machines, billiards, etc. are not considered entertainment. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

42. 	
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of underground surface or overhead electrical gas, water and sewage transmission and collection systems, and the equipment and appurtenances necessary for such systems to furnish an adequate level of public service. 

43. 	
FAMILY: An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together in a dwelling unit or group of not more than four (4) persons, who need not be related, living together in a single dwelling unit or a single individual doing his or her own cooking and living upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit, or a group of not more than twelve (12) unrelated persons, each of whom is handicapped with the meaning of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. Sec. 3602 (h), living together as a single housekeeping unit in an adult foster care home licensed by the State of Michigan, with such nonresident staff as may be needed to assist the residents with their daily life activities, but not receiving funding through a contract with any state or community health or social service agency. 

44. 	
FARM: A tract of land which is directly devoted to agricultural purposes, provided further that farms may be considered as including establishments operated as greenhouses, nurseries, orchards, chicken hatcheries, apiaries; but establishments keeping or operating fur bearing animals, riding or boarding stables, kennels, quarries or gravel or sand pits, shall not be considered farms hereunder, unless combined with bonafide farm operations on the same contiguous tract of land of not less than ten (10) acres. 

45. 	
FARMING, GENERAL: The practice of agriculture on a farm as defined above. 

46. 	
FARM ANIMAL, LARGE: Any four (4) footed creature as livestock which, at maturity, exceeds one hundred (100) pounds. This includes, but is not limited to, the following: cattle, hogs, horses, sheep, goats, deer and elk. 

47. 	
FEEDLOT: A small, confined area for fattening cattle or holding temporarily for shipment. 

48. 	
FENCE: A structure made of wood, posts, and or wire, erected to enclose an area and act as a barrier. 

49. 	
FENCE, PRIVACY: A barrier of at least five (5) feet in height and located so as to serve as a screen or barrier providing at least eighty (80) percent visual block. 

50. 	
FENCE, ORNAMENTAL: An open or semi-open fence, ornamental in nature, not intended to provide a permanent barrier to passage or for screening. Decorative fencing does not include chain link fencing. 

51. 	
FRUIT ORCHARD: A planting of fruit trees for the purpose of harvesting fruit. 

52. 	
FUNERAL HOME: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 

53. 	
GARBAGE: Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, storage, sale, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

54. 	
GREENHOUSE: A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material, and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or personal use. 

55. 	
GROSS FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces, loading spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six (6) feet. 

For the purposes of calculating parking and loading requirements, the gross floor area is the floor area used for service to the public. It shall not include floor area used solely for storage or processing and packaging of merchandise. 

56. 	
HOME OCCUPATION: Any business carried on in a dwelling by one or more members of a family residing on the premises. 

57. 	
HOSPITAL: An institution for the diagnosis, treatment or care of aged, sick or injured people. The term “hospital” shall include sanatorium, rest home, nursing home and convalescent home, but shall not include any institution for the care of mental disorders or the treatment of alcoholics or drug addicts. 

58. 	
HOUSE TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, and recreation and vacation uses. 

59. 	
INCINERATOR: An engineered apparatus used to burn waste substances and, in which all the combustion factors, temperature, retention time, turbulence, and combustion air, can be controlled. 

60. 	
JUNK/SALVGE YARD: A licensed open area where waste, used or second hand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rages, rubber tires, and bottles. A Junk/Salvage Yard includes automobile-wrecking yards, and two or more inoperative, unlicensed vehicles located on a single lot. Operations with the characteristics of salvage yards, which are called recycling centers, junk yards, scrap yards, etc., shall be considered as salvage yards. 

61. 	
KENNEL: A kennel is any facility where more than four (4) dogs or four (4) cats or any combination thereof totaling more than four (4) such animals, over four (4) months old are kept, housed, or boarded on a single parcel. 

62. 	
LOADING BIRTH/SPACE: An off-street space at least ten (10) feet wide, twenty-five (25) long, and fifteen (15) feet high, either within a building or outside on the same lot, provided, maintained and available for the loading or unloading of goods or merchandise, and having direct and unobstructed access to a public street or alley. 

63. 	
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a main building and accessory buildings thereto, together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this Ordinance. Every lot shall abut upon and have permanent access to a public street. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

64. 	
LOT AREA: The total horizontal land area within the lot lines of the lot. 

65. 	
LOT (CORNER, DOUBLE FRONTAGE, FLAG, INTERIOR, AND THROUGH): 

a. 	
LOT, CORNER: a lot which has at least two (2) contiguous sides abutting upon a street for their full length, and provided the two (2) sides intersect at an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 

b. 	
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: a lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 

c. 	
LOT, FLAG: A lot not fronting entirely on or abutting a public road, and where access to the public road is by a narrow, private right-of-way. 

d. 	
LOT, INTERIOR: is a lot other than a corner lot. 

e. 	
LOT, THROUGH: is an interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets which do not intersect at a point contiguous to such lot. 



66. 	
LOT LINES: The lines abutting a lot as defined herein: 

a. 	
LOT LINE, FRONT: That line separating the lot from a street right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot or through lot, the lines separating the lot from each street. 

b. 	
LOT LINE, REAR: Lot line which is opposite the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, the rear lot line may be opposite either front lot line, but there shall only be one rear lot line. In the case of a lot with side lines converging at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than twenty (20) feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line, and wholly within the lot. 

c. 	
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line, not a front lot line, or not a rear lot line. 



67. 	
LOT, WIDTH OF: The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where the required minimum front yard setback line intersects the side lot lines. For lots fronting on a curved road easement or right-of-way, or a cul-de-sac, lot width shall be the distance along a straight line which is both tangent to an imaginary line equidistant from the front lot line (at a building setback distance established for the zoning district wherein the development exists) and also parallel to the chord of such imaginary line, measured between its point of intersection with the side lot lines. 

68. 	
LOT OF RECORD: A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the County Register of Deeds, or in a common use by County and Community officials, and which actually exists as shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 

69. 	
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land, located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developed as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. 

A zoning lot shall satisfy this Ordinance with respect to area, size, dimensions, and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located and in order to comply shall exclude land area located within public rights-of-way. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the County Register of Deeds, and may include one (1) or more lots of record. 

70. 	
LUMBER YARD: A lumber yard is a business which emphasizes the sale of lumber and wood products where material may be stored or displayed in the principal building or in accessory shed type structures. 

71. 	
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A parcel of land fifteen (15) acres or more intended and designed to accommodate multiple manufactured homes for residential use, which is offered to the public for that use along with any structure, facility, rear or equipment permitted, and incidental to the residential use. Referred to also as “Park.” 

72. 	
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE: A plot or parcel of land within the Manufactured Home Park designed to accommodate one (1) manufactured home. 

73. 	
MANUFACTURED HOME STAND: That part of a Manufactured Home Space which has been reserved for the placement of Manufactured Home, appurtenant structures, or additions. 

74. 	
MINI-WAREHOUSE (SELF-STORAGE) FACILITY: A facility consisting of a building or a group of buildings in a controlled-access compound, where individual stalls or lockers are rented out to different tenants for the dead storage of customers' goods and wares. The use of the premises shall be limited to storage only, and shall not be used for any auction, or sales, or storage and transfer business; for the servicing, repair, or fabrication of any vehicle, boat, trailer, appliance, or similar item; or for the operation of power tools, compressors, kilns, or similar equipment; except, that limited sales to tenants of products and supplies incidental to the principal use, such as packing materials, identification labels, rope, locks, tape, etc., shall be permitted on the site devoted to this use. The storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers or explosive materials, as defined in the fire protection code, or toxic materials are expressly prohibited. 

75. 	
MODULAR HOME: A fabricated, transportable building unit designed to be incorporated at a building site into a structure on a permanent foundation for residential use. 

76. 	
MOTEL/HOTEL: A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in connecting units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed primarily for transient automobile facilities. The term “motel” shall include buildings designed as “auto courts,” “tourist courts,” “motor courts,” “motor hotels,” and similar names which are designed as integrated units of individual rooms under common ownership. 

77. 	
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: The term “nonprofit organization” shall include any church, school, governmental agency, service club or similar organization which owns or leases property in the City of Durand. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

78. 	
NONCONFORMITY: Any use of land or a building, any parcel of land, or any structure or structure on land in combination which does not comply with all of the District Regulations for the Zoning District in which it is located. 

79. 	
NUISANCE: An offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeated invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things including but not limited to: noise; dust; smoke; odor; barking dogs; glare; fumes; flashes; vibration; objectionable effluent; noise of a congregation of people, particularly at night; passing traffic; or invasion of street frontage by traffic generated from an adjacent land use which lacks sufficient parking and circulation facilities. 

80. 	
OFFICE: An office is a place of business in which professional services are rendered or management activities of an enterprise are carried out. All such activities take place inside a building. Office activities include, but are not limited to, law, medicine, dentistry, accounting or bookkeeping, tax preparation, insurance, securities brokerage, executive or managerial functions for any type of enterprise, workshop or studio for a graphic artist or photographer, studio for broadcast media, all aspects of a newspaper or publishing business, except actual printing, binding, or distribution centers, and a base of operation for sales people, which does not include storage or display of merchandise. 

81. 	
OPEN SPACE: Any unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with a building. 

82. 	
PARCEL: A parcel is a continuous piece of land under uniform ownership which is occupied or intended for occupancy by principal building or use, and any accessory structures or uses thereto. Every parcel shall abut upon and have permanent access to a public street. Also, “LOT.” 

83. 	
PARKING SPACE: An off-street space of at least two hundred (200) square feet exclusive of necessary driveways, aisles, or maneuvering areas suitable to accommodate one (1) motor vehicle and having direct unobstructed access to a street or alley. 

84. 	
PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESS: A personal service business primarily serves needs of individual people or families, including but not limited to, hair or skin care, grooming, dry cleaning, millinery or tailoring, shoe repair, and repair of small appliances, watches, or jewelry. 

85. 	
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: An area of minimum contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be planned and developed as a single entity containing one or more residential clusters or planned unit residential developments, and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential uses as shall be specified. 

86. 	
POOLS, SWIMMING: Any structure or container intended for swimming, located either above or below grade designed to hold water to a depth of greater than twenty-four (24) inches. 

87. 	
POOLS, WADING: A wading pool is permanent or portable in construction, which has a water depth twenty-four (24) inches or less, and which is also less than twelve (12) feet in diameter. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004  -9-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND ZONING  
ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
ARTICLE II 	Section 202 
88. 	
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. 

89. 	
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 

90. 	
PUBLIC STREET: Any vehicular way which: 

a. 	
Is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway, or; 

b. 	
Is shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law, or; 

c. 	
Is approved by other official action; and includes the land between the street or right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 



91. 	
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board fully authorized to furnish to the public electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation or water service. 

92. 	
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Vehicles primarily designed for conveyance upon the public streets or highways, and duly licensable as such, and which will permit temporary occupancy once stationed as a dwelling or sleeping place for one (1) or more persons. These vehicles can either be towed, hauled or affixed to another vehicle or driven from one site to another without requiring a State or County Special Transportation Permit for travel. 

93. 	
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT: A carry-out restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or method of operation includes both of the following characteristics: 

a. 	
Foods, desserts, or beverages are usually served in edible containers, or in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers. 

b. 	
The consumption of foods, desserts, or beverages within the restaurant building or within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises is prohibited. Food is intended primarily to be consumed off the premises. 



94. 	
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: A drive-in restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design, method of operation, includes one (1) or both of the following characteristics: 

a. 	
Foods, desserts, or beverages are served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle, either by a carhop, or by other means which eliminate the need for the customer to exit the motor vehicle. 

b. 	
The consumption of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises, or at other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building, is permitted. 




City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
95. 	RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD: A fast-food restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carry-out with consumption off the premises, and whose design or principal method of operation includes both of the following characteristics: 
a. 	
Foods, desserts, or beverages are usually served in edible containers or in paper, plastic, or other disposable containers. 

b. 	
The consumption of foods, desserts, or beverages within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises is posted as being prohibited and such prohibition is strictly enforced by the restaurateur. 


96. 	RESTAURANT, STANDARD: A standard restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods, desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to­consume state, and whose design or principal method of operation includes one (1) or both of the following characteristics: 
a. 	
Customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their foods, desserts, or beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which said items are consumed. 

b. 	
A cafeteria type of operation where foods, desserts, or beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant building. 


97. 	
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A street, alley, or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of persons, vehicles, or utilities. 

98. 	
ROADSIDE STAND: A “roadside stand” is a structure for the display of agricultural products, with no space for customers within the structure itself. 

99. 	
RUBBISH: A general term for solid waste, excluding food waste and ashes taken from residences, commercial establishments and institutions. 

100. 	
SALES AREA: The area open to the public of a retail or wholesale establishment used for the display or transaction of goods. 

101. 	
SANITARY LANDFILL: A tract of land developed, designed, and operated to accommodate general types of solid waste, including but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, soils, and concrete, but excluding hazardous waste. 

102. 	
SECTIONAL HOME: Two (2) or more units, fabricated and transported to the building site where they are put on a permanent foundation and there on finished as a residential unit. 

103. 	
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY: see Mini-Warehouse. 

104. 	
S.E.V.: The State Equalized Valuation of the Property in question, as determined by the ownership assessor. This is presumed to be fifty percent (50%) of the property’s true cash value. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

105. 	
SIGN: A name identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which is intended to direct attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. However, a “sign” shall not include a sign located completely within an enclosed building. 


For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following sign or sign related terms are defined: 
a. 	
AREA, OR SURFACE AREA, OF SIGN. That area per face enclosed by one outline, the sides of which make contact with the extreme points or edges of the sign, excluding the supporting structure which does not form part of the sign proper or of the display. 

b. 	
BILLBOARD SIGN. A freestanding outdoor sign which advertises something not located on the immediate premises. 

c. 	
CONSTRUCTION SIGNS. Sign which identify architects, engineers, contractors, and other individuals or firms involved with a construction project, but not including advertisement of any product. These include signs announcing the character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended. 

d. 	
ELECTRIC SIGN. Any sign containing electric wiring. This does not include signs illuminated by an exterior flood light source. 

e. 	
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD. Changeable copy signs in which the copy consists of an array of lights activated and deactivated simultaneously with a frequency of message change of not less than 20 seconds. Signs displaying time and temperature only may change messages with a frequency of no less than five (5) seconds. 

f. 	
ENTRANCE/EXIT. Signs directing traffic movement to or from a parcel. 

g. 	
FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign which is affixed to a permanent foundation, but not attached to the building proper. (Also “Ground Mounted” sign.) 

h. 	
GROUND LEVEL. The elevation to be used for computing the height of signs. Defined as the roadway centerline grade elevation at its intersection with the centerline of the driveway serving the parcel which is located nearest to the sign location. 

i. 	
HIGH PROFILE SIGN. A freestanding identity sign intended to announce the existence of a business located near an expressway interchange to travelers on the expressway so they may react in time to exit safely. 

j. 	
IDENTITY SIGN. A sign that identifies the business, owner, or resident and/or the street address and which sets forth no other advertisement. 

k. 	
ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign that provides artificial light directly or through any transparent or translucent material. 

l. 	
INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARD. A structure containing a surface area upon which is displayed the name of a religious institution, school, library, community center, or similar institution, and the announcement of its services or activities. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
ARTICLE II 	Section 202 
m. 	
INTEGRAL SIGN. Names of buildings or farm, date of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets, and the like when made an integral part of the walls of the structure (or roof for farm buildings). 

n. 	
JOINT SIGN. A sign which gives direction and identification to a group of adjacent businesses whether or not under single management. 

o. 	
LAND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT SIGNS, TEMPORARY. Signs pertaining to the sale, lease, rent, or development of a subdivision, planned shopping center, office building, industrial park, or similar land parcel. 

p. 	
LOCATION. A lot, premise, building, wall or any place whatsoever upon which a sign is located. 

q. 	
MARQUEE. An identification sign attached to or made a part of a marquee, canopy, or awning project from and supported by the building. 

r. 	
MONUMENT: A sign extending upward from grade which is attached to a permanent foundation for a distance not less than fifty (50) percent of its length, and which may be attached or dependent for support from any pole, posts, or similar uprights provided such supports are concealed within the sign structure. 

s. 	
POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGNS. Signs announcing candidates for public political office and other data pertinent to an upcoming election. 

t. 	
PRIVATE TRAFFIC DIRECTION. Signs directing traffic movement or giving instructions, located within a parcel. 

u. 	
PROJECTION. The distance by which a sign extends over public property or beyond the building line. 

v. 	
PROJECTING SIGN. A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure. 

w. 	
PROPERTY RENTAL SIGNS. Signs on the premises announcing rooms, apartment, or houses for rent, not to exceed four (4) square feet. 

x. 	
PUBLIC SIGNS. Signs of a governmental nature and in the public interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the performance of his or her public duty. 

y. 	
REAL ESTATE SIGNS. Signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which they are displayed. 

z. 	
ROOF LINE. This shall mean either the high point of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette, and where a building has several roof levels, this roof or parapet shall be the one belonging to that portion of the building on whose wall the sign is located. 


aa. ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -15-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

aa. SPECIAL PURPOSE SIGNS. Any other temporary signs. 
ab. STREET BANNERS. Fabric signs, suspended across public streets advertising a public entertainment or event. The location and contents of each street banner must be specially approved by the Shiawassee County Road Commission. 
ac. TEMPORARY SIGN. A display, informational sign, banner, or other advertising device intended for a limited period of display, including any sign which can be physically lifted, pulled, carried, or wheeled from one location to another. 
ad. WALL SIGN, FLAT. One affixed directly to or otherwise inscribed on an exterior wall and confined within the limits thereof of any building, and which projects from that surface less than twelve (12) inches at all points. 
106. 	
SITE, AREA: The total area within the property lines, excluding rights-of-way, easements, etc. 

107. 	
SPECIAL USE: The term applies to a use which may be permitted by the issuance of a Special use Permit by the City of Durand City Council. Specified procedures and requirements, as outlined in cited sections, must be complied with prior to final issuance of said permit. 

108. 	
STABLE, PRIVATE: An accessory building in which horses are kept for private use and not for hire, remuneration, or sale, and further that no more than three (3) horses are boarded. 

109. 	
STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: A State Licensed Residential Facility is a private residence licensed by the State of Michigan to receive not more than six (6) aged, emotionally disturbed, developmentally disabled or physically handicapped adults who require ongoing supervision, but not continuing nursing care. Note that the licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. Note also that none of the following may be construed to be a State Licensed Residential Facility: a nursing home, home for the aged, or hospital as defined by Act 386 of 1978; a hospital for the mentally ill as defined by Act 258 of 1974; a county infirmary as defined by Act 280 of 1939; a child caring institution, children’s camp, foster family home or group home as defined by Act 116 of 1973; a Veterans’ facility as defined by Act 152 of 1885; nor an alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation center, a residential facility for persons released from or assigned to adult correctional institutions, a maternity home, a hotel or a rooming house, nor a residential facility licensed by the State to care for four (4) or fewer minors. 

110. 	
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for the use. A half story (1/2) containing independent apartments or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 

111. 	
STORY, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the top surface of one floor to the top surface of the next above. The height of the top most story is the distance from the top surface of the floor to the top surface of the ceiling joints. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

112. 	
STREETS: A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles. For purposes of this Ordinance, streets shall be defined to also include the term roads. Streets are further classified by the functions they perform. 

a. 	
Local (minor) streets: streets primarily designed to provide access to immediately adjacent properties. Through movement may be possible, but is not encouraged by operational controls; it may be impossible in the case of cul-de-sacs. Part of the street width is usually allocated to vehicle parking without restrictions, although special snow emergency parking prohibitions may be necessary. Each abutting property may have a driveway connection to the street. 

b. 	
Collector (secondary) streets: streets primarily designed to provide access to abutting land parcels, and also enable moderate quantities of traffic to move expeditiously between local streets and the major street network. 

c. 	
Major (primary) streets: streets primarily designed for the efficient movement of through traffic at speeds which are as high as can be reasonably allowed in view of safety considerations and the amount of access also being provided. Capacity is obtained by provision of wide street cross sections and high capacity controls at intersections, or by elimination of intersections by grade separation. Speed results from provision of good horizontal and vertical alignments and removal of potential safety hazards, especially access friction. 

d. 	
Freeway (expressway): A limited access divided multi-lane major arterial street intended for through traffic typically designed with grade separation at major intersections. For purposes of this ordinance, freeways shall not be defined to include rights-of-way for entrance ramps, exit ramps or feeder roads supporting the freeway. 



113. 	
STREET LINE: The legal line of demarcation between a street right-of-way line and land for service, benefit or enjoyment. 

114. 	
TAVERN: An establishment used primarily for the serving of liquor by the drink to the general public and where food or packaged liquors may be served or sold only as accessory to the primary use. 

115. 	
TEMPORARY OUTDOOR USE: A use carried out in an open area or uncovered or temporary structure, which is disbanded when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected, has ceased. 

116. 	
USE: The employment or occupation of a building structure or land for service, benefit, or enjoyment. 

117. 	
VARIANCE: A modification of the literal provisions of this Ordinance granted when strict enforcement thereof would cause practical difficulty owing to circumstances unique to the specific property on which the modification is granted by the Board of Appeals on Zoning, or undue hardship when pertaining to a use variance request. 

118. 	
VETERINARIAN: One qualified and authorized to treat diseases and injuries of animals. 

119. 	
VISUAL SCREEN: A method of shielding or obscuring one abutting structure or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely planted vegetation. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

120. 	
WHOLESALE BUSINESS: A wholesale business is an enterprise which buys and/or repackages products for sale to retail businesses. Inventory of a wholesale business is stored within an enclosed building. 

121. 	
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION ANTENNA (WCA): Any antenna used for the transmission or reception of wireless communication signals excluding those used for public emergency systems, television, ham radio, satellite antennas and video programming services. 

122. 	
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SUPPORT FACILITY (WCSF): A monopole, guyed or lattice type tower designed for the attachment of or as support for wireless communication antennas or other antennas. 

123. 	
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a building, which may not be occupied by buildings, structures, or parking areas, except as otherwise provided. The measurement of a yard shall be construed as the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building line. 

124. 	
YARD, FRONT: A yard between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 

125. 	
YARD, REAR: A yard between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 

126. 	
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the nearest point of the main building and any side line. 

127. 	
ZONING DISTRICT: Zoning Districts are those areas of the community within which similar land use activities are permitted and for which the regulations contained within this Ordinance are the same. Zoning Districts are identified in Section 300. 


City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -18-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

ARTICLE III 
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS 


Section 300. Districts Established 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Durand is hereby divided into the following districts: 
R-1 	One-Family Residential District 
R-2 	One-Family Residential District 
R-3 	One-Family Residential District 
R-M 	Multiple-Family Residential 
R-O 	Residential/Office 
C-1 	Central Business District 
C-2 	Service/Business District 
C-3 	General Business District 
I Industrial District Section 301. District Boundaries The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the Zoning Districts Map, City of Durand Zoning Ordinance, which accompanies this Ordinance, and which map with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if fully described herein. 
Section 302. District Boundaries Interpreted 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the Zoning Districts Map, the following rules shall apply: 
1. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines if streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such center lines. 

2. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 

3. 	
Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporate limits shall be construed as following corporate limits. 

4. 	
Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks. 

5. 	
Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line, boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, canals, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 

6. 	
Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Subsections 1 through 5 above, shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 

7. 	
Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by Subsections 1 through 6 above, the Board of Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 

8. 	
Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the Zoning Districts Map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 


City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -19-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

Section 303. Zoning of Vacated Areas 
Whenever any street, alley, or other public way, within the City of Durand shall be vacated, such street, alley, or other public way or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same zoning district as the property to which it attaches. 
Section 304. Zoning of Annexed Areas 
Wherever any area is annexed to the City of Durand, one of the following conditions will apply: 
1. 	Land that is zoned previous to annexation shall be classified temporarily as being in whichever district of this Ordinance most clearly conforms with the zoning that existed prior to annexation, such classification to be recommended by the Planning Commission to the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Council shall approve same by resolution. The City Council shall have a period up to two (2) years to enact the final zoning classification and to amend the zoning districts map. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -20-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

ARTICLE IV 
R-1, R-2, and R-3 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 


Section 400. Intent 
The intent of the R-1, R-2, and R-3 One-Family Residential Districts is to provide for an environment of one-family detached dwellings of an urban nature along with other residentially related facilities which serve the residents in the district. 
Section 401. Principal Uses Permitted 
In a One-Family Residential District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
1. 	
One-family detached dwellings. 

2. 	
Adult Foster Care Family Home (Six or Fewer). 

3. 	
Publicly owned and operated parks, parkways, and recreational facilities. 

4. 	
Family Day Care Homes. 

5. 	
Home Occupations, as regulated in Section 1313. 

6. 	
Churches. 

7. 	
Cemeteries, which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of this Ordinance. 

8. 	
Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education, and not operated for profit. 

9. 	
Wireless Communication Antennas. 

10. 	
Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 


Section 402. Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 
The following Special Condition Uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with Section 4c (2) of the City-Village Zoning Act, as may be amended, and further subject to the review and approval of the City Council, as specified in Section 1400. 
1. 	Public, parochial, and private intermediate or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. 
a. 	Access to the site shall be in accordance with Section 1315. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -21-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

2. 	
Utility and public service buildings and uses (without storage yards), when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 

3. 	
Nursery schools, day nurseries, and child care centers (not including dormitories), provided that for each child so cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet and shall be fenced and screened from any adjoining lot in any residential district. 

a. 	All access to the site shall be in accordance with Section 1315. 

4. 	
Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers; nonprofit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 

a. 	
The proposed site for any of the uses permitted herein which would attract persons from, or are intended to serve, areas beyond the immediate neighborhood shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the Major Thoroughfare Plan, and the site shall be so planned as to provide all access in accordance with Section 1315. 

b. 	
Front, side, and rear yards shall be at least eighty (80) feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. 

c. 	
Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than one-half (1/2) of the member families and/or individual members. The Planning Commission may modify the off-street parking requirements in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will, therefore, be pedestrian. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases, wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirement shall be determined by the Planning Commission on the basis of usage. 

d. 	
Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this Ordinance, said pool area shall be provided with a protective fence, four (4) feet in height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate. 



5. 	
Golf Courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, subject to the following conditions: 

a. 	
The site shall be so planned as to provide all access in accordance with Section 1315. 

b. 	
The site plan shall be laid out to achieve a relationship between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, entrances, driveways, and parking areas which will encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 

c. 	
Development features, including the principal and accessory buildings and structures, shall be so located and related as to minimize the possibilities of any adverse affects upon adjacent property. This shall mean that all principal or accessory buildings shall be not less than two hundred (200) feet from any property line abutting residentially zoned lands; provided that where topographic conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view, the Planning Commission may modify this requirement. 

d. 	
Whenever a swimming pool is to be provided, said pool shall be provided with a protective fence four (4) feet in height, and entry shall be by means of a controlled gate. 



6. 	
Cemeteries, provided that access to said site shall be in accordance with Section 1315. 

7. 	
Bed and breakfast operations when located only in the R-3, One-Family Residential District. 

8. 	
Two-family dwellings (duplex), when located only in the R-3, One-Family Residential District, subject to the following conditions: 

a. 	
The requirements of Section 1100 

b. 	
The building shall have an outward appearance of a single-family dwelling. 

c. 	
Adequate off-street parking shall be provided. 



9. 	
Group day care home when located only in the R-2 and R-3, One-Family Residential Districts. 

10. 	
Adult Foster Care Small Group Home for not more than twelve (12) adults when located only in the R-2 and R-3, One-Family Residential Districts, and subject to the following conditions: 

a. 	
Minimum lot size shall be three (3) acres. 

b. 	
All access to the site shall be in accordance with Section 1315, access to a major thoroughfare. 




City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -22-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

Section 403. Area and Bulk Requirements 
See Article XIII, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -23-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  


Article V 
R-O Residential/Office Districts 

Section 500. Intent 
The R-O, Residential Office Districts, are designed to afford a transition of use in existing housing areas by permitting new construction or conversion of existing structures. This district recognizes the existence of older residential areas of the City where larger houses have been or can be converted from single-family and two-family residences to low intensity office use in order to extend the economic life of these structures and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs and modernization. 
Section 501. Principal Uses Permitted 
In a Residential Office District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
1. 	All uses in the One-Family Residential Districts permitted and as regulated by Section 
401. The standards of the Schedule of Regulations applicable to the R-2, One-Family Residential District, shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected. 
2. 	
Professional offices such as: medical (excluding medical and veterinary clinics) and dental, chiropractors, optometrists, osteopaths, and similar or allied professions. 

3. 	
Professional services such as: insurance, real estate, legal, financial, and similar or allied professions. 

4. 	
Funeral Homes. 

5. 	
Churches. 

6. 	
Wireless Communication Antennas. 

7. 	
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 


Section 502. Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 
The following Special Condition Uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with Section 4c (2) of the City-Village Zoning Act, as may be amended, and further subject to the review and approval by the City Council, and as specified in Section 1400. 
1. 	All special condition uses for the One-Family Residential Districts permitted and, as regulated under Section 402. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -24-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

Section 503. Area and Bulk Requirements 
See Article XIII, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -25-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  


Article VI 
R-M Multiple-Family Residential Districts 

Section 600. Intent 
The R-M, Multiple-Family Residential District, is designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures and related uses, which will generally serve as a transitional land use between nonresidential districts and lower density one-family districts. The Multiple-Family District is further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise medium density, one-family community. 
Section 601. Principal Uses Permitted 
In a Multiple-Family Residential District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
1. 	
Two-Family Dwellings. 

2. 	
Multiple-Family Dwellings. 

3. 	
Housing for the Elderly. 

4. 	
Adult foster care large group homes. 

5. 	
Adult foster care small group homes. 

6. 	
Townhouses. 

7. 	
Boarding Houses. 

8. 	
Manufactured Home Parks, as regulated in Section 1328. 

9. 	
Wireless Communication Antennas. 

10. 	
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 


Section 602. Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 
The following Special Condition Uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with Section 4c (2) of the City-Village Zoning Act, as may be amended, and further subject to the review and approval by the City Council and, as specified in Section 1400. 
1. 	
All special condition uses in the One-Family Residential District permitted, and as regulated under Section 402. 

2. 	
Hospitals, with no maximum height restrictions, when the following conditions are met: 

a. 	
All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least three (3) acres in area. 

b. 	
All access to the site shall be in accordance with Section 1315. 

c. 	
The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least fifty (50) feet for front, rear, and side yards for all two (2) story structures. For each story above two (2), the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least twenty (20) feet. 

d. 	
Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential view with an obscuring wall or fence six (6) feet in height. 



3. 	
Convalescent or Nursing Homes when the following conditions are met: 

a. 	
The building shall not exceed a building height of two (2) stories. 

b. 	
The minimum lot size shall be three (3) acres. 

c. 	
No building shall be closer than forty (40) feet to any property line. 

d. 	
All access to the site shall be in accordance with Section 1315. 

e. 	
There shall be provided on the site, not less than fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of open space for each bed in the home. The fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of land area shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirement, and accessory uses, but shall not include the area covered by main or accessory buildings. 



4. 	
Congregate Housing for the Elderly when the following conditions are met: 


City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -26-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

a. 	All housing for senior citizens shall be constructed on parcels of at least three (3) acres and may provide for the following: 
1) 	Cottage type, one-story, dwellings and/or apartment type dwelling units. 
2) 	Common service containing, but not limited to, central dining rooms, recreational rooms, central lounge, and workshops. 
b. 	
Minimum dwelling unit size shall be three hundred fifty (350) square feet per unit (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities). 

c. 	
Retail and service uses may be permitted on the site if such uses may be permitted on the site if such uses are accessory to the elderly use. All such uses shall be within the principal residential building. No exterior signs of any type are permitted for these accessory uses. 

d. 	
All medical waste facilities shall be secured and meet the requirements of the Health Department of the State of Michigan. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
e. 	
Total coverage of all buildings (including dwelling units and related service buildings) shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total site not including any dedicated public right-of-way. 

f. 	
Buildings of greater height than the maximum height allowed in Article XIII, Schedule of Regulations may be allowed, provided front, side, and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one (1) foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 


Section 603. Required Conditions 
1. 	
The maximum horizontal length of any one building shall be one hundred eighty (180) feet measured along any front, side, or other exterior elevation. 

2. 	
The minimum land area required for each multiple-family dwelling unit in the district shall be in accordance with Section 1101, d. 

3. 	
Within any yard setback or area between buildings, an area equivalent to seventy (70) percent of any required yard or any required minimum area between buildings must be landscaped and developed as usable open space or recreation area available to the residents of the development, and further, said areas shall be kept free of all vehicular uses. 

4. 	
On sites which are four (4) acres or larger in size, the open land area shall include a landscaped greenbelt of a minimum ten (10) foot width, located and continually maintained, along any property boundary adjoining a residential district, or fronting on a public road right-of-way. 

5. 	
The minimum livable floor area per multiple-family unit shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 

6. 	
See Section 1101 “Notes to Schedule”, for additional provisions related to Multiple Family Units. 


Unit Type  Maximum Floor Area Required (Square Feet)  
Efficiency  350 square feet  
One Bedroom  600 square feet  
Two Bedroom  800 square feet  
Three or More Bedrooms  1,000 square feet  

Section 604. Area and Bulk Requirements 
See Article XIII, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -28-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  


Article VII 
C-1 Central Business District 

Section 700. Intent 
The C-1, Central Business District, is designed to cater to the needs of the local and regional consumer population. It is generally characterized by an integrated cluster of establishments serviced by a common parking area, and generating large volumes of pedestrian traffic and ancillary vehicular trips. 
Section 701. Principal Uses Permitted 
In the Central Business District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
1. 	
Office-type business related to executive, administrative, or professional occupations including, but not limited to, offices of a lawyer, accountant, insurance/real estate agent, architect, engineer, and similar occupation. 

2. 	
Clinics, except veterinary clinics having outdoor runs. 

3. 	
Medical, dental, and optical laboratories that provide testing services, or provide medical or dental services such as artificial limbs, teeth, eye glasses, etc. 

4. 	
Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses, not offering drive-through facilities. 

5. 	
Business service establishments such as typing services, photocopying services, quick printing establishments, office supply stores, and similar establishments. 

6. 	
Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building such as, but not limited to, groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods, or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions, or hardware. 

7. 	
Personal service business establishments, which perform services on the premises such as, but not limited to, repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, photographic studios, and self-service laundries and dry cleaners. 

8. 	
Dry cleaning establishments or pick-up stations, dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited. 

9. 	
Standard or carry-out restaurants. 

10. 	
Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls, or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 


11. Post office buildings.  
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -29-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

12. 	
New and used car salesrooms, showrooms, or offices which do not provide outdoor sales space and/or service and repair activities. 

13. 	
Health and athletic clubs. 

14. 	
Discount department or variety stores. 

15. 	
Any service establishment of an office, showroom, or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer, or an establishment doing radio or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct. 

16. 	
Local municipal administration buildings, museums, and libraries, excluding outdoor storage. 

17. 	
Wireless Communication Antennas. 

18. 	
Other uses similar to the above uses. 

19. 	
Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 


Section 702. Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 
The following Special Condition Uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with Section 4c (2) of the City-Village Zoning Act, as may be amended, and further subject to the review and approval by the City Council, as specified in Section 1400. 
1. 	Residential Units when the following conditions are met: 
a. 	
The dwelling unit(s) shall be provided on any floor other than a floor where grade level access is provided. 

b. 	
The minimum floor area per unit shall equal: 

c. 	
Off-street parking shall be provided in the ratio of two (2) parking spaces for each residential unit provided. 


Unit Type  Maximum Floor Area Required  
One Bedroom  620 square feet  
Two Bedroom  720 square feet  
Three Bedroom  920 square feet  
Four or More Bedrooms  960 square feet  

Section 703. Required Conditions 
Outdoor storage of commodities shall be expressly prohibited. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -30-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

Section 704. Area and Bulk Requirements 
See Article XIII, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -31-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  


Article VIII 
C-2 Service Commercial District 

Section 800. Intent 
The C-2, Service Commercial District, is designed to provide sites for more diversified business types, which would often be incompatible with the pedestrian movement in the Central Business District and, which are oriented to serving the needs of “passer-by” traffic and locations for planned shopping centers. Many of the business types permitted also generate greater volumes of traffic and activities which must be specially considered to minimize adverse effects on adjacent properties. 
Section 801. Principal Uses Permitted 
In a Service Commercial District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
1. 	All uses in the C-1, Central Business District, permitted and as regulated under Section 
701. 
2. 	
Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls. 

3. 	
Hotels/motels subject to the following: 

a. 	
Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare. 

b. 	
Each unit shall contain not less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. 

c. 	
No guest shall establish permanent residence at a motel for more than thirty (30) consecutive days within any calendar year. 



4. 	
Bowling alley, billiard hall, video arcade, indoor archery range, indoor tennis courts, indoor skating rink, or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation when located at least one hundred (100) feet from any front, rear, or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential district. 

5. 	
Plant material nursery and other open air business uses. 

6. 	
Auto wash establishments. 

7. 	
Automotive service facilities providing: tire (but not recapping), battery, muffler, rust proofing/undercoating, auto glass, reupholstering, wheel balancing, shock absorbers, wheel alignments, and minor motor tune-ups only, when developed in accordance with the following: 

a. 	
There shall be no outside display of any parts and/or products. 

b. 	
Any repair and/or replacement activity shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building. 

c. 	
All new, used, and/or discarded parts shall be stored within a completely enclosed building approved by the Building Department. 

d. 	
Any such activity shall be located not less than twenty-five (25) feet from a property line. 

e. 	
There shall be no outside parking and/or storage or any partially dismantled or inoperative vehicles. 

f. 	
In operations such as automobile reconditioning, but not necessarily limited to, such activities there shall be no releasing of toxic gases, liquids, or materials in any form into the atmosphere, the water or sewer systems of the City of Durand or on, or into the earth, and further, no adverse affects shall be created by any activity on adjacent property or development. 



8. 	
Veterinary hospitals and clinics having boarding facilities. 

9. 	
Wireless communication antennas. 

10. 	
Other uses similar to the above uses. 

11. 	
Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 


City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -32-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

Section 802. Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 
The following Special Condition Uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions which may be imposed in accordance with Section 4c (2) of the City-Village Zoning Act, as may be amended, and further subject to the review and approval by the City Council, as specified in Section 1400. 
1. 	Vehicle dealers with outdoor sales space and/or repair facilities for the sale of new or secondhand automobiles, house trailers, recreational vehicles, or rental trailers and/or automobiles, all subject to the following: 
a. 	
The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area. 

b. 	
The driveway to an outdoor sales area shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets. 

c. 	
Any servicing of vehicles, including major motor repair and refinishing, shall be subject to the following requirements: 


1) 	Any such activities shall be clearly incidental to the sale of said vehicles and shall occur within a completely enclosed building. 
2) 	Partially dismantled and/or damaged vehicles shall be stored within an enclosed building. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -33-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

3) 	New, used, and/or discarded parts and supplies shall be stored within a completely enclosed building. 
4) 	Any such activity shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
5) 	There shall be no external evidence, beyond the building, by way of dust, odor, or noise of such activities. 
d. 	All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
2. 	Business in the character of an open front store or a fast food or drive-in restaurant subject to the following conditions: 
a. 	
A setback of at least sixty (60) feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained. 

b. 	
Access points shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets. 

c. 	
All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts, 

d. 	
A six (6) foot high completely obscuring wall shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are residentially zoned. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground. Said wall shall further meet the requirements of Article XIII, General Provisions. 


3. 	Automobile Service Stations and Accessory Retail Uses subject to the following conditions. 
a. 	
No repair work shall be permitted, other than incidental service, including the addition of motor oil, windshield/wiper fluid or transmission fluid. 

b. 	
No steam cleaning or undercoating shall be permitted. 

c. 	
A principal building, of not less than four hundred (400) square feet in area, shall be required. 

d. 	
Minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for an automobile service station. Gasoline filling stations may be permitted on lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. For each additional accessory use such as, but not limited to, a fast-food restaurant, car wash, or convenience store, an additional 5,000 square feet of lot area shall be provided. In no instance shall the percentage of building coverage on site exceed 35 percent. 

e. 	
Minimum lot width and frontage shall be not less than one hundred and fifty (150’) feet. 

f. 	
A building shall be located not less than fifty (50’) feet from any right-of-way line. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
g. 	
Ingress and egress to the facility shall only be from a major thoroughfare or from a shared access drive to such roadway. Drives shall not be more than thirty (30’) feet in width. 

h. 	
Not more than two (2) driveways onto adjacent roadways shall be permitted per road frontage. Curb cuts shall not be permitted where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, it may produce a safety hazard to adjacent pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 

i. 	
No drive or curb opening shall be located nearer than twenty-five (25’) feet to any intersection or adjacent residential property line, as measured along the property line. No drive shall be located nearer than thirty (30’) feet, as measured along the property line, to any other drive on the premises. No drive shall be located less than ten (10’) feet from any lot line, as measured along the property line. 

j. 	
The entire lot, excluding the area occupied by buildings, shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or asphalt material, except landscaped areas which shall be separated from all paved areas by a low barrier or curb. 

k. 	
All lubrication equipment, motor vehicle washing equipment, hydraulic hoists and pits shall be enclosed entirely within a building. All gasoline pumps shall be located not less than fifteen (15’) feet from any lot line, and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles shall not be supplied with gasoline or serviced while parked upon or encroaching upon any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way. 

l. 	
When adjoining residentially zoned property, a six (6’) foot masonry wall shall be erected and maintained along the connecting interior lot line, or if separated by an alley, then along the alley lot line. All masonry walls shall be protected by a fixed curb or similar barrier to prevent contact by vehicles. Such walls may be eliminated or gradually stepped down in height within 

m. 	
Twenty-five (25’) feet of any right-of-way line, subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator. 

n. 	
All outside storage areas for trash, auto parts and similar items shall be enclosed by a six (6’) foot ornamental masonry wall with such storage being located in the rear yard. 

o. 	
Any stored items may not be stacked higher than the enclosing wall height. Outside storage or parking of disabled, wrecked, or partially dismantled vehicles shall not be permitted for a period exceeding five (5) days. 

p. 	
The sale of new or used cars, trucks, trailers, and any other vehicles on the premises is expressly prohibited. 

q. 	
All exterior lighting shall be erected and hooded so as to shield the glare of such lights from view by adjacent properties. In no instance shall such lighting exceed a brightness of 1.0 foot-candles as measured at the property line. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
r. 	
The site should be no less than two hundred (200’) feet from any place of public assembly, including any hospital, sanitarium, school, church, or other institution. Measurement shall be the closest distance between the pump islands and the exterior wall of the building used for public assembly. 

s. 	
The view of all restroom doors and/or service bay doors shall not be visible from adjacent residential districts. 

t. 	
A permanent covered structure shall be provided over that portion of the pump island and drive area of any station wherein customers are required to dispense fuel into their own vehicles on a self-service basis. Such structure shall not be enclosed by walls and shall be provided with a minimum clearance of thirteen feet, six inches (13'-6") between the underside of the roof structure and the drive surface. For purpose of this Ordinance, setback requirements shall not apply to canopies; however, in no instance shall they extend beyond the property line. 

u. 	
All off-street parking areas, maneuvering lanes, and paved surface areas shall be drained so as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property and public rights-of-way. 

v. 	
A minimum ten (10’) foot greenbelt, planted in accordance with the specifications of Section 1318 shall be provided along all right-of-way lines bordering a major thoroughfare. 

w. 	
Auto wash facilities, when established in connection with the principal use on the same zoning lot, shall comply with the following standards. 


1) 	All washing activities must be carried on within an enclosed building. 
2) 	Vacuuming activities shall be at least fifty (50’) feet distant from any adjoining residential zone. In no instance shall the weighted sound level from the vacuuming activity exceed 77dBA when measured at the property line. 
3) 	The entrances and exits of the facility shall be from within the lot and not directly to or from an adjoining street or alley. A street or alley shall not be used as maneuvering or parking spaces for vehicles to be serviced by the subject facility. 
4) 	Provision shall be made for the drying of the automobile’s undercarriage during freezing weather prior to entering the public thoroughfare for all automatic auto wash facilities. In addition, such auto washes must also install underground heating elements at each vehicle exit to prevent icing at grade. 
5) 	There shall be provided no less than five (5) stacking spaces for each automatic wash lane. 
6) 	Vehicle stacking spaces shall be clearly separated from pump islands and from routes necessary for entering and exiting the property, and in a manner which precludes pedestrians from traversing through such space. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
x. 	Convenience stores and/or fast food restaurants, when established in connection with the principal use on the same zoning lot, shall comply with the following standards: 
1) 	The sale of alcoholic beverages is expressly prohibited. 
2) 	Buildings shall be so arranged on site in a manner that screens any drive-through lanes from adjoining residentially zoned land. 
3) 	Drive-through lanes shall be separated from pump islands and from routes necessary for entering and exiting the property. 
4) 	Customer parking for convenience store and/or fast food use shall be located on the site in a manner which precludes pedestrians from traversing through drive-through lanes and off-street loading zones. 
5) 	Loading zones shall be restricted to the rear or side yards. 
6) 	There shall be provided no less than five (5) stacking spaces for the drive-through lane. 
7) 	Food service areas shall by physically separated from vehicle repair and service facilities. 
8) 	The sale of snack food items, commonly consumed by travelers (e.g. pop, candy, packaged snacks and goods dispensed through a vending machine), bread, milk, juice, cigarettes and sundry items 
9) 	shall be permitted as part of a gasoline filling or service station provided that the sale of such items is clearly incidental to the sale of vehicular fuel and lubricants, minor parts and accessories; and further provided that the area used for the sale and storage of food and sundry items does not exceed a usable floor area of five hundred (500) square feet. 
10) 	For facilities consisting of any underground storage tanks, the site shall be three hundred (300’) feet from any residential well, eight hundred (800’) feet from a non-community public water well and two thousand (2,000’) feet from any public water well. 
y. 	On-site parking shall equal the sum of the number of parking spaces required separately for each use. 
5. 	Mini-warehouse (self-storage facility) subject to the following conditions: 
a. 	
The minimum size of the site devoted to such use shall not be less than three (3) acres. 

b. 	
Building setbacks shall be as follows: Front yard not less than twenty (20) feet; side and rear yard not less than ten (10) feet. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
c. 	
Building separation between self-storage buildings on the same site shall be fifteen 

(15) feet, as measured from side-to-side or front-to-rear, or equal to the building height, whichever is greater. 

d. 	
The total lot coverage of all structures shall be limited to fifty (50) percent of the total lot area. 

e. 	
When adjacent to a residential district, a sight-proof barrier shall be provided around the perimeter of the development. Said barrier shall be located at the setback line and may consist of either the solid facades of the storage structures or a fence. If a fence is provided, it shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height and shall be constructed of brick, stone, masonry units, or wood products which are determined by the Building Inspect9or to be durable and weather resistant. 

f. 	
A ten (10) foot landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between the property line and required barrier along all street frontages. A five (5) foot landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between the property line and barrier where the site abuts any residential district. All materials shall be planted in conformance with Section 1518. 

g. 	
Parking shall be provided in the ratio of one (1) space for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of gross building area. At a minimum, two (2) parking spaces must be assigned to, and located conveniently to, each individual storage building. In addition, two (2) spaces for the resident manager, and one (1) additional space for each additional employee shall be provided adjacent to the rental office. 

h. 	
Internal driveway aisles shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width. 

i. 	
All off-street parking areas and driveways shall be hard surfaced and drained in accordance with Section 1505. 

j. 	
All ingress and egress from this site shall be directly onto a collector or major thoroughfare as identified on the City Future Land Use Plan. 

k. 	
Building height shall not exceed one (1) story, fifteen (15) feet, except that a caretaker or resident manager’s unit may be allowed a building height of two (2) stories, twenty-five (25) feet. 

l. 	
No single storage building shall exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet. 

m. 	
All storage on the property shall be kept within an enclosed building. 

n. 	
The use of the premises shall be limited to storage only, and shall not be used for any auction, sales, storage, and transfer business; for the servicing, repair, or fabrication of any vehicle, boat, trailer, appliance, or similar item; or for the operation of power tools, compressors, kilns, or similar equipment; except that limited sales to tenants of products and supplies incidental to the principal use, such as packing materials, identification labels, rope, locks, tape, etc. shall be permitted on the site devoted to this use. The storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible fibers, or explosive materials, is defined in the fire protection code, or toxic materials are expressly prohibited. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 803. Area and Bulk Requirements 
See Article XIII, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of the lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -39-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  


Article IX 
C-3 General Business District 

Section 900. Intent 
The General Business District is established to provide an aesthetically attractive working environment for large commercial offices and specialized retail uses. These are generally uses that draw their market from a regional area as opposed to more local types of businesses. Larger parcels of land will be required to accommodate higher parking and landscape standards. 
The provisions of this Article have been developed to coordinate these developments with the intent to: 
1. 	
Establish and maintain high aesthetic standards. 

2. 	
Preserve the district’s visual character by assuring improvements are properly related to their sites and to surrounding developments. 

3. 	
Encourage originality, flexibility, and innovation in site planning and development, including architecture, landscaping and graphic design. 

4. 	
Encourage development that is compatible with and complementary to nearby residential and commercial uses. 


Section 901. Principal Uses Permitted 
In the General Business District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered, or enlarged, except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
1. 	
Corporate headquarters, regional headquarters, and general administrative offices used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government. 

2. 	
Hospitals, medical clinics, and/or optical facilities that provide testing services or provide medical or dental devices such as artificial limbs, teeth, eyeglasses, etc. 

3. 	
Business and technical schools. 

4. 	
Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations (but not including service or storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the location of such facilities within the district. 

5. 	
Health and athletic clubs. 

6. 	
Common open space, including pedestrian plazas and courts. 

7. 	
Wireless Communication Antennas. 

8. 	
Other uses similar to the above uses. 

9. 	
Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 


City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -40-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

Section 902. Accessory Uses 
The following shall be allowed as accessory uses in the General Business District: 
1. 	
Uses and structures customarily accessory and incidental to a permitted use. 

2. 	
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. 

3. 	
Day care facilities. 

4. 	
Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, saunas, game and craft rooms, tennis courts, and exercise studios, which are provided in association with a permitted use. 

5. 	
Parking and loading structures and areas provided in conjunction with a permitted use. 


Section 903. Area and Bulk Requirements 
See Article XIII, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of the lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -41-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  


Article X 
I Industrial District 

Section 1000. Intent 
The I Industrial District, is designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. 
The general goals of this use district include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
1. 	
To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the Municipality’s expected future economy for additional manufacturing and related uses. 

2. 	
To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development. 

3. 	
To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, and other objectionable influences. 

4. 	
To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the Municipality’s tax revenue. 


Section 1001. Principal Uses Permitted 
In the Industrial District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 
1. 	
Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot, or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 

2. 	
Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding, or processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 

a. 	
Warehousing and wholesale establishments and trucking facilities. 

b. 	
The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as, but not limited to, bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge, and machine shops. 

c. 	
The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles of merchandise from previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood, and yarns. 

d. 	
The manufacture of pottery and figurines, or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 

e. 	
Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and meal or rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products. 

f. 	
Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radio and phonographs. 

g. 	
Laboratories – experimental, film, or testing. 

h. 	
Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like. 

i. 	
Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, provided that such plants shall not deal directly with consumer at retail. 

j. 	
All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards, and other related uses. 



3. 	
Warehouse, storage, and transfer and electric and gas service building, and yards. Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations. 

4. 	
Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor’s equipment and supplies. 

5. 	
Municipal uses such as water treatment plants, and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other similar municipal buildings and uses, including outdoor storage. 

6. 	
Kennels. 

7. 	
Greenhouses. 

8. 	
Trade or industrial schools. 

9. 	
Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage requirements or activities (such as, but not limited to, lumber yard, building materials, outlet, upholsterer, cabinet maker). 

10. 	
Recycling centers. 

11. 	
Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops when located in a completely enclosed building. 

12. 	
Wireless Communication Antennas. 

13. 	
Mini-warehouses (self-storage facilities) subject to the design requirements of Section 802, 5). 

14. 	
Other uses similar to the above uses. 

15. 	
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 


City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -42-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -43-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

Section 1002. Principal Uses Permitted Subject to Special Conditions 
The following Special Condition Uses shall be permitted subject to the conditions hereinafter required for each use, subject to any and all reasonable conditions, which may be imposed in accordance with Section 4c (2) of the City-Village Zoning Act, as may be amended, and further subject to the review and approval by the City Council, as specified in Section 1400. 
1. 	Commercial television and radio towers, public utility microwaves, public utility television transmitting towers, subject to the following conditions: 
a. 	
They shall be located centrally on a continuous parcel of not less than 1.0 times the height of the tower measured from the base of said tower to all points on each property line. 

b. 	
A barrier, not exceeding eight (8) feet in height shall be installed along the perimeter of the development. Said barriers shall be located at the setback line and consist of either an ornamental masonry wall or fence constructed of materials which are determined by the Building Inspector to be durable and weather resistant. 

c. 	
A ten (10) foot landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between the property line and required barrier along all street frontages. A five (5) foot landscaped greenbelt shall be provided between the property line and barrier where the site abuts any residential district. All materials shall be planted in conformance with Section 1518. 

d. 	
A minimum of two (2) parking spaces must be provided on site and interior to the perimeter barrier. The parking area shall be provided with a permanent durable and dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within said parking area. 

e. 	
All towers shall be developed on a site consisting of at least two (2) acres in size. 


2. 	Wireless Communication Support Facilities as regulated in Section 1332. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -44-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

Section 1003. Required Conditions 
No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted, within any district, which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy and operation, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained. Generally accepted methods of collection and standard methods of chemical analysis shall be used in the application of these requirements: 
1. 	
Smoke and/or Air Pollution Control. The emission of gases, smoke, dust, dirt, and fly ash should in no manner be unclean, destructive, unhealthful, hazardous or deleterious to the general welfare. Such emission shall be in strict conformance with all applicable Federal, State and County health laws pertaining to air pollution and smoke abatement. 

2. 	
Open Storage. The open storage of junk, scrap or salvage or other waste products where the operations are for the conversion to saleable materials shall be screened from public view, from a public street and from adjoining properties not of a similar nature, by an enclosure consisting of a solid wall or fence not less than six (6’) feet in height. 

3. 	
Glare and Radioactive Materials. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to emit quantities exceeding those established as safe by the 

U.S. Bureau of Standards and/or the Atomic Energy Commission when measured at the property line. 

4. 	
Fire and Explosive Hazards. In the Industrial District the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning as determined by the Fire Marshall, is permitted subject to compliance with all the other performance standards above mentioned. The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials, goods or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning, as determined by the Fire Marshall, is permitted subject to compliance with all other yard requirements and performance standards previously mentioned, and providing that the following conditions are met: 

a. 	
All flammable liquids, solvents, cleaners, and other hazardous substances capable of contaminating groundwater shall be stored within the building and secondary containment measures shall be installed and utilized to prevent spilled materials from contacting the ground. 

b. 	
Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced in completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible exterior walls, which meet the requirements of Building Codes. 

c. 	
All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least forty (40’) feet from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with installation standards prescribed by the National Board of Fire Underwriters. 

d. 	
The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, gases and explosives shall comply with the State Rules and Regulations as established by Public Act No. 207 of 1941, as amended. 

e. 	
All handling of flammable or hazardous substances shall be in accordance with State and Federal laws and all required State and Federal permits shall be obtained and the establishment shall remain in conformance therewith. 



5. 	
Noise. Noise shall not be emitted which exceeds seventy (70) decibels as measured at the property boundary line, except that where normal street traffic noises exceed seventy 

(70) decibels during such periods, the measurable noise emanating from subject premises may be equal to, but shall not exceed, such traffic noises. 

6. 	
Vibration. Vibration as measured at the property lines shall not cause a displacement of greater than three thousandths (.003) of one inch. 

7. 	
Lighting. All lighting or other forms of illumination utilized on private property shall be arranged and so located that it will not shine, reflect, or glare into public streets or surrounding properties in a disturbing manner. 


City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -45-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

Section 1004. Area and Bulk Requirements 
See Article XIII, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
City of Durand Zoning Ordinance  
February 2004 -46-C:\USERS\JLUNDGREN\DESKTOP\NEW FOLDER (2)\DURAND  
ZONING ORDINANCE UPDATE 7_2005.DOC  

ARTICLE XI Section 1100 
Article XI 
Schedule of Regulations 

Section 1100, Schedule, Limiting Height, Bulk, Density and Area by Zoning District  
Minimum size per zoning lot (a)  Maximum building height  Maximum building lot coverage in percent of lot area  Minimum Yard Setback (Per Lot in Feet)  Minimum livable floor area per unit in square foot  
Area in square feet  Width in feet  in stories  in linear feet  Front  Each side  Rear  
Residential Districts  
R-1, One Family Residential  12,500  90  2  25  35%  30 (b)  12 (b), (c)  35(b)  1,200  
R-2, One Family Residential  9,600  80  2  25  35%  25 (b)  10 (b), (c)  35 (b)  950  
R-3, One Family Residential  7,200  70  2  25  35%  25 (b)  10 (b), (c)  35 (b)  950  
R-O, Residential/ Office  7,200  70  2  30  35%  25  10  25  950  
R-M, Multiple Family Residential A. Duplex B. Multiple  7,200 (d)  66 200  2 2-1/2  25 30  35% 30%  25 (f) 25 (e)  10 (f) 20 (e) (g)  25% 20 (e) (g)  Eff. 350 1 bdr. 620 2 bdr. 720 3 bdr. 920 4 or more 960  
Commercial Districts  
C-1, Central Business  40  (i), (j), (m)  20 (k)  
C-2, Service Commercial  30  (j) (h)  (i) (j) (l) (m)  (j) (l) (k)  
C-3, General Business  30  75 (j) (h)  75 (j) (l) (m)  75 (j) (l) (k)  
Industrial Districts  
I Industrial (n)  43,560  40  50 (j) (h) (n)  25 (j) (l) (m)  20 (j) (k) (l) (p)  

City of Durand Zoning Ordinance 
May 2003 -47-P\DUR6106\0\01T\ADMIN-SUPPORT\COPRES\ZO dated 10 1 02.DOC 

Section 1101.Notes to Schedule 
(a) 	
See Section 1102, “Lot Size Averaging” and Section 1103, “Single-Family Clustering Development,” regarding flexibility allowances. 

(b) 	
For all uses permitted other than single-family residential, the setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback required in Section 1300, or whichever is greater. 

(c) 	
In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard of the district in which located. 

(d) 	
In a R-M, Multiple-Family District, the total number of rooms (not including kitchen, dining, and sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the area of the parcel, in square feet, divided by twelve hundred (1200). All units shall have at least one (1) living room and one (1) bedroom, except that not more than ten (10) percent of the units may be of an efficiency apartment type. For the purpose of computing the permitted number of dwelling units per acre, the following room assignments shall control: 


Efficiency -One room 
One Bedroom -Two rooms 
Two Bedroom -Three rooms 
Three Bedroom -Four rooms 
Four Bedroom -Five rooms 

Plans presented showing 1, 2, or 3 bedroom units and including a “den,” “library,” or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
The area used for computing density shall be the total site area exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either interior or bounding roads. 
(e) 	In all R-M, Multiple-Family Residential Districts, the minimum distance between any two 
(2) buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings, and in no instance shall this distance be less than thirty (30) feet. Parking may be permitted within a required side or rear yard, but shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the area of any required yard, or any minimum distance between buildings. The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two (2) buildings in all R-M Districts is as follows: 
S =L +L+ 2(H = H), where 
S = Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of Building A and any wall of Building B or the vertical prolongation of either. 
L = Total length of Building A. 
The total length of Building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of Building B from which, when viewed directly from above, the lines drawn perpendicular to Building B will intersect any wall of Building A. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -48-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

H = Height of Building A. 
The height of Building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of Building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 
H = Height of Building B. 
The height of Building B at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of Building B. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 
(f) 	
Minimum landscaped area for two-family (duplex) building sites shall be 20 percent, with that portion of the required front yard not used for access driveways or sidewalks to be landscaped. Landscaping shall be construed to include areas devoted solely to pedestrian use and, unless for aesthetic purposes, shall not consist of any impervious ground cover with the exception of areas devoted to patios. 

(g) 	
Minimum landscaped area for multiple-family developments shall be as follows. Within any side and rear yard setback or area between buildings, an area equivalent to seventy 

(70) percent of the required yard or any required minimum area between buildings must be landscaped and developed as usable open space or recreation area available to the residents of the development, and further, said areas shall be kept free of all vehicular uses. 

(h) 	
Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard, provided that there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of ten (10) feet between the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the nearest right-of-way line as indicated on the major thoroughfare plan. 

(i) 	
No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the District, except as otherwise specified in the Building Code, provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than ten 

(10) feet shall be provided. 

(j) 	
On a corner lot which has a common lot line with a residential district, there shall be provided a setback of twenty (20) feet on the side or residential street. Where a lot borders on a residential district or a street, there shall be provided a setback of not less than ten 

(10) feet on the side bordering the residential district or street. 

(k) 	
Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio of at least ten (10) square feet per front foot of building and shall be computed separately from the off-street parking requirements. Where an alley exists or is provided at the rear of buildings, the rear building setback and loading requirements may be computed from the center of said alley. 

(l) 	
On a zoning lot of three (3) acres or more in area, side and rear yard setbacks shall be sixty (60) feet in depth when abutting a residential district. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

(m) 	
Off-street parking shall be permitted in a side yard setback. 

(n) 	
Off-street parking for visitors, over and above the number of spaces required under Section 1306 may be permitted within the required front yard, provided that such off-street parking is not located within twenty-five (25) feet of the front lot line. 

(o) 	
No building shall be located closer than sixty (60) feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when said property line abuts any residential district. 

(p) 	
All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than five (5) feet height, or with a chain link type fence and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from an adjacent residential or business district or from a public street. 



Section 1102.Lot Size Averaging 
1. 	The intent of this section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary his lot sizes and lot widths so as to average the minimum size and lot widths as required in Article XI, “Schedule of Regulations,” for each One-Family Residential District. If this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met: 
a. 	
In meeting the average minimum lot size, the subdivision shall be so designed as not to create lots having an area or width greater than ten (10) percent below that area or width required in the “Schedule of Regulations,” and shall not create an attendant increase in the number of lots. 

b. 	
Each final plat submitted as part of a preliminary plat shall average the minimum required for the district in which it is located. 

c. 	
All computations showing lot area and the average resulting through this technique shall be indicated on the print of the preliminary plat. 



Section 1103.Single Family Cluster Housing 
The intent of this Section is to encourage the development of single-family residential patterns that, through design innovation, will introduce flexibility so as to provide for a more appropriate development to encourage the preservation of open space through site planning. 
1. 	
The Planning Commission shall convene a public hearing held in accordance with Section 16(b) of the City and Village Zoning Act, (207 of 1921, as amended), as part of its review, study, and approval of an application for the cluster housing option. 

2. 	
The minimum yard setbacks, heights, and minimum lot sizes per unit as required by the Schedule of Regulations may be waived and the attaching of dwelling units may be accomplished subject to the following: 

a. 	
The minimum floor area for all units constructed under this option shall be at least equal to the minimum floor area requirements for the District in which the cluster is to be constructed. 

b. 	
The attaching of single-family dwelling units, one to another, may be permitted when said homes are attached by means of one or more of the following: 




City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -50-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

1) 	Through a common party wall which does not have over seventy-five (75) percent of its area in common with an abutting dwelling unit wall. 
2) 	By means of an architectural wall detail which does not form interior room space. 
3) 	Through a common party wall in only the garage portion of an abutting structure. 
4) 	The attachment of more than four (4) units in the above-described manner shall not be permitted. 
3. 	In a single-family cluster housing development, the dwelling unit density shall be no greater than if the gross land area were to be developed in the minimum square foot lot areas as required for the single-family district in which the development is proposed. Exception in the form of a ten (10) percent density bonus may be granted by the Planning Commission in cases where either: 
a. 	At least twenty (20) percent of the site is retained as permanent open space or in agricultural activity. In the case of agricultural activity, the method of open space protection shall specifically state that the property shall revert to permanent open space when and if the agricultural activity ceases. The details of the conversion and the maintenance of the open space shall also be provided. 
4. Yard requirements shall be provided as follows: 
a. 	
Spacing between any grouping of four (4) or fewer one-family units and another grouping of such structures shall be equal to at least twenty (20’) feet, measured between the nearest point of the two groupings. A grouping may include a single, freestanding unit. 

b. 	
All such groupings shall be situated so as to have one side of the lot abutting onto a common open space. 

c. 	
That side of a building adjacent to a dedicated street shall not be closer to said street than twenty-five (25’) feet. 

d. 	
This nature of development, when abutting a front yard of an existing recorded subdivision which is not a part of the site plan submitted under this Section, shall cause all dwelling units facing such subdivision to relate through its front or entrance facade and shall treat said side of the grouping as a front yard. 

e. 	
No building shall be located closer than thirty (30’) feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of the site. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
5. 	
A landscaped berm shall be required, at least six (6’) feet high, or a ten (10’) foot landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along the entire property line abutting the major thoroughfare. This berm may be included within a required side or rear yard. The slopes on said berms shall be gentle enough so as not to erode when planted in grass; and the design of the berm as it relates to street intersections, finding that it conforms with corner clearance visibility regulations found elsewhere in this Ordinance. A natural buffer, if one exists, may satisfy all or part of this requirement. 

6. 	
In submitting a proposed layout under this Section, the sponsor of the development shall include, along with the site plan, typical building elevations and floor plans, topography drawn at two (2’) foot contour intervals, main floor grade elevations relative to the existing topography, all computation relative to acreage and density, details relative to the proposed berm or greenbelt and any other details which will assist in reviewing the proposed plan. 

7. 	
Site plans submitted under this option shall be accompanied by information regarding the following: 

a. 	
The proposed manner of holding title to open land in perpetuity. 

b. 	
The proposed method of regulating the use of open land. 

c. 	
The proposed method of maintenance of property and financing thereof. 

d. 	
All land not intended to be conveyed to individual dwelling unit owners shall be set-aside for the use of all occupants of the development. All such lands shall be protected by restrictions or covenants running with the land and must be approved by the City Attorney to assure the following: 

e. 	
That title to the open land is held in common by the owners of all dwelling units in the detached single family cluster development. 

f. 	
A permanent organization for maintenance and management of all such areas shall be assured by legal documents prior to the issuance of the building permit. 




Section 1104. Planned Unit Development 
The purpose of this option is to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development; encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout, and type of structures constructed; achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources and utilities; encourage provision of useful open space; provide adequate housing, employment, and shopping opportunities particularly suited to the needs of the residents of the City of Durand and encourage the use, reuse, and improvement of existing sites and buildings when the uniform regulations contained in zoning districts do not provide adequate protection and safeguards for the site or surrounding area. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -52-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

This option is intended to accommodate developments with mixed or varied uses, to allow some degree of flexibility in the application of standards and regulations in this Ordinance to achieve innovation to development on sites with unusual topography or unique settings within the community, or on land which exhibits difficult or costly development problems, and shall not be allowed where this option is sought primarily to avoid the imposition of standards and requirements of zoning classifications rather than to achieve the stated purposes above. 
1. 	Planned Unit Development Regulations, Standards and Requirements 
a. 	
The entire parcel for which application is made must be under one ownership or the application must be made with the written authorization of all property owners. 

b. 	
The application shall meet the criteria established in each specified zoning district. 


2. 	PUD Review Procedures 
a. 	
The review shall be in two phases: 

b. 	
The preliminary phase shall involve a review of a conceptual PUD plan to determine its suitability. 

c. 	
The final phase shall require a detailed development plan for any part of the approved conceptual PUD plan. 


3. 	Standards for Approval of PUD Plans 
The Planning Commission shall approve, deny or modify preliminary PUD plans, based upon the following standards. Likewise, the City Council shall approve, deny, or modify final PUD plans (after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission) based upon the following standards. 
a. 	
The uses proposed will have a beneficial effect, in terms of public health, safety, welfare, or convenience of any combination thereof, on present and potential surrounding land uses. The uses proposed will not adversely affect the public utility and circulation systems, surrounding properties, or the environment. 

b. 	
The uses proposed should be consistent with the land use plans adopted by the City. 

c. 	
The amount of open space provided, which the Planning Commission or City Council may modify even though such modifications do not conform to that required in other sections of this ordinance. 

d. 	
The amount of off-street parking areas, which the Planning Commission or City Council may modify even though such modifications do not conform to that required in other sections of this ordinance. 

e. 	
The amount of landscaping and buffering areas, which the Planning Commission or City Council may modify even though such modifications do not conform to that required in other sections of this ordinance. 

f. 	
The protection or enhancement of significant natural, historical, or architectural features within the proposed development area. 

g. 	
The uses proposed will result in safe, convenient, uncongested and well defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -53-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

4. 	Preliminary PUD Plan Submission 
The applicant shall submit together with the application for PUD preliminary phase approval: 
a. 	
A general development plan depicting the proposed locations of streets, parking areas, open spaces, buildings and structures, and their spatial relationships, the relationship to off-site improvements and infrastructure and any unusual topographic features. 

b. 	
Approval by the Planning Commission of the PUD Preliminary Plan shall remain in effect for a period not to exceed three (3) years from the date of approval. 


5. 	Final PUD Plan Submission 
The applicant shall submit together with the application for PUD final phase approval, development plans in sufficient detail and in so far as possible the specific locations and dimensions of: 
a. 	
all streets, sidewalks, public and private utilities, parking areas, truck docks and service drives; 

b. 	
all buildings and structures, elevations and spacial relationships; 

c. 	
landscaping, buffers, fences, and protective walls; 

d. 	
open space areas and other significant environmental features; 

e. 	
existing and final topographic changes; 

f. 	
identification and directional signage: 

g. 	
a property survey prepared and certified by a licensed land surveyor; 


The City Council, in its evaluation of a final PUD Plan submittal, shall hold a public hearing pursuant to Section 4b (5) of PA 207 of 1921, as may be amended. 
6. 	Amendments to an Approved Final PUD Plan 
a. 	Incidental or minor changes may be approved by the Planning Commission if the proposed modifications do not alter the basic design or land uses of the plan. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
b. 	If the Planning Commission determines that the proposed modifications are significant or major, a public notice and public hearing in accordance with Section 1202 must be conducted prior to approval or denial. 
7. 	PUD Development Time Limits 
a. 	
Construction of the improvements shown on the approved final PUD plan with all proposed buildings, parking areas, landscaping and infrastructure must commence within one year of approval by the City Council. 

b. 	
Construction must be continued in a reasonable, diligent manner and be completed within five (5) years. 

c. 	
Said five (5) year period may be extended if applied for in writing by the petitioner and granted by the City Council following public notice and public hearing in accordance with Section 1202 of this ordinance. Failure to secure an extension shall result in a stoppage of all construction. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -55-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Article XII 
Site Plan and Special Approval Use Review 


Section 1200.Review and Approval of Site Plans 
1. 	Application 
Prior to the establishment of a new use, change of use, addition to an existing use, or the erection of any building in a zoning district, subject to the conditions listed below, a site plan shall be submitted and approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved by the City Planning Commission, in accordance with the Ordinance requirements of this Article. 
a. 	
Site plan reviews are required for all permitted principal uses and structures in all zoning districts (except for the single-family detached and two-family dwellings and their accessory uses) and all special approval uses in all zoning districts. 

b. 	
When the proposed new construction or remodeling constitutes an addition to an existing building, or use, site plan review procedures may be modified, at the discretion of the Building Official, to provide for an administrative review by the Building Official in lieu of a more formal review by the City Planning Commission. The Building Official may conduct an administrative review provided both of the following are true: 


1) 	No variances to the Ordinance are required. 
2) 	The proposed new construction would not increase the total square footage of the building greater than twenty-five (25) percent or one thousand (1,000) square feet, whichever is less. 
c. 	For those cases requiring site plan review solely as a result of building re-occupancy, site plan review procedures may be modified, at the discretion of the Building Official, to provide for an administrative review by the Building Official in lieu of a more formal review by the City Planning Commission. The Building Official may conduct an administrative review provided all of the following are true: 
1) 	No variances to the Ordinance are required. 
2) 	Such use is conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
3) 	Re-occupancy does not create additional parking demands, beyond ten 
(10) percent of that which exists. 
4) 	Re-occupancy does not substantially alter the character of the site. 
d. 	Every site plan submitted for review shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. Administrative review procedures are not intended to modify any Ordinance, regulation, or development standard. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -56-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

2. 	
Copies Required 

Every site plan submitted to the Planning Commission shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. Fourteen (14) copies of all site plans shall be filed with the Clerk who shall place the request on the next Planning Commission agenda. 

3. 	
Information Required 


The following information shall be included on the site plan: 
a. 	
A scale of not less than 1” equals 50” if the subject property is less than three (3) acres and; 1” equal 100” if three (3) acres or more. 

b. 	
Date, north point, and scale. 

c. 	
The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties. 

d. 	
Legal description of parcel. 

e. 	
Existing and proposed topography with contours at two (2) foot intervals, (based on 

U.S.G.S. datum), extending a minimum of 100 feet beyond site boundaries. 

f. 	
An inventory of existing vegetation on the site and an indication of any alterations. 

g. 	
The location and nature of any streams, drains, swamps, marshes, and/or unstable soils. 

h. 	
An indication of basic drainage patterns, existing and proposed, and including any structures, retention basins and fencing, which are proposed. The applicant shall contact the Municipality and Municipal Engineer to determine the adequacy of utility and storm water proposals, slope, and soil erosion requirements to determine if any such requirements will adversely affect the site plan. 

i. 	
A schedule of parking needs. Separate drawings may be submitted to indicate usable floor area, etc., for computation of parking needs. 

j. 	
A detailed planting plan and schedule of plant materials and sizes. 

k. 	
Cross section drawings of any walls, berms, etc. 

l. 	
The location and width of all existing and proposed sidewalks on or bordering the subject site. Where the subject site borders a public right-of-way, a sidewalk five 


(5) feet in width shall be provided within the public right-of-way one (1) foot from the subjects site’s property line. If a sidewalk in good condition exists within the public right-of-way, the above requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
m. 	
The location of all existing and proposed structures of the subject property and all existing structures within 100 feet of the subject property. The setbacks to all existing and proposed structures to be retained or constructed on the site shall be indicated; this includes buildings, signs, trash storage areas, walls, fences, berms, parking areas, etc. The height of all proposed structures shall also be indicated. 

n. 	
The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas. 

o. 	
The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys. 

p. 	
The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the architect, planner, designer, engineer, or person responsible for the preparation of the site plan. 

q. 	
The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the developers. 

r. 	
A detailed site maintenance agreement shall be presented to the City stating how the property, including, landscaping structures, and private roads and sidewalks shall be maintained in perpetuity. 

s. 	
In addition to the above information, the applicant shall submit a supplementary explanation as to the specific type(s) of activities proposed. Such information shall include, but not be limited to: 


1) 	Estimated number of employees, resident shoppers, etc. 
2) 	Hours of operation. 
3) 	Any changes anticipated in terms of dust, odor, smoke, fumes, noise, lights, etc. 
4) 	Modifications to vegetative cover, drainage patterns, earth work, problem areas. 
5) 	Any ancillary improvements that the applicant proposes to remedy or prevent problems created by the development. 
6) 	Estimated costs of proposed landscaping berms, walls, acceleration-deceleration lanes, or by-pass lanes, or any other required site improvement not covered in the Building Permit cost estimates, shall be provided. 
t. 	The Planning Commission may also, at their discretion, request additional studies including but not limited to the following: 
1) 	An Access Management/Traffic Impact study according to the guidelines provided in Section 1336, provided that such studies shall be required for all developments in the following areas of the City: 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
a) Lansing Highway b) Durand Road north of Lansing Road c) East Monroe between South Durand and Lansing Highway 
2) 	An Environmental Impact Analysis in order to view the possible impact of the proposed development on the natural surrounding using the criteria provided in Section 1333. 
3) 	The impact of Hazardous Substances stored on non-residential properties to the surrounding environment using the criteria provided in Section 1335. 
4) 	The visual impact of a proposed development on the surrounding neighboring areas and development using the criteria provided in Section 1334. 
4. 	
Content of Site Plan File 

The site plan(s), all supplementary data, together with minutes of any meeting and/or hearings related to the proposed site plan shall become part of the official site plan file. 

5. 	
Standards for Site Plan Approval 


In the process of reviewing the site plan, the Planning Commission shall consider: 
a. 	
Specific development requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. 

b. 	
The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site, and in relation to pedestrian traffic. 

c. 	
Natural Features: Site plans shall demonstrate that as many natural features as possible have been retained, particularly where such features provide a buffer between adjoining properties or assist in preserving the general appearance of the neighborhood or help control soil erosion or stormwater. 

d. 	
All elements shall be located, designed and organized in relation to the character of adjoining property and the type and size of the buildings. The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvements of surrounding property for uses permitted in this Zoning Ordinance. 

e. 	
The traffic circulation features within the site and location of automobile parking areas; and may make such requirements with respect to any matters as will assure: 


1) 	Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic, both within the site and in relation to access streets. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
2) 	Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and the existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
3) 	Accessibility afforded to emergency vehicles. 
f. 	
The arrangement of use areas on the site in relation to functional, efficient, and compatible arrangements within the site, and also to adjacent uses. 

g. 	
The Planning Commission may further require landscaping, fences, and walls in pursuance of these objectives and same shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant. 

h. 	
The Planning Commission may waive site plan information for topography, vegetation, problem soils, landscaping, employment data, environmental considerations, etc., when such concerns are obviously not pertinent to the proposed development. 


6. 	Planning Commission Actions 
The Planning Commission, upon reviewing a site plan, shall take one of the following actions: 
a. 	
Approval: If the site plan meets all the Zoning Ordinance and related development requirements and standards, the Planning Commission shall record such approval and the Chairman shall sign three (3) copies of the site plan filing one in the official site plan file, forwarding one to the Building Official, and returning one to the applicant. 

b. 	
Disapproval: If the site plan does not meet Zoning Ordinance and related development requirements and standards, the Planning Commission shall record the reasons for denial. The applicant may subsequently re-file a corrected site plan under the same procedures followed for the initial submission. 

c. 	
Conditional Approval: If minor corrections to the site are necessary, which can be clearly noted, then the Planning Commission shall so note such conditions and the Chairman shall sign three (3) site plans as conditionally approved and stating the necessary conditions. One copy shall be retained in the official site plan file, one forwarded to the Building Official, and one returned to the applicant. 

d. 	
Table: If the site plan is found to be in violation of requirements or incomplete, with respect to necessary information or presenting a unique situation, the Planning Commission may table the site to permit the applicant time to provide the additional information, make the necessary modifications, or to seek the necessary variance(s) from the Board of Appeals. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
7. 	Performance Guarantees 
To ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and any conditions imposed thereunder, the Planning Commission may require that a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the City covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with a project for which site plan approval is sought, be deposited with the Clerk of the City to ensure faithful completion of the improvements, and also be subject to the following: 
a. 	
The performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the building permit authorizing the activity of the project. The City may not require the deposit of the performance guarantee prior to the time when the City is prepared to issue the permit. The City shall establish procedures whereby a rebate of any cash deposits in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvement will be made as work progresses. Any partial release of funds shall be less than ten (10) percent, which shall be retained by the Municipality until all work has been completed and subsequently inspected and approved by the Building Official. This does not relieve the applicant from satisfying all applicable maintenance warranties and/or guarantees necessary to ensure the proper functioning of said public improvements. 

b. 	
This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been deposited pursuant to Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended. 

c. 	
As used in this section, “improvements” mean those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval, to protect natural resources, or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, landscaping, and surface drainage. Improvements do not include the entire project, which is the subject of zoning approval. 


8. 	Revocation 
a. 	Any site plan review approval may be revoked by the Planning Commission after determination that one or more of the following circumstances exist: 
1) 	A material error in the original approval has been discovered either because of inaccurate information supplied by the applicant or administrative error by a staff member or other agency. 
2) 	There has been a material departure from the commitments made and the requirements of an approved site plan. 
3) 	Material and substantial pollution, impairment or destruction of the environment, or to another legally protected public interest, would occur if the project were to be constructed as previously approved. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
4)  Failure to perform within twelve (12) months, unless the applicant applies to the Planning Commission for an extension. Extensions may be granted in six month intervals not to exceed a total of eighteen (18) months.  
5)  Revocation of an approved site plan shall be communicated in writing with reasons therefore to the property owner. The Zoning Administrator shall also be notified to withhold any building permit until a new site plan is approved.  


Section 1201.Review and Approval of Condominium Developments 
The following regulations shall apply to all condominium developments within the City of Durand. 
1. 	Initial Information 
Concurrently with notice required to be given the City, pursuant to Section 71 of Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended (the Condominium Act), a person, firm, or corporation intending to develop a condominium development shall provide the following information: 
a. 	The name, address, and telephone number of: 
1) 	All persons, firms, or corporations with an ownership interest in the land on which the condominium development will be located together with a description of the nature of each entity’s interest (for example, fee owner, optionee, or land contract vendee). 
2) 	All engineers, attorneys, architects, or registered land surveyors associated with the project. 
3) 	The developer or proprietor of the condominium development. 
b. 	
The legal description of the land on which the condominium development will be developed together with appropriate tax identification numbers. 

c. 	
The acreage content of the land on which the condominium development will be developed. 

d. 	
The purpose of the development (for example: residential, commercial, industrial, etc.). 

e. 	
Approximate number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel. 

f. 	
Whether or not a community water system is contemplated. 

g. 	
Whether or not a community septic system is contemplated. 


2. 	
Information to be Kept Current 

The information shall be furnished to the Building Official and shall be kept updated until such time as a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued pursuant to Section 1504, of the Ordinance. 

3. 	
Site Plans for New Projects 

Prior to recording of the Master Deed required by Section 72 of Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, the condominium development shall undergo site plan review and approval pursuant to Section 1400 of this Ordinance. In addition, the City shall require appropriate engineering plans and inspections prior to the issuance of any Certifications of Occupancy. 

4. 	
Site Plans for Expandable or Convertible Projects 

Prior to expansion or conversion of a condominium development to additional land, the new phase of the project shall undergo site plan review and approval pursuant to Section 1200 of this Ordinance. 

5. 	
Master Deed, Restrictive Covenants, and “As Built” Survey to be Furnished 

The condominium development developer or proprietor shall furnish the Building Official with the following: one (1) copy of recorded Master Deed, one (1) copy of all restrictive covenants, and two (2) copies of an “As Built” survey. The “As Built” survey shall be reviewed by the City Engineer for compliance with local Ordinances. Fees for this review shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 

6. 	
Monuments Required 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -62-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

All condominium developments which consist in whole or in part of condominium units which are building sites, mobile home sites, or recreational sites, shall be marked with monuments as provided in this subsection. 
a. 	
All monuments used shall be made of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half (1/2) inches in diameter and thirty-six (36) inches long and completely encased in concrete at least four (4) inches in diameter. 

b. 	
Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the condominium development; at the intersection lines of streets, and at the intersection of the lines of streets with the boundaries of the condominium development, and at the intersection of alleys with the boundaries of condominium development; at all points of curvature, points of tangency, points of compound curvature, points of reverse curvature, and angle points in the side lines of streets and alleys, and at all angles of an intermediate traverse line. It is not intended nor required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in the boundary of the condominium development if the angle points can be readily re-established by reference to monuments along the side lines of the streets. 

c. 	
If the required location of a monument is in an inaccessible place, or where the locating of a monument would be clearly impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof be clearly indicated on the plans and referenced to the true point. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
d. 	
If a point required to be monumented is on a bedrock outcropping, a steel rod, at least one-half (1/2) inch in diameter shall be drilled and grouted into solid rock to a depth of at least eight (8) inches. 

e. 	
All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practicable. 

f. 	
All unit corners and the intersection of all limited common elements and all common elements shall be monumented in the field by iron or steel bars or iron pipe at least eighteen (18) inches long and one-half (1/2) inch in diameter, or other approved markers. 

g. 	
The City Council may waive the placing of any of the required monuments and markers for a reasonable time, not-to-exceed one (1) year, on the condition that the proprietor deposits with the City Clerk cash, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit to the City, whichever the proprietor selects in an amount to be established by Council, by resolution. Such cash, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and markers have been placed as required within the time specified. 


7. 	
Compliance with Federal, State, and Local Law 

All condominium developments shall comply with Federal and State statutes and local ordinances. 

8. 	
The Building Official may allow occupancy of the condominium development before all improvements required by this Ordinance are installed provided that cash, a certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit is submitted sufficient in amount and type to provide for the installation of improvements before the expiration of the Temporary Occupancy Permit without expense to the City. 

9. 	
Single-Family Detached Condominiums 

a. 	
Single-family detached condominium project shall be subject to all requirements and standards of the One-Family Residential District. 

b. 	
The design of a single-family detached condominium projects shall be subject to the design layout standards of the City, as may be provided by the City of Durand Subdivision Regulatory Ordinance (Chapter 56, Title 5, of the Durand City Code, adopted January 15, 1973 as amended) except as may otherwise be provided by this Ordinance. 

c. 	
The construction of a single-family detached condominium project shall be subject to the engineering design standards of the City, as may be provided by local ordinance, except as may otherwise be provided by this Ordinance. 

d. 	
Walkways shall be installed in all single-family detached condominium developments. Such walkways shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width and shall be constructed of concrete four (4) inches thick. In addition, walkways shall be located on both sides of all interior roadways and so located as to provide access to all general common areas. Upon review of the site plan, the Planning Commission may approve alternative locations for the walkways or may waive the walkway requirement if it would not serve the purpose of providing adequate pedestrian circulation. 

e. 	
The natural features and character of the lands shall be preserved wherever practicable. In addition, street trees shall be provided in the ratio of at least one per dwelling unit. All unimproved surface area on the site shall be planted with grass, ground cover, shrubbery, or other suitable landscape material, except that patios, terraces, decks, and similar site features may be allowed. 



10. 	
Final Documents to be Provided 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -64-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

After submittal of the condominium plan and by-laws, as part of the Master Deed, the proprietor shall furnish to the City a copy of the site plan on a mylar sheet of at least thirteen by sixteen (13 x 16) inches with an image not-to-exceed ten and one-half by fourteen (10-1/2 x 14) inches. 

Section 1202.Review and Approval of Special Condition Uses 
1. 	Application 
a. 	
The uses identified as special condition uses are recognized as possessing characteristics of such unique and special nature (relative to location, design, size, public utilities needs, and other similar characteristics) as necessitating individual standards and conditions in order to safe guard the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 

b. 	
The City Council, as provided herein, shall have the authority to approve special condition use permits, subject to such conditions of design, operation, and appropriate and reasonable safeguards as the City may require for any special condition use approval included in the various provisions of this Zoning Ordinance. 

c. 	
Site plans related to Special Condition Use petitions may be reviewed concurrently with approvals contingent on each other. 


2. 	Data Required 
a. 	
Application for any approval use permit, as provided under the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be made to the Building Official by filing an official special approval use permit application form; submitting required data, exhibits, and information; and depositing the required fee as established by resolution of the City Council, and as may be amended from time-to-time. No portion of such fee shall be reimbursable to the applicant. 

b. 	
An application for a special condition use permit shall contain the following: 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -65-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

1) 	Applicant’s name, address and telephone number. 
2) 	Address and tax description number of the subject parcel. 
3) 	A signed statement that the applicant is the owner of the subject parcel, or is acting as the owner’s representative. 
4) 	A certified survey drawing of the subject parcel. 
5) 	A complete site plan containing all of the applicable data outlined in Section 1200, Review and Approval of Site Plans. 
6) 	Supporting statements, evidence, data, information, and exhibits which address those standards and requirements for assessing special condition use permit applications outlined in Section 1202, 4 below. 
3. 	Public Hearing Requirements 
Upon receipt of an application for a special condition use requiring approval, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, one (1) notice of which shall be published not less than five (5) nor more than fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing date in a newspaper of general circulation in the City and sent by First Class mail to the owners of the property for which special approval is being considered, to the owners of record of all real property, and to the occupants of all structures located within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property in question. The notice shall: 
a. 	
Describe the nature of the special condition use request. 

b. 	
Adequately describe the property in question. 

c. 	
State the date, time, and place of the public hearing. 

d. 	
Indicate when and where written comments concerning the request will be received. 


4. 	Standards for Special Use Approval 
a. 	The Planning Commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts applicable to each proposed special approval use in terms of the following standards and requirements, and shall make a determination as to whether the use proposed to be developed on the subject parcel meets the following standards and requirements: 
1) 	Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general objective of the Future Land Use Plan. 
2) 	Will be designed, constructed, operated, maintained, in harmony with existing and intended character of the general vicinity and so that such use will not change the essential character of that area. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
3) 	Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses. 
4) 	Will represent a substantial improvement to property in the immediate vicinity and to the community as a whole. 
5) 	Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities, such as highways, streets, drainage structures, police and fire protection and refuse disposal; or persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately for such services. 
6) 	Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services, and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
7) 	Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment, and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive smoke, fumes, glare, noise, vibration, or odors. 
8) 	Will be consistent with the intent and purposes of this Ordinance. 
b. 	If the facts regarding the special condition use being reviewed do not establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the standards and requirements set forth in this Zoning Ordinance will be met by the proposed use, the Planning Commission shall not recommend approval to the City Council. 
5. 	Appeals 
a. 	Decisions on Special Condition Use petitions are not appealable to the City Zoning Board of Appeals. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -67-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Article XIII 
General Provisions 


Section 1300.Conflicting Regulations 
Whenever any provision of this Ordinance imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions, or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impost more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this Ordinance, then the provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern. 

Section 1301.Building Regulations 
1. 
Scope 

No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, used, reconstructed, altered or maintained and no new use made of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 

2. 
Unlawful Building 

In case any building, or part thereof, is used, erected, occupied or altered contrary to law or the provisions of this Ordinance, such building shall be deemed an unlawful structure and a nuisance and may be required to be vacated, torn down or abated by any legal means, and shall not be used or occupied until it has been made to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. Public expenditures toward abating such nuisance shall become a lien upon the land. 

3. 
Temporary Building 

No temporary building shall be erected unless a valid building permit exists for a permanent building or a new use of land on the same site. Any temporary building shall be removed from the site within thirty (30) days of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The approval of a temporary building may not exceed one (1) year; however, as the Zoning Board of Appeals, may grant multiple extensions up to three (3) months each for good cause shown, when the approval is due to expire. 

4. 
Building Occupancy 

No basement shall be used or occupied as a dwelling unit at any time, nor shall a dwelling be erected in a nonresidential district, except for the living quarters of a watchman, caretaker, or resident manager. 

5. 
Frontage on a Public Street 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -68-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

No building shall be erected on a lot unless said lot fronts its full width, as required by Section 1300, upon a street or road that has been dedicated to the public. Multiple family developments, or commercial, office, or industrial centers need not front each structure within the development upon publicly dedicated streets or roads, provided that adequate vehicular circulation and access can be assured in a site plan submitted for approval to the City. 
In all districts, only one (1) principal building shall be placed on a single lot of record or parcel, except as provided by Section 1301, 5, above. 
Section 1302. 	Building Appearance, Structure Completion and Personal Construction Authority 
1. 
Residential Zones 

In residential zones, after twenty-five (25) percent of the lots and frontages on the side of the street on any block where the proposed improvement is contemplated have been improved by the erection on the residences thereon, if one-half or more of the residences built in any such block are of a certain type and style, the remainder of the residences built in any such block and to be constructed, altered, relocated, or repaired in such block shall be of a substantially similar type and style so that new or altered buildings will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood. Nothing herein shall prevent the upgrading of any residential block by installing an exterior finish having fire or weather resistance, which is greater than the minimum herein required, or by constructing in such block a residence having floor area greater than the average area of residences in such block provided, however, such type and style shall be such as not to impair or destroy property values in the block. 

2. 
Nonresidential Zones 

In any case, where a building or accessory building in a nonresidential district is erected or placed within two hundred (200) feet of the front lot line of any parcel of land fronting upon any public street, the front walls of said building or accessory building within said distance of two hundred (200) feet be constructed of stone, face brick, or other ornamental materials approved by the Building Official consistent with neighboring property, and no building so situated shall be constructed of tarred paper, tin, corrugated iron, or any form of pressed board, felt, or similar material within the limits herein specified, nor shall any occupant of such premises be permitted to place open stock, scrap, or junk piles within said two hundred (200) feet unless the same shall be obscured from view from the street by the existence of a building, solid wall, earth berm, or evergreen screen sufficient to properly obscure the same from view from the street. (See also Section 1334, Urban Design Standards.) 

3. 	
Building Completion Period 

All structures shall be completed within one (1) year of the issue date of the building permit for such structure, unless an extension for not more than one (1) additional year is granted for good cause by the Building Official. When a part of a building is ready for occupancy, a temporary occupancy permit may be issued, provided that the premises complies with health and fire standards required under this Ordinance, or any other ordinance, regulation, or statute. 

4. 	
Personal Construction Authority 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -69-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting an owner, tenant, occupant, or land contract vendee from doing his or her own building, altering, plumbing, electrical installations, etc., provided the minimum requirements of the Electrical and Plumbing Codes of the State of Michigan, and the applicable County Health Department regulations are complied with. 
Section 1303 	Nonconforming Lots, Nonconforming uses of Land, Nonconforming Structures, and Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Premises 
1. 	Intent 
a. 	
It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit existing, legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. 

b. 	
It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this Ordinance and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and use of land and structures which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendments. 

c. 	
Such uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 

d. 	
A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 

e. 	
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in a permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -70-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

2. 	Nonconforming Lots 
a. 	
Contiguous nonconforming lots existing under common ownership must be combined to satisfy current lot size and width requirements. 

b. 	
In any single-family district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record which is under separate and distinct ownership from adjacent lots at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. This provision shall even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard requirement variances may be obtained through approval of the Board of Appeals. 


3. 	Nonconforming Uses of Land 
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a. 	
A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or moved, in whole or in part, to any other portion of the lot or parcel that was not occupied by the use at the time the use became nonconforming, unless approval is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals. However, a nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building which was designed for such use and which existed at the time the use became nonconforming. In deciding requests for expansion of nonconforming uses, the ZBA shall consider whether the extension or enlargement will substantially extend the probable duration of such nonconforming use, and whether the extension or enlargement will interfere with the use of other properties in the surrounding neighborhood for the uses for which they have been zoned, or with the use of such other properties in compliance with this ordinance. 

b. 	
A structure occupied by a nonconforming use shall not be structurally altered in any manner or moved except in connection with a change to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
c. 	
If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six (6) months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for this district in which such land is located. 

d. 	
Substitution of Uses: A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use upon approval of the Planning Commission subject to the following conditions: 


1) 	No structural alterations are required to accommodate the new nonconforming use and that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate in the district than the existing use. In approving such a request, the Planning Commission may require appropriate conditions in accordance with the purposes and intent of this Ordinance. 
2) 	Once a nonconforming use is changed to a more restrictive classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less restrictive classification. 
3) 	When a nonconforming use is replaced by a permitted use, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which the use is located and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
4. 	Nonconforming Structures 
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a. 	
No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. For example, existing residences on lots of a width less than required herein may add a rear porch, provided that other requirements relative to yard space and land coverage are met. 

b. 	
Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost, exclusive of the foundation at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 

c. 	
Should such structure be moved for any reason whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for this district in which it is located after it is removed. 


5. 	Nonconforming Uses of Structures 
If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
a. 	
No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 

b. 	
Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 

c. 	
If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification, provided that the Board of Appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Appeals may require conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use. 

d. 	
Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 

e. 	
When a nonconforming use of structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six (6) consecutive months or 18 months during any three (3) year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used, except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses (one season out of each year) shall be excepted from this provision. 

f. 	
Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 


6. 	Repairs and Maintenance 
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing to an extent no exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance shall not be increased, except through permission of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
7. 	
Conditional Use Interpretation 

Any conditional use as provided for in this Ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district. 

8. 	
Change of Tenancy or Ownership 

There may be a change a tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures, and premises, provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses. 

9. 	
Acquisition 


The City Council may acquire, by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, private property or an interest in private property for the removal of nonconforming uses. The cost and expense, or a portion thereof, of acquiring the private property may be paid from general funds or assessed to a special district in accordance with the applicable statutory provisions relating to the creation and operation of special assessment districts for public improvements in cities. The elimination of the nonconforming uses and structures in a zoning district is declared to be for a public purpose and for a public use. The City Council may institute and prosecute proceedings for condemnation of nonconforming uses and structures under the power of eminent domain in accordance with Act 149 of the Public Acts of 1911, as amended, being Sections 213.21 to 213.41 of the Michigan Compiled Laws or other applicable statute. 
Section 1304. Accessory Buildings and Structures 
Accessory buildings or structures, except as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
1. 	
Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this Ordinance applicable to the main building. 

2. 	
Accessory buildings and structures shall not be erected in any front yard. 

3. 	
An accessory building shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of a required rear yard. 

4. 	
No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any main building or other accessory building, nor shall any accessory building or structure it be located closer than three (3) feet to any side or rear line. 

5. 	
No more than one (1) accessory building shall be located on any parcel within an "R-1", "R-2," “R-3,” or “R-O” district, except that two (2) may be permitted when one is a garage or other shelter for automobiles belonging to the residence. 

6. 	
Height of Accessory Building: 


a. 	Detached accessory buildings and structures in residential districts. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -74-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

1) 	A detached accessory building or structure shall not exceed one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet in height. 
2) 	The vertical exterior of a building, not forming part of the roof, shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet, measured from grade to the top plate of the wall. 
b. 	Detached accessory buildings and structures in nonresidential districts. 
1) 	Detached accessory buildings or structures in all nonresidential districts may be constructed to equal to permitted maximum building height in said districts, subject to Planning Commission review and approval, if the building or structure exceeds two (2) stories or twenty-four (24) feet in height. 
7. 	
When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of the lot to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard setback required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot. 

8. 	
When an accessory building in excess of one hundred fifty (150) square feet in any Residence, is intended for other than the storage of private vehicles, the accessory use shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission. 

9. 	
Household animal enclosures, dog runs, central air conditioning units, heat pumps, and other mechanical system components that could or are likely to produce noise, odors, and other nuisances, shall not be located adjacent to an adjoining property owner’s sleeping area where windows and/or doors on the adjacent property would be exposed to the nuisance. 



Section 1305.Off-Street Parking Requirements 
There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed. 
1. 	
Off-street parking spaces may be located within a rear yard or within a non-required side yard unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. Off-street parking shall not be permitted within a front yard nor with a required side yard setback unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 

2. 	
Off-street parking shall be on the same lot of the building it is intended to serve, except as may be otherwise provided for by this Ordinance. 

3. 	
Required residential off-street parking space shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveways, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and also subject to the provisions of Section 1504, Accessory Buildings and Structures for garages. 

4. 	
Minimum required off-street parking spaces shall not be replaced by any other use unless and until equal parking facilities are provided elsewhere. 

5. 	
Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereafter required for a similar new building or new use. 

6. 	
Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 

7. 	
In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the Board of Zoning Appeals may grant an exception. 

8. 	
The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 

9. 	
For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with a use which the Planning Commission considers is similar in type. 

10. 	
When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half (1/2) shall require one (1) parking space. 

11. 	
For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of Usable Floor Area shall govern and be defined as that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 

12. 	
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -75-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Use 	Number of Minimum Parking Spaces Spaces Per Unit of Measure 
a. Residential 
1) 	Single or Two Family Two (2) per dwelling unit. Unit 
2) 	Multiple Family Two (2) per dwelling unit plus 0.25 parking spaces Dwelling per unit for visitor parking. 
3) Housing for the Elderly 	One (1) space per efficiency dwelling unit (no separate bedroom), 1.25 spaces per each one (1) bedroom unit, and 1.5 spaces per two (2) or more bedroom units. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -76-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Use 
4) Mobile Home Park 

b. Institutional 
1) 	Churches or Temples 
2) 	Hospitals 
3) 	Convalescent or Nursing Homes 
4) 	Elementary and Junior High Schools 
5) 	Senior High Schools 
6) 	Private Clubs 
7) 	Private Golf Clubs, Swimming Pool Clubs, Tennis Clubs, or Other Similar Uses 
8) 	Golf Courses Open to General Public, except Miniature or “Par 3” Courses 
9) 	Fraternity or Sorority 
10) Stadium, Sports Arena, or Similar Place of Outdoor Assembly Number of Minimum Parking Spaces Spaces Per Unit of Measure 
Two (2) for each mobile home site and one (1) for each employee of the mobile home park. 
One (1) for each three (3) seats or six (6) feet of pews in the main unit of worship. 
One (1) for each one (1) bed. 
One (1) for each four (4) beds. 
One (1) for each teacher, employee, or administrator, in addition to the requirements of auditorium. 
One (1) for each one (1) teacher, employee, or administrator, and one (1) for each ten (10) students, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. 
One (1) for each three (3) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, or state fire, building, or health codes. 
One (1) for each two (2) member families or individuals and one (1) for each employee in addition to the requirements for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. 
Six (6) for each one (1) golf hole and one (1) for each employee, in addition to the requirements for each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar. 
One (1) for each five (5) permitted active members or one (1) for each two (2) beds, whichever is greater. 
One (1) for each three (3) seats or six (6) feet of benches. 

11) Theaters and One (1) for each three (3) seats, plus one (1) for Auditoriums each two (2) employees. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
Use 
12) Nursery School, Day Nurseries or Child Care Centers 
13) Library 

c. Business and Commercial 
1) 	Planned Commercial or Shopping Center 
2) 	Auto Wash (Automatic) parking spaces equal in number 
3) 	Auto Wash (Self-Service or Coin Operated) 
4) 	Beauty Parlor or Barber Shop Number of Minimum Parking Spaces Spaces Per Unit of Measure 
One (1) for each employee and one (1) for each seven students in attendance at any particular time. 
One (1) for each 2.5 persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building, or health codes, and one (1) for each employee in the largest working shift. 
Four (4) per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area for planned commercial or shopping centers having between ten thousand (10,000) and fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area. Planned commercial or shopping centers containing more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area shall provide five (5) per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. when a restaurant, lounge, or other establishment whose primary business offers prepared food for sale or consumption on the premises, or carry-out, and is part of a planned commercial or shopping center, the parking for such use shall be computed separately, based on the need for a free standing use of this nature, and the resulting increase shall be added to the other uses in the center. 
One (1) for each one (1) employee. In addition, reservoir to five (5) times the maximum capacity of the auto wash. Maximum capacity of the auto wash shall mean the greatest number of automobiles possible under going some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length in feet in each wash line by twenty (20). 
Five (5) reservoir parking spaces for each washing stall. 
Three (3) spaces for each of the first two (2) beauty or barber chairs, and one and one-half (1­1/2) spaces for each additional chair. 

City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -78-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Use 
5) 	Bowling Alleys 
6) 	Dance Halls, Roller Skating Rinks, Exhibition Halls, and Assembly Halls without Fixed Seats 
7) 	Standard Restaurant 
8) 	Furniture and Appliance, Household Equipment, Repair Shops, Showroom of a Plumber, Decorator, Electrician, or Similar Trade, Shoe Repair, and Other Similar Uses 
9) 	Gasoline Service Stations 
10) Laundromats and Coin Operated Dry Cleaners 
11) Miniature or “Par 3” Golf Courses 
12) Mortuary Establishments 
13) Motel, Hotel, or Other Commercial Lodging Establishments 
14) Motor Vehicle Sales and Service Establishments Number of Minimum Parking Spaces Spaces Per Unit of Measure 
Five (5) for each one (1) bowling lane in addition to the requirements for each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bars. 
One (1) for each two (2) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load, as established by local, county, or state fire, building or health codes. 
One (1) for each three (3) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load, as established by local, county, or state fire, building, or health codes, plus one (1) for each two (2) employees. 
One (1) for each eight hundred (800) square feet of usable floor area. (For that floor area used in processing, one (1) additional space shall be provided for each two (2) persons employed therein.) 
Two (2) for each lubrication stall, rack, or pit; one 
(1) for each gasoline pump; and one (1) for each one hundred (150) square feet of usable floor space devoted to retail sales. 
One (1) for each two (2) washing and dry-cleaning machines. 
Three (3) for each one (1) hole plus one (1) for each one (1) employee. 
One (1) for each fifty (50) square feet of usable floor space. 
One (1) for each one (1) occupancy unit, plus one 
(1) for each employee. 
One (1) for each two hundred (200) square feet of usable floor space of sales room and one (1) for each one (1) auto service stall in the service room. 

City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -79-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Use 
15) Retail Stores, Except as Otherwise Specified Herein 
16) Establishments Offering Carry-Out Service, Being Establishments Primarily Serving Customers over a Counter or Through a Window, i.e., Food Carry Out, Dry Cleaner Pick Up, Meat Markets, Bakeries, Shoe Repair, Etc. 
17) Pool or Billiard Parlors, Card Rooms, Arcades, or Other Similar Establishments 
18) Drive-In/Through Restaurant 
19) Mini-Warehouse Facility 

d. Office 
1) 	Banks 
2) 	Business Offices, or Professional Offices, Except as indicated in the Following Item 3 Number of Minimum Parking Spaces Spaces Per Unit of Measure 
One (1) for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable floor space. 
One (1) parking space for each employee in the largest working shift and one (1) parking space for each thirty (30) square feet of usable floor area devoted to customer assembly and/or waiting area. Parking needs for areas devoted to the consumption of food on the premises shall be computed separately for such seating areas. 
One (1) for each three (3) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building, or health codes. 
One (1) parking space for each employee in the largest working shift; one (1) for each two (2) seats provided; and one (1) for each thirty (30) square feet of usable floor area devoted to customer waiting area. 
One (1) parking space for each two thousand (2,000) square foot of gross building area. At a minimum, two (2) parking spaces must be assigned to, and located conveniently to, each individual storage building. In addition, two (2) spaces for the resident manager, and one (1) additional space for each additional employee shall be provided adjacent to the rental office. 
One (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of usable floor space. 
One (1) for each two hundred (200) square feet of usable floor space. 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
Use 	Number of Minimum Parking Spaces Spaces Per Unit of Measure 
3) 	Professional Offices of One (1) for each fifty (50) square feet of usable Doctors, Dentists, or floor area in waiting rooms, and one (1) for each Similar Professionals examining room, dental chair, or similar use area. 
e. Industrial 
1) 	Industrial or Research Three (3) plus one (1) for every one (1) employee Establishments, and in the largest working shift, or three (3) plus one Related Accessory (1) for every five hundred fifty (550) square feet of Offices usable floor area; whichever is greater. 
2) 	Warehouses and Three (3) plus one (1) for every one (1) employee Wholesale in the largest working shift, or three (3) plus one Establishments and (1) for every seventeen hundred (1,700) square Related Accessory feet of usable floor space, whichever is greater. Offices Space on-site shall also be provided for all 
construction workers during periods of plant construction. 

13. 	Each parking lot that services a building entrance, except single two-family residential or temporary structures, have a number of level parking spaces for the physically handicapped as set forth in the following table, and identified by above grade signs as reserved for physically handicapped persons. 
Handicapped Accessible Parking Space Requirements 
Total Spaces in Parking Lot  Required Number of Accessible Spaces Min 96" Wide  Van Accessible Parking Spaces with Min. 96" wide access aisle.  Accessible Parking Spaces with min. 60" wide access aisle.  
Up to 25  1  1  0  
26 to 50  2  1  1  
51 to 75  3  1  2  
76 to 100  4  1  3  
101 to 150  5  1  4  
151 to 200  6  1  5  
201 to 300  7  1  6  
301 to 400  8  1  7  
401 to 500  9  2  7  
501 to 1,000  Two (2) percent of total  1/8 of Column A*  7/8 of Column A**  
Over 1,000  Twenty (20), plus one (1) for each one hundred (100) over one thousand (1,000).  1/8 of Column A*  7/8 of Column A**  
* one out of every 8 accessible spaces  ** out of every 8 accessible parking spaces  

City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -81-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Section 1306. 	Off-Street Parking Space Layout, Standards, Construction, and Maintenance 
Whenever the off-street parking requirements in Section 1505 require the building of an off-street parking facility, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations. 
1. 	
No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit, therefore, is issued by the Building Official. Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the Building Department in such form as may be determined by the Building Official and shall be accompanied with two (2) sets of site plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. 

The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this section shall be provided with asphaltic or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the Municipal Engineer. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. 

2. 	
Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 

3. 	
All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the 90° pattern shall permit two-way movement. 

4. 	
All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. 

5. 	
Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for single-family residential use. 

6. 	
Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet distant from adjacent property located in any single-family residential district. 

7. 	
A wall shall be provided on all sides of the off-street parking area abutting or adjacent to a residential district. The obscuring wall shall not be less than four feet six inches (4’-6”) in height measured from the surface of the parking area. 


Off-Street Parking Layout Requirements  
Parking Pattern  Maneuvering Lane Width  Parking Stall Width  Parking Stall Depth (90° Measure)  Total Depth of One Tier of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane  Total Depth of Two Tiers of Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane  
2-Way Movement  1-Way Movement  
0°(parallel parking)  24’  12’  8.0’  23’  20’  28’  
45°  N/A  12’  9.0’  20’  32’  52’  
60°  N/A  15’  9.0’  20’  36’-6’  58’  
90°  24’  N/A  10.0’  20’  42’  64’  

City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -82-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

All land between the required obscuring wall and the front property line or street right-of­way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and/or ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
The Planning Commission, upon application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may waive or modify the wall requirement by approving either an earth berm or evergreen screen in its place. The Planning Commission may also waive the wall requirement if in specific cases where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this Section. 
8. 	
All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only. (see Section 1323 for footcandle measurement.) 

9. 	
In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten (10) feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 

10. 	
Parking aisles shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet without a break in circulation. 

11. 	
Except for those serving single and two-family dwellings, all parking lots shall be provided with wheel stops, curbs or bumper guards so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend beyond the property line or into required landscaped areas or pedestrian ways. 

12. 	
No parking lot shall have more than one (1) attendant shelter building. All shelter buildings shall conform to setback requirements for structures in the district in which it is located. 



Section 1307.Parking Lot Landscaping 
Off-street parking areas shall be landscaped as follows: 
1. 	
In off-street parking areas containing twenty (20) or more parking spaces, an area equal to at least five (5) percent of the total parking area shall be used for interior landscaping. Whenever possible, parking lot landscaping shall be arranged to improve the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, guide traffic movement, and improve the appearance of the parking area, through the even distribution of the landscape effort across the total off-street parking area, rather than to concentrate all effort in one location. 

2. 	
Parking lot landscaping shall be not less than five (5) feet in any single dimension and not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in any single island area. Not more than two 

(2) landscaped units of one hundred fifty (150) square feet may be combined in plans designed to meet the minimum requirements. 

3. 	
The landscape plan shall designate the sizes, quantities, and types of plant material to be used in parking lot landscaping. 

4. 	
Required landscaping elsewhere on the parcel shall not be counted in meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements. 

5. 	
A minimum of one (1) deciduous tree shall be planted in each landscaped area. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -83-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1308.Off-Site Parking Facilities 
Required parking for a development may be located off-site under certain circumstances. Request for off-site parking must meet the following requirements: 
1. 	
Residential Uses 

Parking facilities accessory to dwelling units shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served. Spaces accessory to uses other than dwellings (such as churches) may be located on a lot adjacent to or directly across a street or alley from the lot occupied by the use served; but in no case at a distance in excess of three hundred (300) feet from such zoning lot. 

2. 	
Nonresidential Uses 

Parking facilities accessory to nonresidential uses may be located on other than the same zoning lots as the use served (off-site). All required parking spaces shall be within five hundred (500) feet of such zoning lot. No parking spaces accessory to a use in a business or industrial district shall be located in a residential district, unless authorized by the Planning Commission. 

3. 	
Agreement Required 


A written agreement shall be drawn to the satisfaction of the City Attorney and executed by all parties concerned assuring the continued availability of the off-site parking facilities for the use they are intended to serve. 

Section 1309.Payment in Lieu of Providing Required Parking 
The provisions and requirements as set forth in Section 1305 shall apply to all areas within the City except as modified by this Section. The City recognizes that special provisions should be considered for the downtown area, including the reduction of required parking spaces due to the availability of public parking. To this end: 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -84-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

1. 	
Portions of the City shall be contained within areas described as special parking districts as established by the City Council with recommendation from the Planning Commission and City Downtown Development Authority Board. In the absence of such demarcation, the district shall be coincidental with the DDA District boundary. 

2. 	
The number of off-street parking spaces and the size of loading and unloading areas required for any new use, expanded or intensified use of property located within, or partially within, a special parking district shall be determined as set forth in Section 1305, except as provided for in this section. 


a. 	Off-street parking. The determination of parking needs within a special parking district shall be based upon the standards specified in this subsection. For those uses not specified, an adjustment may be made by the City Council, following Planning Commission recommendation, when it is found that a reduction from the standards set forth in Section 1305 would not adversely affect the retail, office and ancillary service facilities forming the commercial nucleus of these older core business areas. In this latter regard primary consideration shall be given to uses which are generally the object of special purpose trips and thereby have little or no interrelation with those business activities in the core business areas. The following standards reflect the gross floor areas actively used in day-to-day operations and shall exclude only vacant space and storage areas. 
1) 	Retail stores except as otherwise specified: One space for 400 square feet of usable floor area. 
2) 	Furniture and appliance stores: One space for each 1,800 square feet of usable floor area. 
3) 	Business and professional offices except as otherwise specified: One space for each 500 square feet of usable floor area. 
4) 	Real estate offices: One space for each 150 square feet of usable floor area. 
5) 	Medical and dental offices: One space for each employee plus one space for each examining or treatment room. 
6) 	Banks, excluding drive-in stations: One space for each 150 square feet of floor area devoted for public use plus one space for each 300 square feet devoted to office use. 
7) 	Establishments offering food, beverages, or refreshments for sale and consumption on the premises: One space for each four seats of dining and/or drinking area. 
8) 	Apartments: One space for any dwelling unit containing more than one bedroom. 
9) 	Nail salon: One and one-half parking spaces for every two service chairs. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -85-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

10) 	Dance schools/dance studios: Four spaces for every 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area. 
b. 	Off-street loading. The Planning Commission shall have the right to modify or waive the requirement for off-street loading areas as specified in Section 1310. Any such modification or waiver shall be based upon a review of a site plan and/or the surrounding area and a determination that there is satisfactory loading space serving the building or that the provision of such loading space is physically and/or functionally impractical to provide. 
3. 	
The owner or owners of such new or expanded use may make application to the City Building Official for the option of paying a dollar amount established by resolution of the City Council per required parking space and loading and unloading space in lieu of providing such required spaces. These monies would be paid in to the special parking district fund established by the City Council specifically for the purpose of constructing and improving off-street parking areas to serve uses located within the special parking districts. The timing of parking spaces provided and their location shall be at the sole discretion of the City Council. 

4. 	
The amount paid into the parking fund described above shall not apply against any present or future special assessments levied by the City for parking improvements. 

5. 	
The exception authorized by this section may only be granted by the City Council. Granting of such exception shall be based upon evidence presented by the property owner or owners showing that the reasonable ability to provide any or all of the required parking spaces and/or loading and unloading areas as required in sections 1305 and 1310 does not exist. 

6. 	
A property owner or owners granted the exception of contributing to the parking fund will not receive an occupancy permit until such monies have been paid into such fund in full. 

7. 	
The provisions of this section also apply to any change in use of property located within a special parking district that would require parking spaces in excess of those required for the previous use. 



Section 1310.Off-Street Loading and Unloading 
On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
Total Floor Area Off-Street Loading of the Building Space Requirements 
Office Use 	0 – 50,000 square One (1) usable loading space feet 10’ x 50’ 
Over 50,000 square feet 	Two (2) usable loading spaces 10’ x 50’ 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -86-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Commercial & Industrial 0 – 20,000 square One (1) usable loading space Uses feet 10’ x 50’ 
20,001 – 50,000 square Two (2) usable loading feet spaces each 10’ x 50’ 
Over 50,000 square feet 	Three (3) usable loading spaces plus one (1) space for each 50,000 square feet in excess of 50,000 square feet each 10’ x 50’ 
1. 	
All loading spaces shall be in addition to the off-street parking area access drive, and maneuvering lane requirements. 

2. 	
Off-street loading space shall have a clearance of fourteen (14) feet in height. 

3. 	
Off-street loading space may be completely enclosed within a building, or may occupy a portion of the site outside of the building, provided that where any portion of a loading space is open to public view, said space shall be screened in accordance with Section 1320, Screening Walls. 

4. 	
All loading and unloading in the Industrial District shall be provided off-street in the rear yard or interior side yard, and shall in no instance be permitted in a front yard. In those instances where exterior side yards have a common relationship with an industrial district across a public thoroughfare, loading and unloading may take place in said exterior side yard when the setback is equal to at least fifty (50) feet. 



Section 1311.Open Parking and Storage in all Districts Except Where Permitted 
1. 	
Intent 

The regulations set forth in this section are intended to prevent the storage or accumulation of unusable, inoperable, or unsightly motor vehicles, machinery, or building materials that could be hazardous to the safety of children, encourage the propagation of rats or rodents, or detract from the orderly appearance of the City. 

2. 	
General Requirements 

a. 	
Motor Vehicle Parking and Storage: No motor vehicle shall be kept, parked, or stored in any district zoned for residential use unless the vehicle is in operating condition and properly licensed or is kept inside a building. However, these provisions shall not apply to any motor vehicle ordinarily used but temporarily out of running condition for not more than thirty (30) continuous days within a ninety 

(90) day period. If a motor vehicle is being kept for actual use, but is temporarily unlicensed, the Building Official may grant the owner a period of up to one (1) month to procure a license. 

b. 	
Machinery and Building Materials Storage: Unusable, rusty, or inoperable machinery, equipment, or machines and/or equipment parts of machines or equipment not intended for use upon the premises, or old and/or used building materials shall not be kept or stored outside of a building. However, the temporary storage of building materials intended to be used to improve the premises may be stored outside if piled off the ground so as not to become a suitable environment for rats or rodents. The temporary storage of building materials to be used for the purpose of new construction shall also be permitted. In no case shall usable or unusable machinery, building materials, or other items be stored on permanent basis in a truck trailer or other type of trailer, with or without its wheels. 




City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -87-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1312.Recreational Vehicle Storage 
1. 	
The open parking or storage of tractors, boats, or similar vehicles not owned by the property owners or tenant of the City on lands not specifically designated for such parking or storage shall be permitted for a period of up to seventy-two (72) hours. However, a travel trailer may be kept in the rear or side yard of a single-family lot for a period of up to four (4) weeks, provided a permit has first been secured from the Building Official. 

2. 	
Residents of the City may keep not more than one (1) of their own trailer, boats, camper, motor home, and similar vehicles on their property for an indefinite period of time, provided such vehicles are in operable condition, licensed, and are not kept within twenty (20) feet of the closest edge of any neighboring road surface area. Such vehicles shall be subject to all other applicable provisions concerning accessory buildings set forth in Section 1504. 

3. 	
Recreational vehicles (RV’s) shall not be parked or stored closer to neighboring or adjacent lot lines than accessory buildings in the same district. 

4. 	
A travel trailer, motor home, or camper parked or stored on a residential lot shall not be connected to sanitary facilities and shall not be occupied. 



Section 1313.Home Occupations 
1. 	
No article or service shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises, except as such is produced on the premises by such occupation. 

2. 	
The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the dwelling unit, (not counting areas of unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches) shall be used for purposes of the home occupation. 

3. 	
There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the structure or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, other than signage as provided in Section 1328. 

4. 	
The outdoor storage of goods and materials shall be prohibited. No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of a dwelling unit used for purposes of a home occupation. 

5. 	
No more than one (1) home occupation per dwelling unit shall be permitted. 

6. 	
No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be provided by an off-street area, located other than in a required front yard. 

7. 	
There shall be no alteration in the residential character or function of the premise in connection herewith; nor shall any garage or parking area be used in connection herewith. 

8. 	
There shall be no commodity or stock in trade sold or stored upon the premises. 

9. 	
No assistants or employees shall be employed in connection with the home occupations, provided that family members, as defined in Section 202, shall not be counted as employees. 

10. 	
There shall be no equipment or machinery used in connection with a home occupation which is industrial in nature. 

11. 	
No home occupation shall be permitted to be established or continued when the same is objectionable as determined by the Planning Commission due to noise, dust, smoke, odor, traffic congestion, reduction of the living environment, or other causes detrimental to the neighborhood in which located. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -88-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1314.Bed and Breakfast Operations 
Any dwelling unit used for bed and breakfast operation shall comply with the following requirements: 
1. 	
Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area shall be used for bed and breakfast sleeping rooms. 

2. 	
There shall be no separate cooking facilities used for the bed and breakfast stay. 

3. 	
Occupancy by guests shall be restricted from one (1) to seven (7) days. 

4. 	
One (1) additional parking space shall be provided for each guest room, on-site; further, said parking shall not be permitted within a required front yard. 



Section 1315.Access to a Major Thoroughfare or Collector Street 
For uses making reference to this Section 1315, vehicular access shall be provided only to an existing or planned major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street. Provided, however, that access driveways may be permitted to other than a major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street between the driveway and the major thoroughfare, freeway service drive, or collector street is zoned for multiple-family use or any nonresidential uses is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences or is an area which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, will be used for other than single-family purposes in the future. This exception shall apply only if the Planning Commission finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety by reducing the number of driveways to a thoroughfare. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -89-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1316.Residential Entranceway 
In all Residential Districts, so called entranceway structures including but not limited to walls, columns, and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in Section 1316, provided that such entranceway structures shall be at least ten (10) feet in width, shall comply to all codes of the Municipality, and shall be approved by the Building Official and a permit issued. 

Section 1317.Corner Clearance 
Except as may otherwise be provided in the Ordinance, no fence, wall, shrubbery, sign, or other obstruction to vision above a height of two (2) feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line as required in Section 1318,3,f. 

Section 1318.Landscaping 
1. 
Intent 

Landscaping, greenbelts, and screening are necessary for the protection and enhancement of the environment and for the continued vitality of all land uses in the City. Landscaping and greenbelts are capable of enhancing the visual environment, preserving natural features, improving property values, and alleviating the impact of noise, traffic, and visual disruption related to intensive uses. The purpose of this section is to set minimum standards for the protection and enhancement of the environment through requirements for the design and use of landscaping, greenbelts, and screening. 

2. 
Scope of Application 


The requirements set forth in this section shall apply to all uses, lots, sites, and parcels which are developed or expanded following the effective date of this Ordinance. No site plan shall be approved unless said site plan shows landscaping consistent with the provisions of this Section. Furthermore, where landscaping is required, a building permit shall not be issued until the required landscape plan is submitted and approved, and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless provisions set forth in this section have been met or a performance bond has been posted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 1200, 7. 
In cases where the use of an existing building changes or an existing building is changed or otherwise altered or reoccupied, all of the standards set forth herein shall be met. 
The requirements of this section are minimum requirements, and nothing herein shall preclude a developer and the City from agreeing to more extensive landscaping. 
3. Landscaping Design Standards 
Except as otherwise specified in the general requirements for each Zoning District, all landscaping shall conform to the following standards: 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -90-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

a. 	General Site Landscaping 
All portions of the lot or parcel area not covered by buildings, paving, or other impervious surfaces, shall be landscaped with vegetative ground cover and other ornamental materials as required below, except where specific landscape elements, such as a greenbelt, berm, or screening are required: 
1) 	All portions of the landscaped area shall be planted with grass, ground cover, shrubbery, or other suitable plant material, except that paved patios, terraces, sidewalks and similar site features may be incorporated with Planning Commission approval. 
2) 	A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted at the rate of one (1) tree for each 1,000 square feet or portion thereof of landscaped open-space area. 
3) 	Required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings. 
4) 	On sites which are two (2) acres or larger in size, the landscaped area shall include a greenbelt of a minimum ten (10) foot width, located and continually maintained along a public right-of-way. 
5) 	In consideration of the overall design and impact of the landscape plan, the Planning Commission may reduce or waive the requirements outlined herein for General Landscaping, or for landscaping in greenbelt area, on berms, or as part of a screen, provided that any such adjustment is in keeping with the intent of the Ordinance, and more specifically, with the intent of Section 1318, 1. 
6) 	The total landscaped area shall be the basis for determining the required number of trees or shrubs, irrespective of the portion which is devoted to patios, terraces, sidewalks, or other site features. 
7) 	Trees shall be planted in a manner that avoids conflicts with overhead utility lines to the maximum extent practicable. 
b. 	Greenbelt Buffer 
Where required, greenbelts and greenbelt buffers shall conform to the following standards: 
1) 	A required greenbelt or greenbelt buffer may be interrupted only to provide for roads or driveways for vehicular access. 
2) 	Grass, ground cover, or other suitable live plant material shall be planted over the entire greenbelt area, except that paving may be used in areas of intensive pedestrian circulation. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
3) 	A minimum of one (1) deciduous tree or evergreen tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) lineal feet or portion thereof of required greenbelt length. Required trees shall be at least five (5) feet tall and may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings. 
4) 	For each fifty (50) linear feet or portion thereof of required greenbelt length, at least one (1) ornamental spring flowering tree at least five (5) feet in height shall be installed and maintained. 
5) 	Two (2) eighteen (18) inch high or wide shrubs shall be required for each fifteen (15) linear feet of greenbelt area. Required shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings. 
6) 	For the purpose of determining required plant material, required greenbelt area length shall be measured along the exterior periphery of the greenbelt area inclusive of all driveways. 
c. 	Berms 
Where required, earth berms or landscaped berms shall conform to the following standards: 
1) 	The berm shall be at least three (3) feet above the grade elevation, and shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one (1) foot vertical for each three (3) feet horizontal. For the purposes of this provision, grade elevation shall be the ground elevation at the property line adjacent to the proposed berm. 
2) 	The berm area shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground cover to ensure that it withstands wind and weather and retains its height and shape. 
3) 	A minimum of one (1) deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) linear feet or portion of required berm. 
4) 	Eight (8) shrubs per tree maybe planted as substitute for trees (see item “three” above). 
5) 	Required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings. 
6) 	For the purpose of determining required plant material, required berm length shall be measured along the exterior periphery of the berm. 
d. 	Evergreen Screening 
Where required, evergreen screening shall consist of closely spaced plantings, which form a visual barrier that is at least eight (8) feet above ground level within five (5) years of planting. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance e. Landscaping of Rights-of-Way and Other Adjacent Public Open-Space Areas 
Public rights-of-way and other public open-space areas adjacent to required landscaped areas and greenbelts shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground cover and maintained by the owner of the adjacent property as if they were part of required landscaped areas and greenbelts. 
f. 	Regulations Pertaining to Landscaping Areas Used for Sight Distance 
When a driveway intersects a public right-of-way or when the subject property abuts the intersection of public rights-of-way, all landscaping within the corner triangular areas described below shall permit unobstructed cross-visibility. Shrubs located in the triangular area shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than two (2) feet above the pavement grade at the edge of the pavement. Portions of required berms located within sight distance triangular areas shall also not exceed a height of two (2) feet above the pavement grade at the edge of the pavement. Trees may be maintained in this area, provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of eight (8) feet above the roadway surface. Landscaping, except grass or ground cover, shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from the edge of a driveway. 
The triangular areas referred to above are: 
1) 	The area formed at the corner intersection of a public right-of-way and a driveway, two (2) sides of the triangle area being ten (10) feet in length measured along the right-of-way line and driveway line and the third side being a line connecting these two (2) sides. 
2) 	The area formed at a corner intersection of two (2) public rights-of-way lines, the two (2) sides of the triangular area being twenty-five (25) feet in length measured along the abutting public rights-of-way lines and the third side being a line connecting these two (2) sides. 
g. 	Maintenance of Landscaping 
All required non-residential landscape areas greater than 200 square feet shall be required to install an underground irrigation (sprinkler) system and be planted and maintained with living materials. Failure to maintain required landscaped areas, including the removal and replacement of dead or diseased plant materials, shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 

Section 1319.Plant Materials 
Whenever in this Ordinance planting is required, it shall be planted within six (6) months from the date of completion of the building or improvement, and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained with permanent plant materials. Plastic and other non-organic, nonliving plant materials shall be prohibited from use and shall not be in compliance with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -93-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

1. 	Plant Material Spacing 
a. 	
Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four (4) feet from the fence line or property line, except that shrubs may be planted no closer than two (2) feet from the fence or property line. 

b. 	
Where plant materials are planted in two (2) or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows. 

c. 	
Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than thirty (30) feet on center. 

d. 	
Narrow evergreens shall be planted not more than three (3) feet on center. 

e. 	
Deciduous trees shall be planted not more than thirty (30) feet on center. 

f. 	
Tree-like shrubs shall be planted not more than ten (10) feet on center. 

g. 	
Large deciduous shrubs shall be planted not more than four (4) feet on center. 


2. 	Suggested Plant Materials Minimum Size 
a. 	Evergreen Trees: Six (6) feet in height 
1) Hemlock 
2) Fir 
3) Pine 
4) Spruce 
5) Douglas-Fir 

b. 	Narrow Evergreens: Four (4) feet in height 
1) Column Honoki Cypress 
2) Blue Columnar Chinese Juniper 
3) Pyramidal Red-Cedar 
4) Irish Yew 
5) Douglas Arborvitae 
6) Columnar Giant Arborvitae 

c. 	Tree-like Shrubs: Six (6) feet in height 
1) Amur Maple 
2) Russian Olive 
3) Amelanchip 
4) Dogwood 
5) Redbud 
6) Rose of Sharon 
7) Hornbeam 
8) Hawthorn 
9) Goldenrain 

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance d. Large Deciduous Shrubs: Four (4) feet in height 
1) Honeysuckle 
2) Viburnum 
3) Mock-Orange 
4) Forsythia 
5) Lilac 
6) Cotoneaster 
7) Hazelnut 
8) Euonymus 
9) Privet 
10) Buckthorn 
11) Sumac 

e. Deciduous Trees: Two (2) to three (3) inch caliper 
1) Oaks 
2) Hard Maple 
3) Hackberry 
4) Birch 
5) Planetree (Sycamore) 
6) Gingko (male) 
7) Beech 
8) Sweet-Gum 
9) Honey locust 
10) Hop Hornbeam 
11) Linden 

f. Ornamental Trees One (1) inch calipier 
1) Flowering Crabapple 
2) Dogwood 
3) Birch 
4) Magnolia 
5) Fruit (Pear, Plum, Cherry, Peach) 

3. Trees Not Permitted 
a. 
Box Elder 

b. 
Soft Maples (Red-Silver) 

c. 
Slippery Elms 

d. 
Poplars 

e. 
Willows 

f. 
Horse Chestnut (nut bearing) 

g. 
Tree of Heaven 

h. 	
Catalpa 

i. 	
Ginkgo (female) 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -95-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

4. 	Existing Plant Materials 
In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, the Building Official may adjust the application of the above standards to allow credit for such plant material if such an adjustment is in keeping with, and will preserve, the intent of this section. 
All existing plant materials must first be inspected by the Building Official to determine the health and desirability of such materials. In the event plant materials are to be saved, prior approval must be obtained from the Building Official before any delimbing, root pruning, or other work is done. 
If such existing plant material is labeled “To Be Saved” on site plans, protective techniques, upon as (but not limited to) fencing placed at the drip-line around the perimeter of the plant material, shall be installed. No vehicle or other construction equipment shall be parked or stored within the drip line of any plant material intended to be saved. 
In the event that health trees labeled “To Be Saved” on the approved site plan are destroyed or damaged, as determined by the Building Official, the owner, developer, or contractor shall replace said trees with trees of comparable type. 

Section 1320.Screening Walls 
1. 	For the Use Districts and uses listed below, there shall be provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a single-or two-family residential district, an obscuring wall. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the parking area on the non-residential side of the wall: 
Use 	Minimum Height Requirements 
a. 	
Off-street Parking Area 4’-6” high wall (see also Section 1306) 

b. 	
RM (with 17 or more units), 4’-6” high wall 
C-1, C-2, C-3, and R-0 Districts 


c. 	
Industrial District 4’-6” high wall 

d. 	
Open Storage Areas and Loading 4’-6” to 8’-0” high walls or fence (see also and Unloading Zones Sections 1311 and 1310) 

e. 	
Trash Receptacles 6’-0” high wall (see also Section 1322) 

f. 	
Utility Buildings, Stations, and 6’-0” high wall or fence 
Substations 



City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -96-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

2. 	
In the case of the variable wall height requirement in (d) above, the extent of obscuring wall shall be determined by the Planning Commission on the basis of land usage, provided further that no wall or fence shall be less than the above required minimum, nor greater than the above required maximum height. 

3. 	
Required walls shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance and, except such openings as may be approved by the Planning Commission. All walls herein required shall be constructed of materials approved by the Building Official to be durable, weather resistant, and easily maintained. 

4. 	
The requirement for an obscuring wall between off-street parking areas, outdoor storage areas, and any abutting residential district shall not be required when such areas are located more than two hundred (200) feet distance from abutting residential district(s). 



Section 1321.Fences 
1. 	
Scope 

The installation, erection, and/or maintenance of a fence is hereby prohibited, except in strict compliance with this Ordinance. A permit to be issued by the Building Official shall be obtained prior to installation or erection of any fence within the corporate limits of the City of Durand. Application shall be made upon a form provided by the Building Department and shall require such information as may be required by the City Clerk. All applications for a fence permit shall be accompanied by a filing fee as may be established by City Council resolution. 

2. 	
Calculation of Fence Height 

The height of the fence shall be computed as the distance from the base of the fence at normal grade to the top of the highest component of the fence. 

3. 	
Design Requirements 


a. 	Residential Fences: 
All fences in areas zoned or used for residential purposes shall be of an ornamental type, and shall not be more than six (6) feet in height, above the grade level. Any metal or masonry fence further shall not be more than four (4) feet in height above grade level. 
b. 	Business, Office, or Commercial Fences: 
All fences in areas zoned or used for business, office, or commercial purposes shall be of an ornamental type and shall not be more than six (6) feet in height above grade level. 
c. 	
Industrial Fences: 

d. 	
Fences Separating Single or Two-Family Residential Property from Multiple-Family Residential Property: 


All fences in areas zoned or used for industrial purposes shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height above grade level. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -97-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Areas zoned or used for multiple family residential purposes, with five (5) to sixteen 
(16) 
total number of units, which abut single or two-family property shall have erected upon said adjoining property line a fence or an ornamental type to be six 

(6) 
feet in height above grade level. 


e. 	Fences for Parks, Schools, Public Buildings, Etc.: 
The height and type of fences enclosing municipal parks, public and parochial school grounds, public building and church grounds, or land used for playgrounds, parks, picnic groves, golf courses, golf driving ranges, or similar facilities for outdoor exercise and recreation shall require the approval of the Building Official. 
f. 	Fences Required for Swimming Pools and Ponds: 
For the protection of the general public, any swimming pool, reflector pool, fish pond, lily pond, or artificially constructed body of water, which contains eighteen 
(18) inches or more of water in depth at any point, shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four (4) feet in height above grade level. The gate(s) shall be of a self-closing and latching type, with the latch on the inside of the gate not readily accessible for children to open. Gates shall be capable of being securely locked when the pool is not in use for extended periods; provided, however, that if the entire premises is enclosed with a fence of not less than four (4) feet in height above grade level, this provision may be waived by the Building Department. 
4. 	Material Specifications 
Fences shall be constructed of wood, metal, or masonry, and other acceptable materials, excluding plastic interwoven weave designs. Only new material shall be used, which has been manufactured and/or treated in a manner to prevent rust and corrosion, and/or rot or decay. 
a. 	
All Fences Shall Be Constructed of a Minimum of: 

1. 	
Two (2) inch iron pipe; or 

2. 	
Two (2) inch angle iron; or 

3. 	
Four (4) inch wooden posts; or 

4. 	
Four (4) inch reinforced concrete posts; or any other member having equal stability. All posts shall be sunk in the soil to a depth of at least three (3) feet. 



b. 	
No Person Shall Erect or Cause to be Erected a Fence Which is: 

1. 	
Made with or upon which is fixed barbed wire; or 

2. 	
Has any protective spike, nail, or sharp pointed object; or 

3. 	
Charged with electronic current 




City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -98-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Provided, however, that a fence in an industrial area may be erected with barbed wire on arms or brackets extending inward over such property upon application and approval by City Council. 
5. 	Location 
a. 	
Fences shall be placed twelve (12) inches from the property line to permit maintenance of the fence without trespassing on a neighboring property, or, with permission of the neighbor, on the property line. 

b. 	
No fence shall be erected between the front building line and the front property of the premises except as ornamental fences of thirty six (36”) inches or less in height. 


6. 	
Maintenance of Nuisance 

Fences must be maintained in a neat and safe condition, so as not to endanger life or property. Any fence which, through lack of repair, type of construction, or otherwise endangers life or property, is hereby deemed a nuisance. The Building Department shall notify the owner, agent, or person in control of the property on which such fence is located of the existence of such nuisance and specify the required repairs or modifications to be made to render the fence safe, or require that the unsafe fence or any portion thereof to be removed, and shall provide a time limiting such repairs, modification, or removal. 

7. 	
Existing Fences 

a. 	
Fences presently in existence shall not be enlarged, rebuilt, or reconstructed without first having obtained a permit thereof from the Building Department. Such fences, when repaired or replaced, shall conform with all provisions of this Ordinance. 

b. 	
Any newly rezoned property shall comply with all fence requirements for the newly zoned district. 





Section 1322.Screening of Trash Storage Areas 
1. 	
In all Commercial and Industrial zone districts, there shall be provided an outdoor trash storage area. Any such area shall be limited to normal refuse which is collected on a regular basis and shall be maintained in a neat, orderly, and sanitary condition. The requirement for such a trash storage area may be waived by the Planning Commission upon a finding that it is unnecessary due to the nature of the use, or owing to provisions for indoor trash storage. 

2. 	
In no instance shall any such refuse be visible above the required screening. 

3. 	
A screen wall in accordance with Section 1320 of six (6) feet in height shall enclose three 

(3) sides of the storage area. Bollards and/or other protective devices shall be installed at the opening and to the rear of any storage area to prevent damage to the screening walls. The surface under any storage area shall be constructed of concrete which complies with local building requirements. 

4. 	
Any such storage area shall be located in a rear and/or be so located and arranged as to minimize its visibility from adjacent streets and uses. The Planning Commission shall require an obscuring gate when the visibility of such a storage area, from a public street or adjacent use, is deemed to render an adverse influence. In no instance shall any such area be located in a front yard. 

5. 	
All trash storage areas and/or enclosures shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any building or structure. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -99-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1323.Exterior Lighting 
1. 	
All outdoor lighting in all use districts other than residential shall be shielded so the surface of the source of the light shall not be visible from all adjacent residential districts, adjacent residences and public rights-of-way. 

2. 	
Illumination guidelines shall be in accordance with the following standards: 


a. 	Street Illumination: 
Street Hierarchy  Nonresidential  Residential  
Footcandle  Lux Footcandles  Lux  Footcandles  
“Major”  12 1.2  6  .06  
“Collector”  8 0.8  4  . 04  
“Local”  6 0.6  3  .08  

Major 
The part of the roadway system that serves as the principal network for through traffic flow. The routes connect areas of principal traffic generation and important rural highways entering the City. 
Collector 
The distributor and collector roadways serving traffic between major and local roadways. These are roadways used mainly for traffic movements within residential, commercial, and industrial areas. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -100-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Local 
Roadways used primarily for direct access to residential, commercial, industrial, or other abutting property. They do not include roadways carrying through traffic. Long local roadways will generally be divided into short sections by collector roadway systems. 
b. 	Parking Illumination 
Level of Activity  Vehicular Use Area Only  General Parking and Pedestrian Safety  
Lux Footcandles  Lux Footcandles  
Low Activity  5 0.5  2 0.2  
Medium Activity  11 1.0  6 0.6  
High Activity  22 2.0  10 0.9  

High Activity 
Examples include major league athletic events, major cultural or civic events, regional shopping centers, and fast food facilities. 
Medium Activity 
Examples include community shopping centers, office parks, hospital parking areas, transportation parking (airports, etc.), cultural, civic or recreational events, and residential complex parking. 
Low Activity 
Examples include neighborhood shopping, industrial employee parking, educational facility parking, and church parking. 
3. 	
There shall be no flashing, oscillating or intermittent illumination of any sign. No sign shall contain any visible moving parts or messages. Time and temperature numerals are exempt from this provision. If a sign is permitted to be illuminated, it may be illuminated only by continuous indirect white light. Only the sign face shall be illuminated. The illumination of any sign shall not be detrimental or annoying to occupants of surrounding property nor constitute a safety hazard, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 

4. 	
Light pole height shall not exceed 30 ft. in height. 



Section 1324.Noise 
1. 	
Noise. The pressure level of sounds shall not exceed the following decibel levels when adjacent to the following types of uses: 

*Except if normal road traffic noise levels exceed sixty-five (65dBA) decibels, the use noise level may equal but not exceed the traffic noise level. 

2. 	
The sound levels shall be measured using a weighted decibel measurement and with a type of audio out meter approved by the National Institute of Standards and Technology. Objectionable noise as determined by the building inspector, of an intermittent nature, or high frequency sounds, even if falling below the aforementioned decibel readings, shall be muffled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 

3. 	
Where street traffic noises directly adjacent to the boundary line exceed these maximum permitted levels, the intensity levels permitted may then exceed those levels specified in the tables, but may not exceed the level of the subject adjacent street traffic noise. 

4. 	
Noise resulting from temporary construction activity that occurs between 7:00 a.m. and 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -101-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

SOUND LEVEL ADJACENT USE  WHERE MEASURED  
65dBA Residential  Boundary Property Line*  
75dBA Commercial/Office  Boundary Property Line  
80dBA Industrial/Other  Boundary Property Line  

7:00 p.m. shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 

Section 1325.Satellite Dish Antenna 
These provisions shall apply to any satellite earth station antenna (that is over two (2) meters and located in a commercial and industrial area or any satellite earth station over one (1) meter in diameter in any other district). 
1. 	
A ground mounted satellite antenna shall be located only in the rear yard and shall be subject to the accessory structures setback requirements of the Zoning District in which it is located, as measured at the property line to the nearest edge of the dish. 

2. 	
Not more than one (1) satellite antenna shall be allowed on any single residential lot of record. 

3. 	
Any satellite dish antenna shall be installed and maintained with a screen that shall not interfere with the reception, but will obscure the view from adjacent lots or streets. 

4. 	
No satellite dish antenna shall exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter. 

5. 	
A roof mount location may be considered as an alternative to a ground mount for nonresidential structures. The maximum height of a roof mounted satellite antenna shall be not greater than fifteen (15) feet, including its base, nor shall the building and antenna exceed the maximum height permitted for a structure in its respective zoning district. 

6. 	
The satellite antenna and structural support shall be of noncombustible and corrosive resistant material. 

7. 	
All satellite antennas shall be grounded as required by the applicable building codes to alleviate electrical potential differences between exposed “dead” metal parts of the antenna and the premises A.C. electrical system. 

8. 	
Each satellite antenna shall be designed to withstand a wind force of 75 mph without the use of any supporting guide wires. 

9. 	
Wiring between a satellite dish and the receiver shall be placed at least eighteen (18) inches beneath the surface of the ground with a cable approved for direct burial. 

10. 	
Any driving motor shall be limited to 100v maximum power design and be encased in protective guards. Any motor with operating voltage of more than 50v A.C. nominal shall comply with Article 430 of the National Electrical Code, as may be amended. 

11. 	
A satellite antenna shall be permanently mounted. A satellite antenna may only be on wheels or temporarily installed when used to demonstrate and/or test the feasibility of use for no more than two (2) weeks. 

12. 	
No satellite dish antenna permanently mounted shall be used, nor contain a commercial or residential advertisement, except signs indicating the manufacturer, sales or servicing agent, the total of which shall not exceed twenty (20) square inches. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -102-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1326.Private Swimming Pools 
1. 	
For permanent above or below ground swimming pools, and for portable pools with a diameter exceeding twelve (12) feet or an area exceeding one hundred (100) square feet, a building permit must be obtained for its alteration, erection, and construction. Before a permit is issued, an application shall be approved by the enforcing official (building official or authorized representative). An application is not required for a wading pool less than twenty four (24”) inches in depth. An application for a permit should provide the following information: name of the owner, plot plan specifying dimensions, site location of the pool, as well as nearby fences, buildings, gates, septic tanks, tile fields, public utilities, and easements. The application for a below ground pool must include plans and specifications to scale of the pool walls, slope, bottom, walkway, diving boards, type and rating of auxiliary equipment, piping, and valve layout. 

2. 	
For permanent above or below ground swimming pools, and for portable pools with a diameter exceeding twelve (12) feet or an area exceeding one hundred (100) square feet, a building permit must be obtained for its alteration, erection, and construction. Before a permit is issued, an application shall be approved by the enforcing official (building official or authorized representative). An application is not required for a wading pool. An application for a permit should provide the following information: name of the owner, plot plan specifying dimensions, site location of the pool, as well as nearby fences, buildings, gates, septic tanks, tile fields, public utilities, and easements. The application for a below ground pool must include plans and specifications to scale of the pool walls, slope, bottom, walkway, diving boards, type and rating of auxiliary equipment, piping, and valve layout. 

3. 	
Rear and side lot line setbacks shall not be less than ten (10) feet between the pool outside wall and the side or rear property line, and not less than ten (10) feet between pool wall and any building on the lot. 

ARTICLE XIII 	Sections 1326 -1327 

4. 	
With regard to overhead electrical or telephone wires, a distance of not less than ten (10) feet horizontally from the water’s edge shall be enforced. Under no circumstances shall wire of any kind cross over the water surface. 

5. 	
A swimming pool shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet horizontally to any semi-public water well, unless a shorter distance is approved by the County Health Department. 

6. 	
A distance of at least three (3) feet horizontally must be maintained from a permanent pool to any sewer. There shall be ten (10) feet horizontally to a septic tank and tile field or other treatment facility, provided the water level in the pool is one (1) foot or more above the ground surface elevation of such treatment facility. 

7. 	
A distance of three (3) feet shall be provided from any portion of the pool to any underground water, electrical, telephone, gas, or other pipes and conduits, except for parts of the swimming pool system. 

8. 	
No yard containing a swimming pool or wading pool shall be constructed or maintained unless such swimming pool is entirely enclosed by a building, wall, and/or fence. The minimum height of all parts of the fence or wall, including gates, shall be four (4) feet in height, and not more than six (6) feet in height, measured from grade. The fence shall be designed and constructed so as to make the pool inaccessible to children by climbing or entering through the fence openings. The fence must be no closer than ten (10) feet to the water’s edge. All openings in any such fence or building shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching gate or door which shall be securely locked with a tamper proof lock when the pool is not in use. 

9. 	
A private swimming pool shall be located only in the rear yard. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -103-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1327.One-Family Dwelling Standards 
1. 	
Every dwelling unit hereafter erected shall have a minimum of 800 square feet of floor space on the ground floor. For the purpose of this paragraph, a basement or cellar shall not count as a story, and a breezeway or garage shall not be included in the computation of ground floor area. 

2. 	
It has a minimum width across any section of 24 feet and complies in all respects with the local Building Code, including minimum heights for habitable rooms. Where a dwelling is required, by law, to comply with any Federal or State standards or regulations for construction, and where such standards or regulations allow standards of construction which are less stringent that those imposed by the Building Code, then, and in that event, the less stringent Federal or State standard or regulation shall apply. 

3. 	
It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the local Building Code and co-extensive with the perimeter of the building, which attachment shall also meet all applicable building codes and other State and Federal regulations. 

4. 	
It does not have exposed wheels, towing mechanism, undercarriage, or chassis. 

5. 	
The dwelling is connected to a public sewer and water supply or to such private facilities approved by the local Health Department. 

6. 	
The dwelling contains storage area whether in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure being of standard construction similar to, or of better quality than, the principal dwelling. Such storage shall be in addition to the space for the storage of automobiles and shall be addition to the space for the storage of automobiles and shall be equal to not less than fifteen (15%) percent of the minimum square footage requirement. In no case, however, shall more than 200 square feet of storage area be required by this provision. 

7. 	
The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity, and with either a roof overhang of not less than six inches on all sides, or alternatively with window sills and roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage along the sides of the dwelling; with not less than two (2) exterior doors with one being in the front of the dwelling and the other being in either the rear or side of the dwelling; and contains permanently attached steps connected to said exterior door area where a difference in elevation requires the same. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -104-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by the Building Official upon review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling subject to appeal by an aggrieved applicant to the Zoning Board of Appeals within a period of fifteen 
(15) 
days from the receipt of notice of said Building Official’s decision. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the following standards: 

a. 	
Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to its surroundings. 

b. 	
Buildings shall have a good scale and be in harmonious conformance with permanent neighboring development. 


1) 	Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings. 
2) 	Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings shall have the same materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all building walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from public ways. 
3) 	Materials shall be of durable quality. 
4) 	In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious with their surroundings. 
c. 	
Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 

d. 	
Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be so located as not to be visible from any public ways. 

e. 	
The roof overhang and pitch shall be comparable to the overhang and pitch of homes typically found in the surrounding area, provided the pitch of the roof shall not be less than one (1) foot of rise for each four (4) feet of horizontal run. 

f. 	
Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the standard set forth in this section, as compared against the character, design, and appearance of one 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -105-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

(1) or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks within two thousand (2,000) feet of the subject dwelling where such area is developed with dwellings to the extent of not less than twenty (20) percent of the lots situated within said area; or, where said area is not developed, by the character, design, and appearance of one (1) or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks throughout the City. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour, or relief from the standard design home. 
8. 	
The dwelling contains no additions or rooms or other areas which are not constructed with similar materials and which are similar in appearance and which have similar quality of workmanship as the original structure, including the above-described foundation and permanent attachment to the principal structure. 

9. 	
The dwelling complies with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of mobile homes, the standards for mobile home construction as contained in the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) regulations entitled “Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards” as amended, shall apply. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. 

10. 	
The foregoing standards shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park, except to the extent required by State or Federal law, or otherwise specifically required in the Ordinance of the City pertaining to such parks. 

11. 	
All construction required herein shall be commenced only after a Building Permit has been obtained in accordance with the applicable local Building Code provisions and requirements. 


Section 1328. Manufactured Home Parks 
1. 	Manufactured home parks are subject to the following provisions: 
a. 	Locational Requirements 
1) 	Manufactured home parks shall be permitted in R-M Districts where suitable access exists to major street thoroughfares, public water and sanitary and storm sewer facilities are available or, could be provided by the developer at no cost to the City. 
b. 	Use Restrictions 
1) 	In all R-M Districts, no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, shall be erected or used, except for one or more of the following specified uses, on approval of the City Council, with respect to site layout and pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -106-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

2) 	The building or structure herein after erected or altered in a manufactured home park shall not exceed one (1) story in height or fifteen (15) feet. 
c. 	Space Requirements 
1) 	Open area shall be provided on each manufactured home lot, to insure privacy, adequate natural light, and ventilation to each home and, to provide sufficient area for outdoor uses essential to the manufactured home. All lots shall contain a minimum area of at least three thousand (3,000) square feet. All such manufactured home site areas shall be computed exclusive of service drives, facilities, and recreation space. 
2) 	There shall be unobstructed open spaces between each manufactured home of not less than fifteen (15) feet, and not less than fifteen (15) feet of unobstructed open space between the ends of adjacent manufactured homes. Hitches shall not extend beyond the boundary lines of the sites. 
3) 	No manufactured home shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line of public thoroughfare or twenty-five (25) feet from the manufactured home park property line. 
4) 	No manufactured home occupying a site shall be less than ten (10) feet in width, nor less than five hundred (500) square feet in area. 
5) 	Each manufactured home site shall be provided with one (1) utility cabinet, which shall not be less than four (4) feet in width, three (3) feet in depth, and five (5) feet in height from the right-of-way line of public thoroughfare or, twenty-five (25) feet from the manufactured home park property line. 
d. 	Parking Provisions 
1) 	Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home site and one (1) for each employee of the manufactured home park. 
2) 	All manufactured homes shall be parked on forty-two (42) inch pilings ten feet apart, the width and length of which shall be at least equal to the width and length of the manufactured home. 
3) 	Area shall be provided for additional parking spaces for visitors. 
e. 	Roads and Sidewalks 
1) 	Each individual manufactured home park site shall abut or face a driveway, roadway, or street for a distance of at least thirty (30) feet, which street shall have unobstructed access to a public street, or highway. All roadways and off-street parking areas shall be to specifications as prescribed by the City Council, which in no event shall be less than required for city streets. 
2) 	A ten (10) foot greenbelt space shall be provided between sidewalk and curb. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
3) 	Each manufactured home park shall provide a thirty (30) inch concrete walk from the entrance of each manufactured home to all required service facilities. 
4) 	Roadways and streets within all existing and new manufactured home parks shall conform to the following schedule regarding vehicle traffic use, including motor vehicle parking: 
No parking on road (separate lot or on-site parking provided), Parallel parking (One side only, two-way road, 20 feet wide), Parallel parking (Two sides, one-way road, 20 feet wide), Parallel parking (Two sides, one-way road, 26 feet wide); and, Parallel parking (Two sides, two-way road, 36 feet wide) 
5) 	Sidewalks shall be required and the space shall be in addition to the above schedule. 
f. 	Plumbing, Heating, and Electrical Installations 
1) 	Plumbing, heating, and electrical installations in manufactured home parks shall be maintained in accordance with the City of Durand plumbing, heating, and electrical codes. All utilities shall be underground. Only a single master antenna system shall be utilized within manufactured home parks as an exterior television receiver. 
g. 	Additional Requirements 
1) 	There shall be provided an area of not less than one hundred (100) square feet for recreation for each manufactured home space in the manufactured home park, with a minimum area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet, which shall be no longer than two (2) times its width. Such area shall be developed and maintained by the management so as to provide healthful recreation for the children of the manufactured home park. 
2) 	A greenbelt planting strip, as provided in Section 1318, herein shall be located along all perimeter lot lines. 
3) 	When property adjacent to the manufactured home park is zoned for residential or agricultural purpose, a structural fence or wall at least four (4) feet, but not more than six (6) feet in height shall be erected and used in combination with plant material to effectively screen the manufactured home park from surrounding uses. 
4) 	The front yard and the side yard adjacent to a street shall be landscaped, and the entire manufactured home park shall be maintained in a good, clean, and presentable condition at all times. 
5) 	No business of any kind shall be conducted in any manufactured home or building on the premises of the mobile park, except that of the management office. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
6) 	Street and yard light, sufficient in number and intensity to permit the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night, shall be provided and shall be effectively related to buildings, trees, walks, steps, and ramps. 
7) 	No spot or flood lights shall be used for lighting or advertising purposes. No other lighting for identification or advertising purposes shall have a visible source of illumination. No lighting shall shine on adjacent properties. All other lighting shall be in accordance with the State of Michigan, Act 243, Public Acts of 1959, as amended. 
8) 	All fuel oil and all gas tanks shall be located on each manufactured home site in a uniform manner. All tanks shall be of an approved type to comply with Building Code standards, and shall be equipped with vent pipes and with fused valves. 
9) 	There shall be no storage underneath any manufactured home, and each manufactured home site shall be maintained in a clean and presentable condition at all times. Each manufactured home shall be skirted within thirty 
(30) days of site occupancy. 
10) 	Fences, other than those surrounding the park, shall be uniform in height, shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height, and shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide firemen access to all sides of each manufactured home. 
11) 	Fire hydrants of a size and a pressure to be used by the City of Durand Fire Department shall be placed within said manufactured home park so that no manufactured home shall be more than three hundred (300) feet from a fire hydrant. Said hydrants shall be maintained in good working condition. 
g. 	A one-family dwelling may be permitted in the manufactured home park, provided that such dwelling is limited to the management’s residence and provided further, such dwelling complies with the requirements of the R-1 District of this Ordinance. A portion of such dwelling may be utilized for management’s office, in accordance with other provisions of this Ordinance. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -109-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1329.Signs 
1. 	
Intent 

The City finds that signs and other visual outdoor advertising tends to promote commerce and are related to the health, safety, and/or general welfare of the residents of the City, and that the preservation of the existing character of the community requires regulation of signs and of other visual outdoor advertising. The City finds that failure to regulate the size, location, and construction of signs and other outdoor advertising may have an adverse effect upon the promotion of business and commerce in the City, may lead to poor identification of businesses, may have an adverse effect upon the existing aesthetic character of the City, and may cause deterioration of business and residential areas of the community. Therefore, the purpose of this section and the subsections thereunder is to permit such signs and visual outdoor advertising as will not by reason of their size, location, or manner of display, endanger public health and/or safety; confuse or mislead traffic; or obstruct vision necessary for traffic and pedestrian safety; and further, to regulate signs and other visual outdoor advertising in such a way as to prevent the placement of signs, and such other visual outdoor advertising in a manner that will conceal or obscure other signs and other visual outdoor advertising on adjacent businesses; to keep the number of sign and sign messages at a minimum level reasonably necessary to identify a business and its products; to keep signs within a reasonable scale with respect to the buildings to which they relate; and further, to prevent off-premise signs from conflicting with business, residential and public land uses, and to prohibit signs and other visual outdoor advertising which will have an adverse effect upon the existing aesthetic character of not only the zoning district in which they are located, but also upon the overall existing aesthetic character of the City. 

2. 	
Sign Permit Procedures 


Except as otherwise provided, the following conditions shall apply in all districts: 
a. 	
Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing to the Zoning Administrator and deposited at the City Hall. 

b. 	
Permit fees, as established by the City Council, must accompany the application. 

c. 	
The Zoning Administrator may either issue or deny a permit. If the permit is not issued or denied within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application, the applicant may, on the thirty-first (31st) day, after the application was deposited at the City Hall, demand a permit and the Zoning Administrator shall then issue such permit. 

d. 	
Permits may be revoked if the sign has deteriorated or is dilapidated. 

e. 	
No sign, except those maintained by the City, County, State, or Federal governments, or as otherwise provided for in this Ordinance, shall be located in, project into, or overhang a public right-of-way or dedicated public easement. 

f. 	
No sign shall be permitted in any required setback area. A “Front Setback” is measured from the edge of the right-of-way of any abutting roadway. A “Rear Setback” is measured from the property line opposite the roadway. A “Side Setback” is measured from any other abutting property line. Corner lots shall require two (2) front setbacks, but only one (1) rear setback. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -110-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

3. 	
Measurement of Sign Area 

The area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a regular geometric form or combination of such forms comprising all the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed. An area so created shall include all solid surfaces, as well as all openings. Frames and structural members not bearing copy or display material shall not be included in computation of sign area. Where a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two (2) such faces are placed back-to-back, parallel to one another, and less than twenty-four (24) inches a part, the area of the sign shall be the area of one (1) face. Where a sign has two (2) or more faces, that portion of the sign structure connecting the sign faces shall not be used for display purposes. Signs painted on a wall are also regulated by the provisions of this Ordinance; however, super graphics or wall murals are excluded if they do not advertise a business name, product, service, etc. 

4. 	
Sign Height 

The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: 1) existing grade prior to construction; or, 2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zoning lot, whichever is lower. 

5. 	
Permitted Signs in the Residential Districts 

a. 	
One (1) sign advertising the sale or lease of the lot or building not exceeding six (6) square feet in area on any one (1) lot. Such sign not to be placed in the public right-of-way, and shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of closing. 

b. 	
One (1) unlighted sign announcing a home occupation, or professional service, not-to-exceed three (3) square feet in area. The sign shall be attached flat against the front wall of the building. 

c. 	
One (1) sign advertising a recorded subdivision or development not-to-exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and placed no closer to any street right-of-way than one-third (1/3) the minimum authorized front yard depth. Such sign shall be removed within one (1) year after the sale of ninety (90) percent of all lots or units within said subdivision or development. 




City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
d. 	
One (1) sign identifying a multiple-family building or development, not having commercial connotations, not-to-exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and placed no closer to any street right-of-way line than one-third (1/3) the minimum authorized front yard depth, and no closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line in any adjacent one-family district. 

e. 	
One (1) sign identifying a park, school, church, public building, other authorized use, or a lawful nonconforming use, not exceeding fifty (50) square feet and be placed no closer to the street right-of-way line than one-third (1/3) the minimum authorized front yard depth. 

f. 	
One (1) unlighted sign announcing a bed and breakfast establishment or similar use not-to-exceed three (3) square feet in area. The sign shall be attached flat against the front wall of the building. 

g. 	
One (1) unlighted nameplate, identifying the name of the occupant, not-to-exceed three (3) square feet in area. The nameplate shall be attached flat against the front wall of the building. 


6. 	Residential development signs indicating only the name of the development and the management/developer thereof, subject to the following: 
a. 	
The residential development signs shall be monument signs. 

b. 	
There shall not be more than two (2) residential development signs for each major point of vehicular access to a development. 

c. 	
Residential development signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in gross surface area for each exposed face nor exceed an aggregate gross surface area of one hundred (100) square feet. 

d. 	
Residential development signs may be located in any required yard but shall not extend over any lot line or within fifteen (15) feet of any point of vehicular access from a zoning lot to a public roadway. The location and arrangement of all residential development signs shall be subject to the review and approval of the Building Official. 

e. 	
Residential development signs shall not project higher than eight (8) feet. 


7. 	Permitted Signs in the Nonresidential Districts 
Signs shall be limited to one (1) flat wall sign and one (1) freestanding sign on the premises of a business establishment or composite of businesses under a single ownership by an individual, firm, or corporation, subject to the following conditions: 
a. 	Wall Signs: 
1) 	Flat wall signs may not project above the roof or parapet line and may not project more than one (1) foot beyond the face of the wall of the building. Wall signs shall be attached to, and be parallel to, the wall of the building. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
2) 	Wall signs shall be limited in number to one (1) wall sign per business on each wall having an individual means of access. The maximum size of any such sign shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the building façade where so provided, however, that no such sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
3) 	In the instance of several tenants utilizing a common public entranceway, a common wall sign shall be permitted provided any such sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area for each tenant listed, or one hundred 
(100) square feet in area for all tenants listed, whichever is more restrictive. No occupant shall be listed on more than one (1) such sign per side of building having an individual means of access. 
b. 	Freestanding Ground Signs 
1) 	A maximum of one (1) freestanding sign, or one (1) for each front lot line on parcels with a minimum of three (3) acres or more, shall be permitted per structure or planned grouping of structures where a building does not cover the full area of the property. Signs may be freestanding or ground supported anywhere back of the property line provided, however, that such signs shall not be placed closer than fifty (50) feet to any residential district; or closer than a distance equal to its height to a public right-of-way or adjacent nonresidential properties. 
2) 	The allowable height for such signs shall not be over twenty (20) feet. 
3) 	The maximum sign area shall be fifty (50) square feet. 
4) 	Freestanding signs shall be two-sided. Signs other than two-sided may be permitted after review and approval by the Planning Commission, subject to the following criteria: 
i) 	Signs made in the image of animals, plants, or machines shall be subject to design review by the Planning Commission. 
ii) 	The signs shall not display moving or animated parts or images. 
8. 	Signs Permitted in the Downtown (Development Authority District) Overlay Zone 
a. 	
Signs permitted in the Downtown Overlay Zone shall be limited to wall signs as regulated by Section 1329, 8, (b). In addition, canopy/awning sign(s), projecting sign(s) and monument signs may be installed subject to the limitations presented below. 

b. 	
Wall signs. Wall signs shall be permitted subject to the following conditions: 


1) 	Flat wall signs may not project above the roof or parapet line and may not project more than one foot beyond the wall of the building. Wall signs shall be attached to, and parallel to, the wall of the building. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
2) 	One wall sign for each business shall be allowed on each building face. The maximum amount of sign area allowed on each building face shall not exceed ten percent of the building façade where so provided; however, no such sign area shall exceed 100 square feet in area. 
c. 	Awning or canopy signs. The canopy of awning shall be constructed of durable material and maintained in such a manner so as to continue its original appearance and to provide safety to the persons and property it may affect. No canopy or awning sign shall contain back lighting or be illuminated for purposes of drawing attention to, or enhancing the visibility of, the canopy or canopy sign during its use. This restriction shall not be construed to preclude the use of site lighting principally used to illuminate adjacent sidewalks, parking lots, loading and unloading zones and similar use areas. The area of signage on a canopy or awning shall be limited to the name of the business and/or property owner, and the address. 
1) 	Location 
i) 	A canopy or awning sign shall be restricted to the canopy valance, consisting of short strips or bands of material hung at the lower edge of the canopy or awning. 
ii) 	Canopy or awning signs shall be restricted to only the valance of canopies/awnings at the first story. 
iii) 	Any such canopy structure shall be at least two feet from any vehicular parking space or maneuvering lane. 
iv) 	Any such structure shall not conflict with necessary sight distances for proper vehicular and pedestrian movements. 
v) 	No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window or fire escape. 
2) 	Area 
i) 	The sign shall not be greater than eight inches in height and occupy no more than 33 percent of the total valance area. The sign shall be restricted to the valance area which is directed to the adjacent right­of-way. 
ii) 	Only the copy area of the canopy should be identified as sign area used for calculation purposes. 
3) 	Height 
i) 	A minimum under-clearance of eight feet shall be maintained by all canopy structures, as measured from the bottom edge of canopy to grade immediately beneath the canopy. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
ii) 	Canopies hereafter erected shall, whenever practical, match the established under-clearance height and projection of canopies which exist on abutting parcels and/or businesses. 
4) 	Number. One per each canopy so provided. 
5) 	Under-canopy sign. A suspended sign, perpendicular to the building façade and not greater than two square feet in area shall be permitted under the canopy and which shall also not hang below the lowest part of the canopy. 
d. 	Projecting signs. The projecting sign shall be constructed of durable material and maintained in such a manner so as to continue its original appearance and to provide proper safety to the persons and property it may affect. Identifying symbology is encouraged on all projecting signs. 
1) 	Location 
i) 	Projecting signs shall extend no more than four feet from the building, or one-third of the sidewalk width, whichever is less. In measuring the sign projection, the measurement shall be taken from the building from which it protrudes, including any open area between the wall face and the sign face. 
ii) 	Projecting signs shall not extend vertically beyond the windowsill of the second story. 
iii) 	Projecting signs shall have a minimum six-inch separation between the sign and the wall face. 
iv) 	Projecting signs shall project from the wall at an angle of 90 degrees. 
v) 	No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window or fire escape. 
vi) 	Angular projection at the corner of a building is prohibited. 
2) 	Area 
i) 	Projecting signs shall not exceed a display area of ten square feet per face. 
3) 	Height 
i) 	Projecting signs shall clear grade level below the sign by a minimum of eight feet. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
4) 	Number 
i) 	There may be one individual projecting sign on each side of the building offering customer access, provided that such signs are spaced not less than 20 feet apart horizontally. 
e. 	Monument sign. One monument sign may be permitted in lieu of a wall sign on sites having a front yard setback of not less than ten feet, subject to the following conditions: 
1) 	The monument sign shall be located on private property, outside of the public right-of-way, within the front yard setback. The monument sign shall not be closer than three feet to any lot line. 
2) 	The monument sign shall contain not more than two sides. 
3) 	The monument sign shall not exceed a height of four feet or a sign area of 20 square feet of each face. 
4) 	The monument sign shall not be translucent to an extent greater than 30 percent of any one face and, further, any resultant internal illumination shall be restricted to highlight only the individual lettering or logo used in the composition of the sign message. The monument sign may also instead be illuminated from a freestanding light source. 
5) 	The monument sign shall be situated in a manner that allows adequate sight distance for motorists entering or exiting the site. It may not encroach into a clear vision sign triangle as defined in Section 1318. 
9. 	Other Permitted Signs 
a. 	
Highway signs erected by the U.S. Government, State of Michigan, County, or City of Durand. 

b. 	
Governmental use signs erected by governmental agencies to designate the hours of activity or conditions of use for parks, parking lots, recreational areas, other public space, or for governmental buildings. 

c. 	
Directional signs in conjunction with drives or off-street parking areas, provided any such sign does not exceed four (4) square feet in area, is limited to traffic control functions, does not obstruct traffic vision, and does not contain any advertising copy or logos. 

d. 	
Historic signs designating sites recognized by the State Historical Commission as Centennial Farms or Historical Landmarks. 

e. 	
Placards posted to control or prohibit hunting and/or trespassing within the City. 

f. 	
Essential service signs denoting utility lines, railroad lines, hazards, and precautions. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
g. 	Memorial signs or tablets which are either: 1) Cut into the face of a masonry surface; or 2) Constructed of bronze or other incombustible material when located flat on 
the face of a building. 
h. 	Canopy signs, when used in substitution of wall sign or freestanding sign, may be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
1) 	Canopies and awnings extending into the public right-of-way shall be subject to the review and approval by the City Council. 
2) 	Any such structure shall not extend closer than twenty-four (24) inches to any vehicular parking space or moving vehicle lane. 
3) 	Canopies and awnings shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet six (6) inches above pedestrian walkways. 
4) 	Any such structure shall not conflict with necessary sight distances, landscape feature, traffic control device or adjacent properties. 
5) 	The structure shall be maintained in a manner to continue its original appearance and to provide proper safety to persons or property. 
6) 	“Backlighting” of canopy signs shall only be permitted subject to the following conditions: i) Fluorescent lighting only. ii) Lighting shall not exceed 12 watts per foot 
10. 	Temporary Signs 
a. 	
Nonilluminating temporary signs promoting political parties, candidates, or proposals so long as such signs are removed within five (5) days after completion of election activities, and not-to-exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 

b. 	
Special decorative displays or signs used for holidays, public demonstrations or promotion of civic welfare or charitable purposes when authorized by the Building Department. In considering such authorization, the City shall consider the following standards: 


1) 	The size, character and nature of the display or sign. 
2) 	The duration or time period during which the display or sign will be utilized. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
3) 	The purpose(s) for which the sign display is to be erected. 
4) 	The arrangements made for the removal of the sign or display after the termination of its usefulness. 
5) 	The effect of the proposed sign or display on light and air circulation for lots which are both the adjoining and in the surround neighborhood of the proposed sign or display. 
6) 	Whether or not the sign or display will constitute a traffic hazard. 
c. 	
Construction signs showing names of building contractors, professional firms, and lending institutions on sites under construction not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and not located nearer than ten (10) feet to a public right-of-way. The sign shall be confined to the site of the construction, construction shed, or trailer and shall be removed within fourteen (14) days of the beginning of the use of the project. 

d. 	
Portable signs for a period of not more than ten (10) days prior to each special event per year, such as grand openings, fair and festivals, and announcements of new products, service or management, and including the event period, provided the following conditions are met: 


1) 	They do not exceed fifty (50) square feet in any area on any side. 
2) 	They are not located closer than ten (10) feet to a street right-of-way. 
3) 	They may be illuminated, provided such lights are not flashing or intermittent and are not placed or designed such that they can be confused with, or appear similar to, a highway sign or traffic safety device and are connected to an electrical outlet approved by State code. 
4) 	No portable sign shall exceed ten (10) feet in height. 
5) 	No portable sign shall be located in such a manner as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow or visibility. 
6) 	Portable signs must be removed within two (2) days of the end of the special event period. 
11. 	Prohibited Signs 
a. 	
Inflatable signs. 

b. 	
Signs which incorporate, in any manner or are illuminated by, any flashing or moving lights other than for the conveyance of noncommercial information which requires periodic change, such as temperature, stock average, time, and date. 

c. 	
Exterior banners, pennants, spinners and streamers, other than a sign as permitted by Section 10, b above. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
d. 	
Exterior string lights used in the connection with a commercial premise, other than holiday decorations. 

e. 	
Any sign which is structurally or electrically unsafe. 

f. 	
Any business sign or sign structure now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product sold. 

g. 	
Any sign on a motor vehicle or trailer which is parked in front of a business for the purpose of advertising a business, or product, or service, of a business located on the premises where such vehicle is parked. 

h. 	
Any sign structure or frame no longer containing a sign. 


12. 	Nonconforming Signs 
a. 	
Be re-established after the activity, business, or use to which it relates has been discontinued for ninety (90) days or longer. 

b. 	
Be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or as to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign. 

c. 	
Be re-established after damage or destruction, if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost as determined by the Building Official. 


13. 	Nonaccessory Signs 
a. 	
Nonaccessory signs are permitted in the Industrial districts. 

b. 	
Nonaccessory signs shall be regulated as follows: 1) They shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from adjacent residentially zoned property; 2) They shall be located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from other freestanding signs or billboard on the same side of the right-of-way; 3) They shall have the same setbacks as other principal structures in the zone 


in which they are situated; 4) They shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area; 5) They shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height; and 6) They shall be freestanding ground signs. No sign shall be erected on the 
roof of any building, nor have any (1) sign above another. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 

Section 1330.Canopies and Awnings 
Canopies and awnings offering partial protection from the weather, but not fully enclosed, and which extend into a public right-of-way or required yard, may be considered for approval subject to the following conditions: 
1. 	Canopies and awnings extending into a public right-of-way are subject to the following requirements: 
a. 	
Such approval shall only be granted by the City Council following Planning Commission recommendation. 

b. 	
Any such structure shall not extend closer than twenty-four (24) inches to any vehicular parking space or moving vehicle lane. 

c. 	
Any such structure shall not conflict with necessary sight distances for proper vehicular and pedestrian movements. 

d. 	
Any such structure shall not conflict with any existing or proposed landscape features, traffic control device, adjacent properties and signs, and pedestrian movements. 

e. 	
The height, location, materials, construction and signage involved in any such structure shall specifically be subject to review and approval by the City Council. 

f. 	
The structure shall be maintained in such a manner as to continue its original appearance and provide safety to the persons and property it may affect. 

g. 	
The City of Durand, its officials, employees, and any of its representatives shall be guaranteed full protection against any liability or damages resulting from the construction and existence of any such structure. The nature of such protection and its continuous effect shall be subject to City Council determination. 


2. 	Canopies and awnings extending into a required yard are subject to the following requirements: 
a. 	
Such approval shall only be granted by the Planning Commission. 

b. 	
Any such structure shall not extend closer than the height of the structure to any property line adjacent to a residential district. 

c. 	
Any such structure shall not conflict with necessary sight distances for proper vehicular and pedestrian movements. 

d. 	
Any such structure shall not conflict with any existing or potential development on adjacent property. 

e. 	
The height, location, materials, construction and signage involved in any such structure shall specifically be subject to review and approval. 

f. 	
The structure shall be maintained in such a manner as to continue its original appearance and provide proper safety to the persons and property it may affect. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -120-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1331.Decks 
A deck which is associated with a residential structure shall maintain a distance of at least fifteen 
(15) feet from the rear lot line and shall not occupy any required side yard or front yard area, and shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
1. 	
The portion of a deck which occupies the required rear yard shall not be above the elevation of the first floor of the residence; 

2. 	
No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of any deck shall be covered with structures such as a gazebo or a screened porch and such structures shall be nonhabitable; provided, that the portion of a deck which occupies the required rear yard shall not contain any such covered structures; 

3. 	
The portion of a deck which occupies the required rear yard shall not be converted into any enclosed habitable space. 

4. 	
A deck shall be subject to lot coverage limitations. 


Section 1332. Wireless Communication Facilities 
1. 	Wireless Communication Antennas 
a. 	In order to encourage location on public property, co-location with existing facilities and to minimize the number of Wireless Communication Support Facilities (WCSFs) within the City, Wireless Communication Antennas (WCAs) shall be considered a permitted accessory use in all non-residential Zoning Districts when placed on or attached to any structure which constitutes a principle use, including existing WCSFs, provided that any WCA shall not extend more than twenty (20’) feet above the tallest portion of the structure on or to which it is attached. Provided further that the height of any WCA shall not exceed one hundred (100’) feet unless: 
1) 	Located on a lawfully existing or approved WCSF; or 
2) 	Located on a structure existing prior to the adoption of this regulation; or 
3) 	Located on a structure which has received a height variance. 
b. 	
An application to install a WCA in a non-residential zoning district shall be required to receive approval from the City Zoning Administrator. 

c. 	
An application to install a WCA in a residential zoning district shall require a review by the Planning Commission, and shall include but not be limited to the following: 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -121-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

1) 	Evidence that adequate servicing cannot be attained from the placement of a WCA in a non-residential zoning district. 
d. 	
WCAs shall require no personnel on the premises except as necessary for maintenance and repair. 

e. 	
If a WCA requires an accessory equipment storage structure, it shall not be greater than fifteen (15’) feet in height and shall meet all zoning requirements. 

f. 	
WCAs shall not be allowed on any site used as a single-family dwelling unit. 

g. 	
All WCAs shall be designed to blend into or meet the aesthetic character of the principal (primary) structure where reasonably practical taking into consideration the location of the WCA and the line of sight angle and distance from the right-of­way and neighboring uses. 

h. 	
No accessory equipment structure or area shall be allowed in any rights-of-way which creates a public safety hazard. 

i. 	
This section shall not exempt the applicant from such other government review and permitting procedures (i.e., FCC, FAA, etc.). 


2. 	Wireless Communication Support Facilities (WCSF) 
a. 	
All WCSF shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable construction codes, which include the Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industry Association (EIA/TIA) Structural Standards of Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures. 

b. 	
The WCSF shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements. 

c. 	
The WCSF shall not be used for advertising purposes and shall not contain any signage except signage which shall show the identity of the service provider and emergency telephone numbers. 

d. 	
The WCSF may be located on a zoning lot containing other principal uses. The WCSF may be located within an area smaller than the minimum lot size of the applicable zoning district provided the zoning lot complies with the applicable minimum lot size for the existing principal use or is a legal nonconforming or grandfathered lot. The area within which the WCSF is located shall be the area subject to the requirements of this section, rather than the entire zoning lot, unless otherwise provided herein. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
e. 	
The WCSF shall meet all requirements of the zoning district in which it is located which are not inconsistent with this section. Minimum yard requirements shall be measured from the boundary of the zoning lot to the closest portion of the WCSF or the accessory equipment structure or storage area, whichever is closer. 

f. 	
The WCSF shall have a landscaped greenbelt so that the base of the WCSF and accessory equipment structure or storage area shall be screened from any right-of­way or adjacent properties. A greenbelt, as selected by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission from among those provided in Appendix B, shall be constructed around the perimeter of a WCSF. Screen fencing shall also be required for public safety reasons. A chain linked or a solid wood fence at least six 

(6) feet in height shall be erected entirely around any communication tower and any related support facilities being utilized for commercial purposes. “No Trespassing” signs shall be posted around the wireless communication facility with a telephone number of a person to contact in the event of an emergency. 

g. 	
The construction of the WCSF shall be of monopole design unless it can be demonstrated that such design is not feasible to accommodate the user or co-location. 

h. 	
The application shall contain information showing the geographic search area within which the proposed WCSF must be located and shall also provide locations of all structures of similar height within and adjacent to the search area. 

i. 	
If co-location is not part of the application, then the applicant shall provide evidence as to why co-location is not possible. (Co-location shall not require Planning Commission approval.) 

j. 	
This section shall not exempt the applicant from such other government review and permitting procedures (i.e., FCC, FAA, etc.). 

k. 	
WCSFs shall not have a shiny or metallic finish. 

l. 	
The applicant is required to disclose whose wires will be connecting proposed towers so the City can assess any separate franchise fees. 


3. 	Replacement of Existing WCSF 
An existing WCSF which was lawful at the time of its construction may be replaced for purposes of accommodating co-location of additional WCAs or otherwise provided that: 
a. 	The replacement WCSF shall not exceed a total height of one hundred and fifty (150’) feet or, if the existing WCSF has an approved height greater than one hundred and fifty (150’) feet, the replacement WCSF shall not exceed the approved height. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
b. 	
The replacement WCSF shall be located within the same zoning lot as the existing WCSF and shall be located so as to maximize compliance with existing minimum yard requirements. 

c. 	
The applicant shall cause the existing WCSF to be removed within ninety (90) days of completion of the replacement WCSF and the relocation or installation of the WCA. In any event, the existing WCSF shall be removed within one hundred and eighty (180) days of the City’s final construction inspection of the replacement WCSF. 

d. 	
If the location of the replacement WCSF is such that the existing WCSF must be moved before the replacement WCSF is constructed, temporary portable antennae support facilities may be used, but must be removed within thirty (30) days of the completion of the replacement WCSF and the relocation or installation of the WCA. In any event, the temporary portable antennae facilities must be removed within sixty (60) days of the City’s final construction inspection of the replacement WCSF. 

e. 	
The installation of a replacement WCSF in any zoning district must be reviewed by the Planning Commission which shall approve such requests that meet the requirements of this section. 


4. 	Review Criteria for all new WCSFs, except replacement WCSFs 
a. 	A new WCSF shall not be approved unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant that there is a need for the new WCSF which cannot be met by placing WCA on an existing WCSF or on other structures or replacement of an existing WCSF. Information concerning the following factors shall be considered in determining that such need exists: 
1) 	Insufficient structural capacity of existing WCSFs or other suitable structures and infeasibility of reinforcing or replacing an existing WCSF; 
2) 	Unavailability of suitable locations to accommodate system design or engineering on existing WCSF or other structures; 
3) 	Radio frequency interference or other signal interference problems at existing WCSF or others structures; 
4) 	Other factors which demonstrate the reasonable need for the new WCSF. 
5) 	The denial of the application for a proposed WCSF will result in unreasonable discrimination among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless communication services and/or will have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communication services. 
6) 	The refusal of owners or parties who control WCSFs or other structures to permit a WCA to be attached to such WCSFs or structures. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
b. 	
WCSFs shall be designed to have sufficient structural capacity to allow for three 

(3) providers to be located on the structure. The wireless communication facility shall also be designed to show that the applicant has sufficient space on its site plan for an equipment building large enough to accommodate three (3) users. If an equipment building is initially constructed to accommodate only one (1) user, space shall be reserved on site for equipment building expansions to accommodate three (3) users. 

c. 	
The applicant must include a statement in the application of its good faith intent to allow the co-location of the WCA of other entities, provided that the cost of modifying the WCSF to accommodate the co-location WCA is borne by the co-locating entity, and that all requests for co-location of wireless communication facilities will be responded to within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of written request. 

d. 	
As an additional condition of issuing the permit to construct and operate the tower, the owner/operator of the tower is required to sign a statement that all disputes with future providers concerning co-location and the terms and conditions of co-location shall be submitted to commercial arbitration under a system selected by the parties but if the parties are unable to agree, then under the auspices of the Commercial Arbitration Provisions of the American Arbitration Association. 

e. 	
The applicant shall send a written notice to all potential users of the new WCSF offering an opportunity for co-location. The list of potential users shall be provided by the City based on those entities who have requested approval of WSCF in the past, current FCC license holders, and any other entities requesting to be included on the list. Copies of the notice letters shall be provided to the City at the time the application is filed. 

f. 	
New WCSFs shall meet the following additional criteria: 


1) 	The WCSF shall not exceed one hundred and fifty (150’) feet in height; 
2) 	All WCSF’s over one hundred (100’) feet in height shall be designed for the co-location of three additional WCAs, and shall therefore also be able to accommodate additional equipment storage structures. 
3) 	All WCSFs shall be setback a minimum of two hundred and fifty (250’) feet from any residential zoning districts. 
4) 	The installation of a WCSF must be reviewed by the Planning Commission which shall approve such WCSFs that meet the requirements of this section. Such review by the Planning Commission shall be without notice. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -125-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

g. 	Application Requirements for New WCSFs 
1) A site plan prepared in accordance with Article 17 of this ordinance (Site Plan Review Procedures) shall be submitted, showing the location, size, screening and design of all buildings and structures, including fences, and the location and size of outdoor equipment, and the location, number, and species of proposed landscaping. 
2) The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan where the support structure is being placed at a location which is not otherwise developed. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening for the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases, there shall be shown on the plan fencing which is required for protection of the support structure and security from children and other persons who may otherwise access facilities which may be unsafe. 
3) 	The application shall include a certification by a State of Michigan licensed and registered professional engineer of the applicant with regard to the manner in which the proposed structure will fall, which certification will be utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable regulation for the district in question, in determining the appropriate setback to be required for the structure (WCSF) and other facilities. 
4) 	The application shall include a description of security to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as required in subsection 6. In this regard, the security shall be in the form of cash, surety bond, letter of credit, or an agreement in a form approved by the City Council establishing the land in question as security for removal. 
5) The application shall include a map showing existing and known proposed WCFs within the City, and further showing existing and known WCFs within areas surrounding the borders of the City in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in terms of potential co-location or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. 
6) 	The name, address and phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the WCF is on the premises. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -126-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

5. 	Additional Criteria for Special Approval Condition Use and Review 
a. 	
The installation of a WCSF in any residential zoning district shall be located on lots or parcels of not less than two acres; 

b. 	
As a condition of issuing a permit to place a WCSF in a Residential Zoning District, the applicant is required to provide proof that no suitable locations exist within any other “permitted use” or “conditional use” areas determined by the Ordinance. 

c. 	
If the WCSF is not entirely surrounded by commercial or industrial uses, a written justification of the need for this site showing why other non-residential sites are not suitable; 

d. 	
The Planning Commission may require a visual/line of site analysis to enable the City to assess impacts. Such analysis may require the applicant to provide visualization of the WCSF on-site which may include graphic representations or other acceptable methods to demonstrate the visualization. 


6. 	Removal of Abandoned WCSFs 
a. 	Any WCSF which is abandoned shall immediately be removed or demolished. For the purposes of this section, abandoned shall mean that no WCA or other commercial antenna has been operational and located on the WCSF for 180 days or more. Where the removal or demolition of an abandoned WCSF has not been lawfully completed within sixty (60) days of the applicable deadline, and after at least thirty (30) days written notice, the City may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn or collected from the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the WCF or the City may place a lien on the property to cover costs for the removal of the WCF. A lien on the property shall be superior to all other liens except taxes. 
7. 	Variances and Appeals 
a. 	Variances from this section may be requested from the Zoning Board of Appeals. Requests for additional height to any permitted or previously approved WCSF may be granted by the Planning Commission to provide for co-location of additional WCA so long as such additional height does not exceed thirty (30’) feet. Appeals of a Planning Commission decision shall be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
8. 	Certification of Registered Engineer 
a. 	The City may require a review by an independent registered engineer engaged by the City and paid for by the applicant for the construction of wireless communication towers. Among other things, the Engineer may review and approve the written certification of the applicant’s Engineer and may review and approve the applicant’s studies showing the necessity for and location of the tower; and may review and approve the structural integrity, electrical integrity and electrical safeness of the wireless communication facility in its projected uses so as to assure the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the City residents. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -127-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Section 1333. Preservation of Environmental Quality 
1. 	
Intent 

It is the intent of this section to specify certain materials which must be prepared and submitted by land developers to assist the City in order to evaluate if a project will have a negative effect on community natural resources, means for reducing or eliminating negative consequences on them, and to determine if a proposed development is in compliance with local ordinance and state and federal statutes, which are enacted to protect wildlife, preserve ecologically important features, and retain natural resources. 

2. 	
Applicability 


It is the intent of this Section to apply the provisions stated herein solely to those projects requiring site plan approval. The development of detached single-family units on an individual basis is hereby excluded from the requirements of this section. 
In any Zoning District, no natural resource shall be altered, changed, transformed, or otherwise varied by any person except as provided by this Ordinance, and such person having submitted to the City Planning Commission the required data, exhibits, and information as hereafter required. The applicant may be relieved from the requirements of this Section by clearly showing the Planning Commission through the use of reports, exhibits, and/or expert testimony at the time of site plan review that the proposed development will not alter, change, transform, or otherwise vary any natural resource contained on the subject parcel. 
3. 	Information and Data Required 
A Natural Resources Analysis shall be submitted by and at the expense of the petitioner to the Planning Commission as part of its review of the site plan in accordance with Section 1200. Submission shall be made concurrently with the payment of site plan review fees. 
The Natural Resources Analysis shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a. 	
Site conditions of the subject property indicating the location, size, and type of existing natural resources. Such information shall be displayed on a map in relation to the subject parcel’s property lines and existing development pattern. 

b. 	
A project description which, in narrative form, shall describe the proposed development in terms of use, density, building coverage, height, gross floor area, number of units, parking, landscaping, internal site circulation, traffic to be generated, and other applicable design features. 

c. 	
The petitioner shall provide a full analysis and description of the proposed project’s impact on the natural resources existing on the site. This analysis shall include an evaluation of alternatives affecting the natural resources in terms of alternative site location or actions. The analysis shall also assess the impact of affecting the natural resource(s) in terms of the natural environment (topography, habitat, hazards, etc.), social concerns (aesthetics, historic and cultural values, etc.), and legal constraints (permits required, intergovernmental review, conformance with local plans/ordinances, etc.). These factors shall be evaluated in terms of both positive and negative impacts, direct and indirect impacts, as well as long-term vs. short-term effects. 

d. 	
The applicant shall identify measures to mitigate or eliminate negative effects to natural resources identified in step 4(c) above. 

e. 	
The Natural Resources Analysis shall be approved by the Planning Commission upon a finding that the measures proposed by the petitioner adequately eliminate or reduce negative effects on natural resources in consideration of the standards presented in 1333, 4, b below. Approval of a Natural Resources Analysis shall be a condition of site plan review and approval for affected properties. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -128-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

4. 	Natural Resources Analysis Review 
a. 	
The Natural Resources Analysis shall be approved by the Planning Commission upon a finding that the measures proposed by the petitioner adequately eliminate or reduce negative effects on natural resources in consideration of the standards presented in 1333, 4, b below. Approval of a Natural Resources Analysis shall be a precondition of site plan review and approval for affected properties. 

b. 	
The following standards shall govern the acceptance or rejection of a Natural Resources Analysis by the Planning Commission: 

(1) 	
The preservation and conservation of natural resources has been demonstrated in the Natural Resources Analysis to have priority over development where there are feasible and prudent location alternatives on the site for proposed buildings, structures, and other site improvements; 

(2) 	
Where the proposed activity requires a natural resource to be altered, changed, transformed, or otherwise varied, it shall be to the maximum extent feasible, limited to designated street rights-of-way, drainage and utility areas, and areas necessary for the construction of buildings, structures, or other necessary site improvements. It is the intent of this subsection to limit unnecessary site clearing, grading and similar activities to the maximum extent practicable; and, 

(3) 	
The proposed activity shall, to the extent reasonably feasible, be designed and constructed to blend into the natural setting of the landscape. 




City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
c. 	As part of its review and approval of a site plan, the City may reduce or waive horizontal dimensional standards contained within the Zoning Ordinance applicable to setbacks, building separation, and similar requirements provided all of the following conditions are found to be true: 
(1) 	
The conditions and circumstances which motivate such modification result from the unique natural characteristics of the property which are not similarly applicable to other nearby properties; 

(2) 	
Strict enforcement of these provisions would cause an unnecessary hardship and deprive the owner of virtually all development rights enjoyed by other property similarly zoned unencumbered by natural resources; 

(3) 	
The circumstances and conditions of the property motivating such modification were not created by the owner or his predecessor in title; and 

(4) 	
The requested modification will not be contrary to the spirit and intent of this Zoning Ordinance. 


5. 	Nullification and Conflict of Authority 
Nothing contained herein shall relieve the project’s sponsor from complying with other land development or environmental standards established by other public agencies having jurisdiction. 
Section 1334. Urban Design Standards 
1. 	
Intent. 

The exterior appearance of any building located within a multiple-family, business, or industrial zoning district of the City has an effect upon the desirability of the immediate area and of neighboring areas for business and other purposes. Maintenance of an attractive, compatible and pleasing exterior appearance of such buildings will prevent impairment of the stability of the value of other real property in the area, permit the most appropriate development of such area, and will prevent attendant deterioration of conditions affecting the general welfare of the citizens of the City. 

2. 	
Scope of Application. 


Except for those items listed below, all plans submitted under Section 1200, Site Plan Review, shall be subject to design review requirements of this section. Those items exempt from these provisions are: 
a. 	
Single-family residential buildings and structures. 

b. 	
Items such as gutters, downspouts, door and window replacement, antennas, roof vents, small mechanical equipment not readily visible to the public, painting to a similar color, and items of ordinary repair and maintenance. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -130-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

3. 	
Approval Procedure. 

The Planning Commission shall review submitted materials concurrently with site plan review when such is required. All approvals for site plans shall be conditioned upon an affirmative review of the building design. 

4. 	
Information Required. 


The Planning Commission shall receive, and promptly review all drawings, data, plans and specifications required under this subsection. This information shall include: 
a. 	An application form, indicating: 
1) 	The name, address, and telephone number of the petitioner, property owner, and site designer. 
2) 	The general location of the subject parcel. 
3) 	A project description. 
c. 	
A site plan, providing data as required by Section 1200. 

d. 	
Elevation drawings of all sides of buildings visible to the public, showing general design treatment including color and materials of all walls, screens, towers, openings, and signs and the treatment to be utilized in concealing any exposed mechanical or electrical equipment. 

e. 	
Description information, including samples or swatches, indicating the color and texture of the buildings as they will appear following construction or renovation. 

f. 	
Any other material, drawings, and documents which may be helpful to, or requested by the Planning Commission. 


5. 	Design Criteria. 
In the process of reviewing the submitted materials, the Planning Commission shall consider: 
a. 	Relationship of Buildings to Site 
1) 	The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition, between the building(s), with the streetscape to provide for adequate planting, safe pedestrian movement, and parking areas. 
2) 	Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess of zoning restrictions is encouraged, where feasible, to provide an interesting relationship between buildings. 
3) 	Without restricting the permissible limits of the applicable zoning district, the height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -131-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

4) 	Newly installed utility services, and service revisions necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be underground, where feasible. 
b. 	Relationship of Buildings and Site to Adjoining Area 
1) 	Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means as screens, sight breaks, and materials. 
2) 	Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided. 
3) 	Harmony in texture, lines, and masses is required. Monotony shall be avoided. 
4) 	Effort should be made to provide connectivity between developments and points of interest in the City. It is the intent of this ordinance that a connectivity index of 1.40 is optimal. Connectivity shall be measured using the following formula. 
a.) 	The connectivity index shall be measured by dividing the number of street linkages by the number of street ends including cul-de-sacs. 
6. 	Building Design 
a. 	
Architectural style is not restricted but shall incorporate elements representative of, or compatible with, the historical theme of the community. Evaluation of the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and relationship to surroundings. 

b. 	
Buildings shall have good scale and be in harmonious conformance with permanent neighboring development. 

c. 	
(i) Materials shall have good architectural character and shall be selected for harmony of the buildings with adjoining buildings. 

(ii) 	Materials shall be selected for suitability to the type of buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings shall have the same materials, or those that are architecturally harmonious, used for all building walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly visible from public ways. 
(iii) 	Materials shall be of durable quality. 
(iv) 	In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall be compatible within themselves and harmonious with their surroundings. 

d. 	
Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets, shall have good proportions and relationships to one another. 

e. 	
Colors shall be harmonious and shall use only compatible accents. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
f. 	
Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be so located as not to be visible from any public ways. 

g. 	
Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building design. 

h. 	
Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting of individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance. 

i. 	
Gutters and downspouts are to be painted to match the surface to which they are attached, unless used as a major design element, in which case the color is to be consistent with the color scheme of the building. 

j. 	
The design should be compatible with future construction both on and off the site. 


7. 	Maintenance Factors 
a. 	
Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep. 

b. 	
Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be incorporated for protection against the elements, neglect, damage, and abuse. 

c. 	
Configurations that tend to catch and accumulate debris, leaves, trash, dirt, and rubbish shall be avoided. 

d. 	
Owners of all buildings incorporating painted or stained exteriors shall be required to provide evidence that such buildings will be retained in good condition (no peeling, blistering or unsightly fading). 


8. 	Approval Standards. 
The Planning Commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts applicable to each submittal in terms of the preceding design criteria, and shall make a finding as to whether the proposal meets the following standards: 
a. 	
The appearance, color, texture and materials being used will preserve property values in the immediate vicinity and will not adversely affect any property values. 

b. 	
The appearance of the building exterior will not detract from the general harmony of and is compatible with other buildings already existing in the immediate vicinity. 

c. 	
The appearance of the building exterior will not be garish or otherwise offensive to the sense of sight. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
d. 	The appearance of the building exterior will tend to minimize or prevent discordant and unsightly surroundings in the immediate neighborhood. 
Section 1335. Hazardous Substance Regulation 
1. 	
Purpose 

The purpose of the hazardous substances overlay zone is to provide supplemental development regulations in designated areas so as to permanently protect City properties from long-term contamination originating from the improper use, storage or generation of hazardous substances or polluting materials to ensure they remain in productive use; to prevent the migration of contaminants off the site of origin, and to protect groundwater aquifers as a means to protect those entities in the region still dependent upon well systems for their water consumption needs. 

2. 	
Application 

Except as specified below under Exemptions and Waivers, the provisions of the hazardous substances overlay zone, as set out in this section, shall apply to all nonresidential uses and facilities, including private and public facilities, which use, store or generate hazardous substances in a quantity greater than 100 kilograms per month (25 gallons). 

3. 	
Hazardous Substance Protection Standards 

a. 	
The project and related improvements shall be designed to protect the natural environment, including ponds, streams, creeks, rivers, wetlands, and floodplains. 

b. 	
Storm water management and drainage facilities shall be designed to retain the natural retention and storage capacity of any wetland, water body, or watercourse, and shall not significantly increase flooding or the potential for environmental contamination of surface waters or groundwaters, on-site or off-site. 

c. 	
General purpose floor drains shall be connected to a public sewer system or an on-site holding tank in accordance with state, county, and City requirements. No releases to groundwater, including direct and indirect releases, shall be allowed without an applicable groundwater discharge permit or permit exclusion from the State Department of Environmental Quality. 

d. 	
Sites at which hazardous substances and polluting materials are stored, used, or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges of hazardous substances to the air, surface of the ground, groundwater, ponds, streams, creeks, rivers, wetlands or floodplains. 

e. 	
State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill prevention, recordkeeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. 



4. 	
Above-Ground Storage Areas 

a. 	
Primary containment of hazardous substances shall be product-tight.Secondary containment of hazardous substances shall be provided for all facilities. Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released substance. Products held in containers of five (5) gallons or less packaged for retail use shall be exempt from this subsection. 

b. 	
Outdoor storage of hazardous substances shall be prohibited except in product-tight containers which are protected from weather, leakage, accidental damage and vandalism. Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the operator to recover any released substance, including an allowance for the expected accumulation of precipitation. 

c. 	
Outbuildings, storage rooms, sheds and pole barns which are utilized as secondary containment shall not have floor drains which outlet to soil, a public sewer system, groundwater, nearby drains or natural water bodies unless a surface water or groundwater discharge permit has been obtained from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources according to applicable requirements of Section 3112 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994. 

d. 	
Areas and facilities for loading and unloading of hazardous substances, as well as areas where such materials are handled, used and stored, shall be designed and constructed to prevent unpermitted discharge or runoff to floor drains, rivers, creeks, streams, floodplains, wetlands, soils, or groundwater. 



5. 	
Underground Storage Tanks 

a. 	
Existing and new underground storage tank systems as defined under Section 21101 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, shall be registered with the authorized state agency in accordance with applicable requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency and the State Department of Natural Resources. 

b. 	
Installation, operation, maintenance, closure and removal of underground storage tanks shall be in accordance with applicable requirements of the State Department of Natural Resources. Applicable leak detection, corrosion protection, spill prevention, and overfill protection requirements shall be met. Records shall be required to be retained and available for review by state or City officials for a period of five (5) years for tank tightness and for a two (2) year period for retention and all other monitoring or test results. 

c. 	
Out-of-service and/or abandoned underground storage tanks shall be emptied and permanently closed in accordance with the requirements of the State Department of Environmental Quality and the City. 




City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -134-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
6. 	Development Review Requirements 
The following requirements are in addition to those specified under Article 1200, Site Plan Review: 
a. 	
Specify location and size of interior and exterior areas and structures to be used for on-site storage, loading/unloading, recycling and use or disposal of hazardous substances or polluting materials. 

b. 	
Specify location of all underground and above-ground storage tanks for such uses as fuel storage, waste oil holding tanks, hazardous substance storage, collection of contaminated storm water or wash water, and all similar uses. 

c. 	
Specify location of exterior drains, dry wells, catch basins, retention/detention areas, pumps, and other facilities designed to collect, store or transport storm water or wastewater. The point of discharge for all drains and pipes shall be specified on the site plan. 

d. 	
Specify areas on the site that the applicant has reason to believe are contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup, if applicable. 

e. 	
Submit a list of the types and quantities of hazardous substances and polluting materials which will be used, stored, or generated on-site, including chemicals, hazardous substances/materials, petroleum products, hazardous wastes and other polluting materials. The list shall include common name (trade name) of materials, chemical name (components), form (liquid, pressurized liquid, solid, gas, pressurized gas, etc.), maximum quantity on hand at any one time, and type of storage containers (above-ground tank, underground tank, drums, cylinders, metal container, wooden or composition container, portable tank). Material safety data supplied to the fire department and to employees by an employer must also be submitted for site plan review purposes. 

f. 	
Submit any state/county environmental permits necessary for the storage of and/or discharge of hazardous substances or polluting materials. 


7. 	Exemptions and Waivers 
The transportation of any hazardous substance or polluting material shall be exempt from the provisions of this section provided the transporting motor vehicle or railcar is in continuous transit, or that it is transporting substances to or from a properly licensed solid or hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -136-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Section 1336. Access Management 
1. Intent 
The intent of this section is to establish standards for driveway spacing and the number of driveways for application during the site plan review process. The standards of this section are intended to promote safe and efficient travel within the City; minimize disruptive and potentially hazardous traffic conflicts; separate traffic conflict areas by reducing the number of driveways; provide efficient spacing standards between driveways, and between driveways and intersections; implement the Master Plan and protect the substantial public investment in the street system; and to ensure reasonable access to properties, though not always be the most direct access. 
The standards herein apply to site plans and plats along roads which are under the jurisdiction of the Shiawassee County Road Commission or Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT). Both of those agencies have driveway design and permit requirements, however, those general standards may not be sufficient to meet the particular traffic issues and objectives of the City of Durand. Therefore, the driveway standards herein may be more restrictive than those provided by the road agencies. 
Construction within the public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of Shiawassee County or MDOT still must also meet the permit requirements of the road agency. Where any conflicts arise, the more stringent standard shall apply. 
2. General Standards for Driveway Location 
a. 	
Driveways shall be located so as to minimize interference with the free movement of traffic, to provide adequate sight distance, and to provide the most favorable driveway grade. 

b. 	
Driveways, including the radii but not including right turn lanes, passing lanes and tapers, shall be located entirely within the right-of-way frontage, unless otherwise approved by Shiawassee County and upon written certification from the adjacent property owner agreeing to such encroachment. 


3. Standards for the Number of Commercial Driveways: 
The number of commercial driveways shall be the minimum necessary to provide reasonable access for regular traffic and emergency vehicles, while preserving traffic operations and safety along the public roadway. Additional driveways may be permitted for a property only under one of the following: 
a. 	
One (1) additional driveway may be allowed for properties with a continuous frontage of over three hundred (300) feet, and one (1) additional driveway for each additional three hundred (300) feet of frontage, if the Planning Commission determines there are no other reasonable access opportunities. 

b. 	
Two one-way driveways may be permitted along a frontage of at least one hundred twenty five (125) feet, provided the driveways do not interfere with operations at other driveways or along the street. 

c. 	
The Planning Commission may determine additional driveways are justified due to the amount of traffic generated by the use without compromising traffic operations along the public street, based upon a traffic impact study. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -137-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

4. Driveway Spacing Standards 
a. 	Between driveways: The minimum spacing between two commercial driveways shall be determined based upon posted speed limits along the parcel frontage. The minimum spacings indicated below are measured from centerline to centerline. 
Posted Speed Minimum Driveway 
Limit (MPH) Spacing (In Feet) 

25 125 
30 155 
35 185 
40 225 
45+ 300 

1) 	For sites with insufficient street frontage to meet the above criterion, the Planning Commission may require construction of the driveway along a side street, a shared driveway with an adjacent property, construction of a driveway along the property line farthest from the intersection or require a service/frontage road. 
b. 	
Offsets: To reduce left-turn conflicts, new commercial driveways should be aligned with driveways or streets on the opposite side the roadway where possible. If alignment is not possible, driveways should be offset a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet along an Arterial roadway and one hundred fifty (1 50) feet along other roadways. Longer offsets may be required depending on the expected inbound left-turn volumes of the driveways. 

c. 	
Spacing from intersections: Minimum spacing requirements between a proposed commercial driveway and an intersection either adjacent or on the opposite side of the street may be set on a case-by-case basis by the Planning Commission during site plan review but in no instance shall be less than the distances listed below. The following measurements are from the near edge of the proposed driveway, measured at the throat perpendicular to the street, to the near lane edge of the intersecting street or pavement edge for uncurbed sections. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -138-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

5. 	Standards for Shared Driveways and Service/Frontage Roads 
The use of service roads, in conjunction with driveway spacing, is intended to preserve traffic flow along major thoroughfares and minimize traffic conflicts, while retaining reasonable access to the property. Where noted above, or where the Planning Commission determines that reducing the number of access points may have a beneficial impact on traffic operations and safety while preserving the property owner's right to reasonable access, access from a side street, a shared driveway or service road connecting two or more properties or uses may be required. In particular, service drives, frontage roads or at least a connection between uses may be required in the following cases: 
a. 	
Where the driveway spacing standards of this section can not be met. 

b. 	
When the driveway could potentially interfere with traffic operations at an existing or potential traffic signal location. 

c. 	
The site is along Regional Arterials or Arterials, particularly along segments experiencing congestion or a relatively high number of accidents. 

d. 	
The property frontage has limited sight distance. 

e. 	
The fire department recommends a second means of emergency access. 


6. 	Design Standards for Service Drives 
Service roads as an alternate to numerous individual driveways serving a series of uses or lots shall be designed according to the following additional standards: 
a. 	
Location: Service roads shall generally be parallel or perpendicular to the front property line and may be located either in front of, adjacent to, or behind, principal buildings and may be placed in required yards. 

b. 	
Access Easement: The service road shall be within an access easement permitting traffic circulation between properties. This easement shall be at least forty (40) feet wide. 

c. 	
Construction and Materials: Service roads shall have a base, pavement, and curb and gutter in accordance with City standards, except the width of the service road shall be twenty-six (26) feet wide, measured from curb edge-to-edge. 

d. 	
Parking: The service road is intended to be used exclusively for circulation, not as a parking maneuvering aisle. The Planning Commission may require the posting of "no parking" signs along the service road. In reviewing the site plan, the Planning Commission may permit temporary parking in the easement area where a continuous service road is not yet available, provided that the layout allows removal of the parking in the future to allow extension of the service road. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
e. 	
Access The Planning Commission shall approve the location of all accesses to the service/frontage road, based on the driveway spacing standards of this Article. 

f. 	
Temporary Access: The Planning Commission may approve temporary access points where a continuous service road is not yet available and a performance bond or escrow is created to assure elimination of temporary access when the service road is continued. 

g. 	
Elevation: The site plan shall indicate the proposed elevation of the service/frontage road at the property line and the Building Department shall maintain a record of all service road elevations so that their grades can be coordinated. 

h. 	
Landscaping: The greenbelt between a service road and the public street right-of­way shall be landscaped as specified in Section 1517 of the Landscaping Standards. 

i. 	
Maintenance: Each property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the service/frontage road. 


7. Modification of Standards for Special Situations 
During site plan review the Planning Commission shall have the authority to modify the standards of this Article upon consideration of the following: 
a. 	
The standards of this section would prevent reasonable access to the site. 

b. 	
Access via a shared driveway or service/frontage road is not possible due to the presence of existing buildings or topographic conditions. 

c. 	
Roadway improvements (such as the addition of a traffic signal, a center turn lane or bypass lane) will be made to improve overall traffic operations prior to project completion, or occupancy of the building. 

d. 	
The use involves the redesign of an existing development or a new use which will generate less traffic than the previous use. 

e. 	
The proposed location and design is supported by the Shiawassee County Road Commission as an acceptable design under the conditions. The Planning Commission may also request the applicant provide a traffic impact study. 

f. 	
The modification shall be of the minimum amount necessary, but in no case shall spacing of a full-access driveway be less than sixty (60) feet, measured centerline to centerline. 


City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
Section 1337. Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses 
1. 
Purpose and Intent 

The purpose and intent of this section of this Ordinance is to regulate the location and operation of, but not to exclude, sexually oriented businesses within the City and to minimize their negative secondary effects. It is recognized that sexually oriented businesses because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics which cause negative secondary effects upon nearby residential, educational, religious, and other similar public and private uses, based on the evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses in the findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, (1986); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); Iacobucci v. City of Newport, KY, 479 U.S. 92 (1986); United States v. O’Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d (6th Cir.1997); Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir.1986); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir.1995); and South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. v. City of Miami, 734 F.2d 608 (11th Cir.1984), as well as studies conducted in other cities including, but not limited to: Garden Grove, California; Tucson, Arizona; Seattle, Washington; Indianapolis, Indiana; and, Houston, Texas. The regulation of sexually oriented uses is necessary to ensure that their negative secondary effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of property values of surrounding areas and will not negatively impact the health, safety, and general welfare of City residents. The provisions of this Ordinance are not intended to offend the guarantees of the First Amendment to the United State Constitution or to deny adults access to sexually oriented businesses and their products, or to deny sexually oriented businesses access to their intended market. Neither is it the intent of this Ordinance to legitimize activities which are prohibited by City ordinance, state, or federal law. 

2. 	
Definitions 


For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall control. 
a. 	
Adult Arcade – Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of “specified sexual activities,” “specified anatomical areas,” or “specified acts of violence.” 

b. 	
Adult Cabaret – An establishment where materials or entertainment is presented, displayed, permitted or provided, which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or related to “specified sexual activities,“ “specified anatomical areas,” or “specified acts of violence.” 

c. 	
Adult Motel – A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that: offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities,” “specified anatomical areas,” or “specified acts of violence;” and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours; or allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than twenty-four (24) hours. 

d. 	
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater – Any enclosed building with the capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities,” “specified acts of violence,” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein. 

e. 	
Adult Motion Picture Theater – Any enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities,” “specified acts of violence,” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein. 

f. 	
Adult Personal Service Establishment – Any business agency, or service which arranges, solicits, or provides for the benefit of its customers or clients, escorts, dates, models, “therapists,” companions or entertainers, either on or off the premises, for the purposes of depicting or engaging in “specified sexual activities,“ “specified anatomical areas,” or “specified acts of violence.” 

g. 	
Adult Physical Culture Establishment – Any establishment, club, or business by whatever name designated, which provides, offers, or advertises, or is equipped or arranged so as to provide as part of its services, either on or off the premises, massages, body rubs, physical stimulation, baths, tattoos, or other similar treatment by any person. The following uses shall not be included within the definition of an adult physical culture establishment: 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -141-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

1) 	Establishments which routinely provide such services by a licensed physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a licensed or certified physical or massage therapist, a licensed practical nurse, or any other similarly licensed medical professional; 
2) 	Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis equipment; 
3) 	Continuing instruction in martial or performing arts or in organized athletic activities; 
4) 	Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, or medical offices; and, 
5) 	Barbershops or beauty parlors, health spas and/or salons which offer massage to the scalp, face, the neck, or shoulders only. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
h. 	
Adult Supply Store – Any premises wherein a significant portion or area is used for the sale, rental, distribution, or display of books, magazines, novelties, periodicals, films, videos, recordings, devices, objects, toys, paraphernalia or similar materials, which are used for or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities," "specified acts of violence" or "specified anatomical areas." Retail establishments which display, sell, distribute, provide or rent such materials within a segregated enclosed area not greater than five (5) percent of the total, useable retail space which is limited to persons eighteen (18) years or over, shall not be included in the definition of “Adult Supply Store.” 

i. 	
Nude Model Studio – Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons for consideration. 

j. 	
Sexual Encounter Center – A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. 

k. 	
Sexually Oriented Business – An adult supply store, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult cabaret, adult personal service establishment, adult physical culture establishment, adult arcade, adult motel, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 

l. 	
Specified Acts of Violence shall include: 


1). 	The graphic depiction, or simulation of human or animal: 1) decapitation; 2) dismemberment; 3) physical torture; 4) stabbing; 5) shooting; 6) strangulation; 7) drowning; 8) electrocution; 9) aggravated assault, whether accomplished by human contact, instruments, or weapons; 10) rape; 11) disfigurement; 12) mutilation; 13) burning; and, 14) disembowelment. 
m. 	Specified Anatomical Areas is defined as: 
1) 	Less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals, pubic region; 2) buttock; and 3) female breasts below a point immediately above top of the areola; and 
2) 	Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -143-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

n. 	Specified Sexual Activities shall be defined as: 
1) 	Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral/anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, or sodomy; 
2) 	Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, tumescence; 
3) 	Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; 
4) 	Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
5) 	Masochism, erotic, or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; 
6) 	Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other contact with an animal by a human being; 
7) 	Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
3. 	Development Standards 
Sexually oriented businesses shall only be allowed in the C-2 and I-1 Districts subject to the following standards: 
a. 	
The proposed sexually oriented business will not be located within 500 feet of any residence, residentially zoned property, park, school, child care organization, place of worship or other sexually oriented business. The distance between a proposed sexually oriented business and any residence, residentially zoned property, park, school, child care organization, place of worship or other sexually oriented business shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest property line upon which the proposed sexually oriented business is intended to be located to the nearest property line of the residence, residentially zoned property, school, child care organization, place of worship, or other sexually oriented business. 

b. 	
Any sign or signs proposed for the sexually oriented business shall comply with the provisions of Section 1329 of this Ordinance, and shall not otherwise include photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any type, or include animated or flashing illumination. 

c. 	
Entrances to the proposed sexually oriented business shall be posted on both the exterior or interior walls, in a location clearly visible to those entering and exiting the business, and using lettering no less than two (2) inches in height that: 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -144-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

1) 	“Persons under the age of 18 are not permitted to enter the premises” and 
2) 	“No alcoholic beverages of any type are permitted within the premises” unless specifically allowed pursuant to a license duly issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. 
d. 	
No product or service for sale or gift, or any picture or other representation of any product or service for sale or gift, shall be displayed so as to be visible from the nearest adjoining road right-of-way or a neighboring property. 

e. 	
Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 

f. 	
All off-street parking areas shall be illuminated to a level of one (1) footcandle as measured at the property line during all hours of operation of the sexually oriented business, and until one (1) hour after the business closes, such that the off-street parking areas are visible from the nearest adjoining road right-of-way. 

g. 	
The site shall be so located as to abut a major thoroughfare as designated by the City with all ingress-egress to the site directly from such major thoroughfare. 

h. 	
Any booth, room or cubicle available in any sexually oriented business, excepting an adult motel, used by patrons for the viewing of any entertainment characterized as showing “specified anatomical areas,” “specified sexual activities,” or “specified acts of violence” shall: 


1) 	Be handicap accessible to the extent required by the Americans with Disabilities Act; 
2) 	Be unobstructed by any door, lock, or other entrance and exit control device; 
3) 	Have at least one (1) side totally open to a public, lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times for the adjoining aisle of any occupant; 
4) 	Be illuminated by a light bulb of wattage not less than fifty (50) watts; and 
5) 	Have no holes or openings, other than doorways, in any side or rear walls. 
i. 	All adult entertainment uses shall be contained in a freestanding building. Enclosed malls, commercial strip stores, common wall structures, and multi-uses within the same structure do not constitute a freestanding building. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -145-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

4. 	Review Procedures for Sexually Oriented Businesses 
All applications to establish a sexually oriented business shall be processed as a conditional use in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 1402. The Planning Commission shall adhere to the following procedures when reviewing a conditional land use application for a sexually oriented business: 
a. 	
If the Planning Commission determines that a conditional land use application for a sexually oriented business is not complete when it is first presented to the Planning Commission, it shall provide written notice by first class mail within five (5) business days of said determination detailing the items required to complete the application. 

b. 	
Only when the Planning Commission determines that the application is complete, it shall within ninety (90) days of said determination make and adopt specific findings with respect to whether the sexually oriented business is in compliance with the approval standards of Section 1402 and the development standards of Section 1536, c above. If the Planning Commission has not made and adopted findings of fact with respect to a proposed sexually oriented business and either approved or denied the issuance of a conditional use permit for the same within ninety (90) days of its determination that a completed application has been filed, then the conditional use permit shall be deemed to have been approved. 

c. 	
In the event an application for a conditional use permit is denied by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall be entitled to an automatic and prompt review by the City Board of Appeals as a means to exhaust local remedies and to be consistent with the intent of Paragon Properties Co., v. Novi, 206, Mich App 74; 520 NW 2d 344 (1994). The applicant shall be notified of the date of the review by the City Clerk within ten (10) business days of the date of the denial of the conditional use permit application by the Planning Commission. The review shall be conducted at a special Board of Appeals meeting convened within forty-five (45) days of the date of denial of the conditional use permit by the Planning Commission. Notification of the special meeting shall be in accordance with Section 1805 of the Zoning Ordinance. The City Board of Appeals shall review the record of the proceedings conducted before the Planning Commission to determine whether the Planning Commission’s determination was based upon competent material and substantial evidence in the record and otherwise review the Planning Commission’s decision to ensure that it complies with all requirements of both the Michigan and the United States Constitutions. 

d. 	
The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final. However, the applicant may appeal to circuit court pursuant to Section 5, (11) of state Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended (the City and Village Zoning Act). 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -146-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Article XIV 
General Exceptions 


Section 1400.Area, Height, and Use Exceptions 
The regulations in this Ordinance shall be subject to the following interpretations and exceptions. 

Section 1401.Essential Services 
Essential services serving the City of Durand shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the Municipality. Overhead or underground lines and necessary poles and towers to be erected to service primarily those areas beyond the Municipality shall receive the review and approval, after a public hearing, of the City Council acting in the capacity of appeal board. Such review shall consider abutting property and uses as they relate to easements, rights­of-way, overhead lines, poles and towers and further, shall consider injurious effects on property abutting or adjacent thereto and on the orderly appearance of the City of Durand. 

Section 1402.Voting Place 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a Municipal or other public election. 

Section 1403.Height Limit 
The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flag poles, public monuments or television antennae for personal use; provided, however, that the City Council may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a conditional use. 

Section 1404.Lot Area 
Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of this Ordinance may be used for any principal use permitted in the district which such lot is located, other than conditional uses for which special lot area requirements are specified in this Ordinance, whether or not such lot complies with the lot area and width requirements of this Ordinance. Such use may be made provided that all requirements other than lot area and width prescribed in this Ordinance are complied with and provided that not more than one (1) dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance for required lot area for each dwelling unit. (See also Section 1503, Nonconforming Lots.) 

Section 1405.Yard Regulations 
When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, or where their application cannot be determined on lots of peculiar shape, topography, or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified as determined by the City Council, acting as appeal board. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -147-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1406.Porches 
An open, unenclosed, and uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten (10) feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies. 

Section 1407.Projections Into Yards 
Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side yard not more than two (2) inches for each one (1) foot of width of such side yard; and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three (3) feet. 

Section 1408.Access Through Yards 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards, accessory, or attached structures. These drives shall not be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk, terrace, or other pavement servicing a like function, and not in excess of nine (9) inches above the grade upon which placed, shall for the purpose of this Ordinance not be considered to be a structure and shall be permitted in any required yard. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -148-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Article XV 
Administration and Enforcement 

Section 1500.Enforcement 

The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Building Official or by such deputies of his department as the Building Official may delegate to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. 

Section 1501.Duties of Building Official 
The Building Official shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance. It shall be unlawful for the Building Official to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this Ordinance. 
The Building Official shall record all nonconforming uses existing at the effective date of this Ordinance for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of Section 1303. 
Under no circumstances is the Building Official permitted to make changes to this Ordinance nor to vary the terms of this Ordinance in carrying out his duties as Building Official. 
The Building Official shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this Ordinance are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may occur upon the granting of said permit. 

Section 1502.Plot Plan 
The Building Official shall require that all applications for Building Permits shall be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale showing the following: 
1. 	
The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot. 

2. 	
The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 

3. 	
The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 

4. 	
Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed. 


Section 1503.Permits 
The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -149-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

1. 
Permits Not to be Issued 

No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration, or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this Ordinance. 

2. 
Permits for New Use of Land 

No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 

3. 
Permits for New Use of Buildings 

No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 

4. 
Permits Required 


No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved, or repaired unless a building, zoning or engineering permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms “altered” and “repaired” shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the City of Durand Building Code, Housing Law, or this Ordinance, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. The term “structure” as defined herein means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on or under the ground or attachment to something having location on or under the ground, such as, but not limited to, utility equipment, cables, sidewalks, fences, driveways and storage sheds. 

Section 1504.Certificates 
No land, building, or part thereof, shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
1. 
Certificate Not to be Issued 

No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any buildings, structure, or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this Ordinance. 

2. 
Certificates Required 

No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 

3. 
Certificates Including Zoning 

Certificates of occupancy, as required by the City Building Code, for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this Ordinance. 

4. 
Certificates for Existing Buildings 

Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 

5. 
Record of Certificates 

A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person have a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 

6. 
Certificates for Dwelling Accessory Buildings 

Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy, but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 

7. 
Application for Certificates 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -150-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the Building Official on forms furnished by that Department, and such certificates shall be issued within ten (10) days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant, therefore, shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof, within the aforesaid ten (10) day period. 

Section 1505.Final Inspection 
The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair, or moving of any building structure or part thereof, shall notify the Building Official immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 

Section 1506.Fees 
Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this Ordinance may be collected by the Building Official in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this Ordinance. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -151-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Article XVI 
Board of Appeals 

Section 1600.Purpose 

In order that the objectives of this Ordinance may be fully and equitably achieved, that a means shall be provided for competent interpretation of this Ordinance, that adequate but controlled flexibility be provided in the application of this Ordinance, that the health, safety, and welfare of the public is secured, and that justice be done, there is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA). 

Section 1601.Creation and Membership 
The ZBA shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Section V of Act 207 of the Public Acts of 1921, as amended. The ZBA shall consist of five (5) members, appointed from the electorate, by and with the consent of the City Council. 
1. 	
The first member of the ZBA shall be a member of the Planning Commission. 

2. 	
The remaining four (4) members shall have been a resident of the City for at least one (1) year prior to the date of appointment, and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the City on such day and throughout his tenure of office. 

3. 	
An employee or contractor of the City may not serve as a member of the ZBA. 

4. 	
Terms of appointments shall be as follows: 

a. 	
Appointments of the first members shall be for terms of 1, 2, and 3 years, respectively, so as nearly as possible to provide for the appointment of an equal number of members each year. 

b. 	
Thereafter, each member is to hold office for a full three (3) year term. 



5. 	
Any appointive vacancies in the ZBA shall be filled by the City Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 

6. 	
The City Council shall also appoint two (2) alternate members to the ZBA. Appointments shall be as follows: 


a. 	One (1) alternate member shall be appointed for a period of two (2) years and the second alternate shall be appointed for a period of three (3) years; thereafter, each alternate member shall hold office for a full three (3) year term. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -152-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Any vacancies in the alternative membership of the Board shall be filled by appointment by the City Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The alternate member shall: 
a. 	
Sit as regular members of the ZBA in the absence of a regular member if a regular member is absent from, or unable to attend two (2) or more consecutive meetings of the ZBA, or for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 

b. 	
Be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision in a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest, or due to an immediate, unnotified absence of a regular member. The alternate member having been appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. 


Alternate members shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the ZBA. Whenever possible, these two (2) alternates should be provided the opportunity to rotate as members of the ZBA. 

Section 1602.Compensation 
Each member and alternate member shall receive a reasonable sum as determined by the City Council for his services in attending each regular or special meeting of the ZBA. Sums to pay said compensation and the expenses of the ZBA shall be provided annually in advance by the City Council. 

Section 1603.Removal 
Appointed members may be removed for nonperformance of duty or misconduct in office by the City Council only after consideration of written charges and a public hearing. Failure of a member to disqualify himself from a vote in which he has a conflict of interest shall constitute misconduct in office. 

Section 1604.Meetings 
1. 	
The Board of Appeals shall annually elect its own chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary. 

2. 	
All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as such Board may determine. 

3. 	
All hearings conducted by the ZBA shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member in question, or if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions in the office of the City Clerk, and shall be a public record. 

4. 	
The ZBA shall not conduct business unless a majority of the members are present. The concurring vote of a majority of the total membership of the ZBA shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of the applicant a matter upon which they are required to pass under an ordinance, or to effect a variation in an ordinance, except that a concurring two-thirds vote of the total membership shall be required for the granting of a use variance. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -153-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

The ZBA shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony, and the production of books, papers, files, and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 

Section 1605.Appeal and Notice Requirements 
1. 	
An appeal may be taken to the ZBA by any person, firm, or corporation, or by an officer, department, board, or bureau affected by a decision of the Building Official. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the ZBA general rule, by filing with the Building Official and with the ZBA, a Notice of Appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Building Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board, all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Building Official certifies to the Board of Appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record. 

2. 	
The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice of the appeal to the parties, and to whom real property within 300 feet of the premises in question is assessed, and to the occupants of single and two-family dwellings within 300 feet, the notice to be delivered personally, or by mail, addressed to the respective owners and tenants at the address given in the last assessment role. The ZBA shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. If the tenants name is unknown, the term occupants may be used. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall also be given in the manner required by Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, and by insertion in a newspaper of general circulation in the City 15 days prior to said hearing date. Such notice shall contain the address, if available, and the location of the property for which the ruling of the ZBA is sought, as well as a brief description of the nature of the appeal. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. 

3. 	
No appeal shall be taken to the ZBA from a decision of the Planning Commission and City Council in connection with a special approval use. 

4. 	
No appeal shall be taken to the ZBA from a decision of the Planning Commission in connection with an approved site plan unless such appeal has first been reviewed by the Planning Commission and a recommendation on the variance is provided by the Planning Commission. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -154-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1606.Jurisdiction 
The ZBA may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision of determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this Ordinance, the ZBA shall have the power in passing upon appeals to vary or modify any of its rules, regulations or provisions so that the spirit of this Ordinance shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the Zoning Board of Appeals the authority to make changes in the Zoning Ordinance or the Zoning Map, such power and authority being reserved to the City Council in the manner herein provided by law. 

Section 1607.Powers and Duties 
The ZBA shall have the following specified powers and duties: 
1. 	
Administrative Review 

To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by the Building Official or any other administrative official in carrying out, or enforcing, any provisions of this Ordinance. 

2. 	
Interpretation 


To hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance: 
a. 	
Appeals for the interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance. 

b. 	
Requests to determine the precise location of the boundary lines between the zoning districts as they are displayed on the Zoning Map, when there is dissatisfaction with the decision on such subject. 


3. 	Variances 
a. 	Dimensional or Non-Use Variances 
To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area of a specific piece of property at the time of enactment of this Ordinance or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties upon the owner of such property provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this Ordinance. In granting a dimensional variance, the Board of Appeals may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed use as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this Ordinance. A dimensional variance shall not be granted unless all of the following standards are met: 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -155-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

1) 	Special conditions and circumstances exist that are unique to the land, structures, or buildings involved, and are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
2) 	The special conditions and circumstances on which the variance request is based do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
3) 	Literal interpretation of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other property owners in the same district under the terms of this Ordinance. 
4) 	Granting the variance requested would not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the Ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
5) 	The existence of non-conforming uses of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; permitted or non-conforming uses of land, structures, or buildings in other districts; and non-conforming structures, shall not be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
6) 	A variance granted shall be the minimum that will make possible a reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
7) 	The variance granted shall be in harmony with the intent of this Ordinance and will not be injurious to the environment, neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public interest. 
b. 	Use Variances 
To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance for a specific use of land that is not otherwise permitted in the district in which the property is located where the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in an unnecessary hardship upon the owner of such property. In granting a use variance, the Board of Appeals may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed use as it may deem reasonable in the furtherance of the purpose of this Ordinance. A use variance shall not be granted unless all the following standards have been met: 
1) 	The property cannot reasonably be put to a conforming use (i.e., that the property cannot yield a reasonable economic return if it is used in strict compliance with the Ordinance). 
2) 	The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances of the property and not to general neighborhood conditions which may reflect the unreasonableness of the zoning itself. 
3) 	The use to be authorized will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
4) 	The problem is not self-created. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
5) 	A variance granted shall be the minimum that will make possible a reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
4. 	
Variance Revocation 

The variance shall be revoked at the end of 12 months, unless a land use permit for authorizing the construction has been obtained and construction has started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of the land use permit. 

5. 	
Approval of Temporary Uses 


The ZBA shall have the power to grant permits authorizing temporary land uses for: 
a. 	Tent sales, sidewalk sales, seasonal sales of produce, firewood or Christmas trees, and similar uses, under the following conditions: 
1) 	Zoning Districts Where Permitted 
Temporary uses shall be restricted to nonresidential zoning districts; except that temporary uses shall be permitted on parcels of three (3) acres or more in any residential district. 
2) 	Application and Submittal Requirements 
The application for a temporary use permit shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, including a plot plan, in triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
i) 	The shape, location, and dimensions of the lot, including the shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures already on the lot, off-street parking layout, and the location of any designated fire lanes. 
ii) 	The materials to be utilized and the shape, size, and location of all buildings and structures to be erected or moved onto the lot, including all tents, tables, stands, or display racks. 
iii) 	The anticipated automobile traffic flow to and from the lot and any adjacent thoroughfares, loss of off-street parking spaces, if any, as well as the anticipated flow of pedestrian traffic upon lot sidewalks. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -157-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

3) 	Time Limitations 
i) 	A temporary use permit for a tent or sidewalk sale shall by its terms be effective for no longer than five (5) days. No more than three (3) temporary use permits for tent sales or sidewalk sales shall be issued for a given location within a single calendar year. Temporary use permits for tent sales or sidewalk sales shall not be issued for any given location for consecutive time periods. 
ii) 	A temporary use permit for the sale of Christmas trees shall be its terms be effective for no longer than thirty (30) days. No more than one (1) temporary use permit for the sale of Christmas trees shall be issued for any given location within a single calendar year. 
iii) 	A temporary use permit for a vegetable, fruit, or produce stand or for the sale of firewood or similar use shall, by its terms, be effective for no longer than three (3) months. No more than one (1) temporary use permit for such uses shall be issued for any given location within a single calendar year. 
4) 	Standards for Approval 
A temporary use permit shall only be granted if the ZBA determines that the proposed use, including the erection of any temporary building or structure, will: 
i) 	Provide adequate light and ventilation between buildings and structures. 
ii) 	Provide adequate automobile and pedestrian traffic flow and provide adequate off-street parking. 
iii) 	Provide adequate lot access for fire protection purposes. 
iv) 	Not adversely affect the stability and integrity of the Zoning plan prescribed by this Ordinance or otherwise interfere with the protection of public health, safety, and general welfare. 
v) 	Not be incompatible with or otherwise adversely affect the physical character of the community and, in particular, the surrounding area with a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet. 
vi) 	When the proposed temporary use is to be conducted on an otherwise vacant or unused lot, the use shall comply with all applicable Zoning regulations for the district in which the temporary special use is to be located, including all requirements pertaining to lot size, height, set back, open space ratio, maximum percentage of covered lot area, and off-street parking. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
b. 	Permit in any residential district the temporary location of a premanufactured building in new subdivisions for periods not to exceed ninety (90) days, provided: 
1) 	The use shall be only for offices for the specific purpose of selling lots or new homes to be erected in the subdivision. 
2) 	All applicable building height, bulk, and area requirements of the district are met. 
3) 	The structure shall be removed from the subdivision upon completion of the first permanently built model home intended for display, but in no case shall the premanufactured dwelling remain beyond the time limitation specified above. 
c. 	
Permit the location of temporary building and uses for periods not to exceed two 

(2) years in undeveloped sections of the City, with the granting of twelve (12) month extensions being permissible, provided the conditions set forth in Section 1607, 5, e, below are met. In no instance shall a permit be extended when the property surrounding the temporary use has developed during the life of the temporary permit. 

d. 	
Permit uses which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature, not otherwise permitted in any district (such as art fairs, carnivals, and civic festival events), not to exceed twelve (12) months, provided the conditions set forth in Section1807, 4, e, below are met. 


In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of land; recreation developments, such as, but not limited to: golf driving range and outdoor archery courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating systems, or sanitary connections. 
e. 	The ZBA, in granting permits for temporary uses described in Sections 1607, 5, c and d, above, shall do so under the following conditions: 
1) 	The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district, nor on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted. 
2) 	The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of said temporary permit. 
3) 	All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City shall be made at the discretion of the Board of Appeals. 
City of Durand 	Zoning Ordinance 
4) 	The use shall be in harmony with the general character of the area. 
f. 	No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided for in this Ordinance. Further, the Board of Appeals shall seek the review and recommendation of the Planning Commission prior to the taking of any action. 

Section 1608.Attachment of Conditions 
The ZBA may impose conditions upon an affirmative decision. The conditions may include, conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall do all the following: 
1. 	
Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare, as well as the social and economic well being of those who will use the land or activity under consideration, residents, and land owners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use, or activity, and the community as a whole. 

2. 	
Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 

3. 	
Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the Zoning regulations; be related to the standards established in the Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 

4. 	
The conditions imposed shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged, except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and the land owner. The approving authority shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. 



Section 1609.Approval Period 
No order of the Board permitting the erection of a building shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
No order of the Board permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one (1) year unless such a use is established within such period; however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall contain in force and effect if building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -160-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Section 1610.Fees 
The City Council may, from time to time, prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for Zoning Board of Appeals proceedings. At the time an application is filed, said fee shall be paid to the City Clerk. 

Section 1611.Rehearing 
1. 	
The decision of the ZBA shall be final. However, a person having an interest affected by the Zoning Ordinance may appeal to Circuit Court. 

2. 	
The ZBA is without general authority to reconsider a matter it has decided and from reversing its previous decision unless the facts and circumstances which actuated the decision have so changed as to vitiate or materially affect the reason which produced and supported it, and no vested rights have intervened. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -161-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Article XVII 
Planning Commission 

Section 1700.Creation 

The Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Commission specified in Section 4, of Act 207 of the Public Acts of 1921, and shall perform the Zoning duties of said Commission, as provided in the statute in connection with the amendment of this Ordinance. 

Section 1701.Approval 
In cases where the Durand Planning Commission is empowered to approve certain use of premises under the provisions of this Ordinance, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans, or other information as may be reasonably required by said Commission for the proper consideration of the matter. 
The Planning Commission shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and shall notify such parties, who may in its opinion be affected thereby, of the time and place of any hearing which may be held relative thereto as required under its rules of procedure. 
Any approval given by the Planning Commission, under which premises are not used or work is not started within six (6) months, or when such use or work has been abandoned for a period of six (6) months, shall lapse and cease to be in effect. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -162-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Article XVIII 

Amending the Ordinance 
All amendments to the Zoning Ordinance must be reviewed by the City Planning Commission. Amendments may take the form of the City Council proposal, staff initiated recommendations or citizen petitions, for either zoning text or zoning district boundary changes. In any event the Planning commission shall hold a public hearing, as provided in Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended. After the public hearing has been closed, the Planning Commission shall submit a report and recommendations to the City Council on the proposed change. 
Whenever the Planning Commission holds a public hearing to consider a proposed change in the Zoning District Boundaries, a written notice of such time and place for a public hearing shall be mailed to the owners, at the address given in the last assessment rolls, of all lots or parcels of land lying within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries, or within lots in every direction of the area proposed to be rezoned, whichever is the greater area. Notices of public hearing shall also be sent to each public utility company and each railroad owning or operating within the districts or zones affected. Such notices shall be delivered personally or by first class mail, at least fifteen 
(15) days prior to the date of the hearing. Notices to public utilities or railroads shall only be sent to those which register their name and mailing address for the purpose of receiving the notice. 
A request for zoning ordinance amendments shall be submitted to the City Clerk on standard forms provided at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting. At the next regularly scheduled meeting, the Planning Commission shall set a date for a public hearing to receive public comment. The standard forms shall be completed in the manner prescribed and such documents, as required by the resolution of the City Council, shall be levied against each petition to cover the cost of administering the application process and for advertising public hearings and other incidental costs relative to said petition. The City Clerk shall transmit the application to the Planning Commission. 
A zoning amendment application once denied by City Council, shall not be resubmitted for recommendation or action within one (1) year from date of denial. 
Upon presentation of a protest petition, an amendment to a Zoning Ordinance, which is the object of the petition, shall be passed only by a 2/3 vote of the legislative body unless a larger vote, but not to exceed 3/4 vote, is required by Ordinance or Charter. The protest petition shall be presented to a legislative body before final legislative action on the amendment, and shall be signed by one of the following: 
1. 	
The owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of land included in the proposed change. (Publicly owned land is excluded in calculating the twenty percent (20%) land area requirement.) 

2. 	
The owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of land included within an area extending outward one hundred (100) feet from any point on the boundary of land included in the proposed change. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -163-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Procedures for publishing a notice of ordinance adoption are as follows: 
1. 	A notice of adoption shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City within fifteen (15) days after adoption. The notice shall include the following information: 
a. 	
In the case of a newly adopted zoning ordinance the following statement; “A zoning ordinance regulation the development and use of land has been adopted by the City Council of the City of Durand”. 

b. 	
In the case of an amendment to an existing ordinance, either a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment. 

c. 	
The effective date of the ordinance. 

d. 	
The place and time where a copy of the ordinance may be purchased or inspected. The filing and publication requirements in this section relating to city and village zoning ordinances supersede charter provisions relating to the filing and publication of city ordinances. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -164-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Article XIX 

Vested Right 
Section 1900. Application 
1. 	
Vested rights shall accrue when substantial physical construction work for the facilities needed for the use has begun. 

2. 	
Nothing in this Ordinance should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification, or any permissible activities therein; and, they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change, or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety, and welfare. 


City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -165-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  


Article XX 
Violations, Penalties, and Other Remedies 

Section 2000.Violations 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 dollars and the costs of prosecution or, in default of the payment thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days for each offense, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court, together with the cost of such prosecution. 

Section 2001.Fines/Imprisonment 
The owner of any building, structure, or premises or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this Ordinance shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to the fines and imprisonment herein provided. 

Section 2002.Each Day a Separate Offense 
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 

Section 2003.Rights and Remedies are Cumulative 
The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -166-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Article XXI 

Severance Clause 
Section 24 of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be severable and should any section, paragraph, or provision hereof be declared by the Courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -167-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Article XXII 

Interpretation 
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, or general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the above described Zoning Ordinance, or with any rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing Ordinance or by rules, regulations, or permits; the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. 
City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -168-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Above-Ground Storage · 135, 136 
Above-Ground Storage Areas · 135 
Abut · 2 
Access Management · 58, 137 
Access Through Yards · 148 
Access To A Major Thoroughfare Or Collector Street · 89 
Accessory Buildings And Structures · 74, 75 
Accessory Occupation · 2 
Accessory Use · 2 
Acquisition · 74 
Activity · 3 
Addition · 136 
Adjacent · 3, 102 
Administration And Enforcement · 149 
Administrative Review · 155 
Adult Arcade · 141 
Adult Business · 3 
Adult Cabaret · 141 
Adult Foster Care Facilities · 3 
Adult Foster Care Family Home · 3, 21 
Adult Foster Care Large Group Home · 3 
Adult Foster Care Large Group Homes · 26 
Adult Foster Care Small Group Home · 3, 23, 26 
Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater · 142 
Adult Motion Picture Theater · 142 
Adult Personal Service Establishment · 142 
Adult Physical Culture Establishment · 142 
Adult Supply Store · 143 
Alterations · 132 
Amending The Ordinance · 163 
Amendments To An Approved Final PUD Plan · 54 
Application Requirements For New Wcsfs · 126 
Approval · 54, 56, 60, 62, 65, 66, 127, 129, 131, 133, 157, 158, 160, 162 
Approval Of Temporary Uses · 157 
Arcades · 80 
Archery Range · 32 
Area And Bulk Requirements · 23, 25, 28, 31, 39, 41, 46 
Area, Height, And Use Exceptions · 147 
Area, Or Surface Area, Of Sign · 14 
Arena · 77 
Auditoriums · 77 
Auto Engine And Body Repair · 43 
Auto Wash · 32, 36, 78 
Automobile Car Wash · 3 
Automobile Sales And Repair Shop · 3 
Automobile Service Station · 3 
Automobile Service Stations · 34 
Automotive Service Facilities · 32 
Awning Or Canopy Signs · 114 
Awnings · 120 
B 
Backlighting · 117 Bank · 4 Banks · 29, 80, 85 Bar· 4 
Base Area · 4 
Basement · 4 
Beauty Parlor · 78 
Bed And Breakfast · 23 
Bed And Breakfast Operations · 89 
Berms · 92 
Billboard Sign · 14 
Billiard Hall · 32 
Board Of Appeals · 17, 20, 60, 67, 68, 70, 71, 73, 105, 127, 146, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 159, 160, 161 
Boarding House · 4 
Boarding Houses · 26 
Bollards · 100 
Bowling Alley · 32 
Bowling Alleys · 79 
Building · 4, 12, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134 
Building Appearance · 69 
Building Design · 132 
Building Envelope · 4 
Building Line · 4 
Building Occupancy · 68 
Building Regulations · 68 
Building, Front Line Of · 4 
Building, Height Of · 4 
Building, Principal · 4 
Bulk Station · 4 
Business And Technical Schools · 40 
Business Service Establishment · 29 
Business Services · 5 
Business, Office, Or Commercial Fences · 97 
C 
C-1 Central Business District · 29 C-2 Service Commercial District · 32 C-3 General Business District · 40 Calculation Of Fence Height · 97 Canopies · 115, 117, 120 Canopy Signs · 117 Carry-Out · 80 Carry-Out Restaurant · 12 Cemeteries · 21, 23 Central Business District · 19, 29, 32 Certificate Not To Be Issued · 150 Certificates · 150, 151 Certificates For Dwelling Accessory Buildings · 151 Certificates For Existing Buildings · 151 Certificates Required · 150 Change Of Tenancy Or Ownership · 74 Child Care Centers · 22 Churches · 21, 24, 77 Churches Or Temples · 77 City Downtown Development Authority Board · 85 Clinic · 5 Clinics · 29 Club· 5 Clubs · 22, 32 Cluster Housing · 50 Commercial Recreation · 5 Commercial School · 5 Commercial Television And Radio Towers · 44 Common Land · 5 

City of Durand Zoning Ordinance 
Common Open Space · 40 Conditional Approval · 60 Conditional Use Interpretation · 74 Condominium · 62 Conflicting Regulations · 68 Congregate Care Facility · 5 Congregate Housing · 27 Construction And Safety Standards · 6, 106 Construction Signs · 14, 118 Content Of Site Plan File · 59 Convalescent Or Nursing Home · 5 Convalescent Or Nursing Homes · 27 Convenience Store · 5 Convenience Stores · 37 Corner Clearance · 90 Corporate Headquarters · 40 Coverage, Lot · 5 Credit Unions · 29 Cul-De-Sac · 5 
D 
Dance Halls · 79 Day Care Facilities · 41 Day Care, Family Home · 6 Day Care, Group Home · 6 Day Nurseries · 22 DDA District · 85 Decks · 121 Definitions · 2, 141 Depth · 6 Design Criteria · 131, 133 Design Review · 130 Design Standards For Service Drives · 139 Development · 130, 132 Dimensional Or Non-Use Variances · 155 Directional Signs · 116 Disapproval · 60 Discount Department · 30 Discount Department Stores · 30 District Boundaries · 19, 163 District Boundaries Interpreted · 19 Districts Established · 19 Drive-In · 12 Drive-In Restaurant · 12, 34 Driveway Spacing Standards · 138 Driveways · 137, 139 Dry Cleaning Establishments · 29 Duplex · 23, 49 Duties Of Building Official · 149 Dwelling · 6 Dwelling Types · 6 Dwelling Unit · 6 
E 
Effective Date · 1 Elderly Housing · 6 Electric Sign · 14 Electronic Message Board · 14 Enforcement · 149 Entertainment · 6 Entertainment · 6 Entrance/Exit Sign · 14 Environmental Impact Analysis · 59 Essential Service Signs · 116 Essential Services · 7, 147 Evergreen · 92, 93, 94 Evergreen Screening · 92 Existing Fences · 99 Exterior Banners · 118 Exterior Lighting · 100 Exterior String Lights · 119 
F 
Facility · 136 Family · 3, 6, 7, 21 Family Day Care Homes · 21 Farm· 7 Farm Animal, Large · 7 Farming, General · 7 Fast Food · 34, 37, 101 Feedlot · 7 Fees · 63, 151, 161 Fence · 7 Fence, Ornamental · 7 Fence, Privacy · 7 Fences · 97, 98, 99, 109 Fences For Parks, Schools, Public Buildings · 98 Fences Required For Swimming Pools And Ponds · 98 Final Inspection · 151 Final PUD Plan Submission · 54 Fire And Explosive Hazards · 45 Fraternal Organizations · 32 Fraternity Or Sorority · 77 Freestanding Ground Signs · 113 Freestanding Sign · 14 Frontage On A Public Street · 69 Fruit Orchard · 7 Funeral Home · 7 Funeral Homes · 24 
G 
Garbage · 7 General Business District · 19, 40, 41 General Exceptions · 147 General Provisions · 34, 68 General Site Landscaping · 91 General Standards For Driveway Location · 137 Glare And Radioactive Materials · 45 Golf Courses · 22, 77, 79 Governmental Use Signs · 116 Greenbelt Buffer · 91 Greenhouse · 8 Greenhouses · 43 Gross Floor Area · 8 Ground Level · 14 Ground Level Sign · 14 Groundwater Discharge Permit · 135 Group Day Care Home · 6, 23 Halls · 29, 32 

City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -170-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

Handicapped Accessible Parking Space Requirements · 81 
Hazardous Substance · 135, 136 
Hazardous Substance Protection Standards · 134 
Hazardous Substance Regulation · 134 
Hazardous Substances · 59 
Health And Athletic Clubs · 30, 40 
Height Limit · 147 
Height Of Accessory Building · 74 
High Profile Sign · 14 
Historic Signs · 116 
Home Occupation · 8 
Home Occupations · 21, 88 
Hospital · 8 
Hospitals · 26, 40, 77, 142 
Hotels · 32 
House Travel Trailer · 8 
Housing For The Elderly · 26, 27, 76 
I Industrial District · 42 
Identity Sign · 14 
Illuminated Sign · 14 
Illumination Guidelines · 100 
Improvements · 61 
Incinerator · 8 
Industrial District · 19, 42, 45, 47, 87, 96 
Industrial Fences · 97 
Inflatable Signs · 118 
Ingress And Egress · 35, 82 
Institutional Bulletin Board · 14 
Integral Sign · 15 
Intent · 21, 24, 26, 29, 32, 40, 42, 70, 87, 90, 110, 128, 130, 137, 141 
Interpretation · 155, 168 
J 
Joint Sign · 15 Junk/Salvge Yard · 8 
K 
Kennel · 8 Kennels · 43 
Land Development Project Signs, Temporary · 15 Landscaping · 49, 90, 91, 92, 93, 140 Landscaping Design Standards · 90 Landscaping Of Rights-Of-Way · 92 Laundromats · 79 Legal Description · 57 Libraries · 30 Light Pole Height · 101 
Lighting · 46, 117, 133 
Loading · 135, 136 
Loading Birth/Space · 8 
Loading Space · 49 
Location · 15 
Location Sign · 15 
Lodge Halls · 32 
Lot · 8, 9, 11 
Lot (Corner, Double Frontage, Flag, Interior, And Through) · 9 
Lot Area · 9, 147 
Lot Line, Side · 9 
Lot Line, Front · 9 
Lot Line, Rear · 9 
Lot Lines · 9 
Lot Of Record · 9 
Lot Size Averaging · 48, 50 
Lot, Corner · 9 
Lot, Double Frontage · 9 
Lot, Flag · 9 
Lot, Interior · 9 
Lot, Through · 9 
Lot, Width Of · 9 
Lumber Yard · 10 
M 
Machinery And Building Materials Storage · 88 
Maintenance Factors · 133 
Maintenance Of Landscaping · 93 
Manufactured Home Park · 10 
Manufactured Home Parks · 26, 106 
Manufactured Home Space · 10 
Manufactured Home Stand · 10 
Manufactured Homes · 6 
Marquee · 15 
Master Deed · 63, 65 
Measurement Of Sign Area · 111 
Mechanical Equipment · 105, 133 
Medical Waste Facilities · 27 
Medical, Dental, And Optical Laboratories · 29 
Memorial Signs · 117 
Minimum Landscaped Area For Multiple-Family Developments · 49 
Minimum Livable Floor Area Per Multiple-Family · 28 
Mini-Warehouse · 37, 44 
Mini-Warehouse (Self-Storage) Facility · 10 
Mobile Home Park · 77 
Modular Home · 10 
Monument · 15 
Monument Sign · 15, 116 
Motel/Hotel · 10 
Motels · 32 
Motor Vehicle Parking And Storage · 87 
Multiple Dwelling · 6 
Multiple-Family Dwellings · 26 
Multiple-Family Residential · 19, 26, 48, 98 
Municipal Administration Buildings · 30 
Municipal Uses · 43 
Museums · 30 

City of Durand Zoning Ordinance 
N 
Natural Features · 59 New And Used Car Salesrooms · 30 Noise · 46, 101, 102 Nonaccessory Signs · 119 Nonconforming · 70, 71, 72, 119, 147 Nonconforming Signs · 119 Nonconforming Structures · 70, 72 Nonconforming Uses Of Land · 70 Nonconforming Uses Of Structures And Premises · 70 Nonconformity · 11 Nonprofit Organization · 10 Notes To Schedule · 28, 48 Nude Model Studio · 143 Nuisance · 11 Nursery School · 78 Nursery Schools · 22 Nursing Homes · 27, 77 
O 
Offensive · 133 
Office · 11 
Offices · 24, 29, 30, 40, 80, 81, 85, 142, 159 
Office-Type Business · 29 
Off-Street Parking · 22, 30, 49, 50, 75, 76, 82, 83, 85 
Off-Street Parking Requirements · 75 
One-Family Detached Dwellings · 21 
One-Family Dwelling Standards · 104 
One-Family Residential District · 19, 21, 23, 24, 26, 50, 64 
Open Front Store · 34 
Open Parking And Storage In All Districts Except Where Permitted · 87 
Open Space · 11 
Open Storage · 45, 96 
P 
Parcel · 11 
Parking · 38, 41, 48, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 96, 101, 107, 139 
Parking Facilities Accessory To Dwelling Units · 84 
Parking Facilities Accessory To Nonresidential Uses · 84 
Parking Illumination · 101 
Parking Lot Landscaping · 83 
Parking Space · 11 
Parks, Parkways, And Recreational Facilities · 21 
Payment In Lieu Of Providing Required Parking · 84 
Pedestrian Courts · 167 
Performance Guarantees · 61 
Permits · 110, 136, 149, 150 
Permits For New Use Of Buildings · 150 
Permits For New Use Of Land · 150 
Permits Not To Be Issued · 150 
Permits Required · 150 
Permitted Signs In The Nonresidential Districts · 112 
Permitted Signs In The Residential Districts · 111 
Personal Construction Authority · 69, 70 
Personal Service Business · 11 Personal Service Business Establishments · 29 
Personal Service Business Establishments · 29 
Petroleum · 136 
Placards · 116 
Planned Unit Development · 11, 52, 53 
Planning Commission · 20, 22, 23, 35, 50, 51, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 65, 66, 67, 72, 75, 76, 83, 84, 85, 86, 89, 91, 96, 97, 99, 100, 113, 120, 122, 123, 124, 125, 127, 128, 129, 131, 133, 137, 138, 139, 140, 146, 152, 154, 160, 162, 163 
Plans For The Layout Of Off-Street Parking Facilities · 82 
Plant Material Nursery · 32 
Plant Material Spacing · 93 
Plant Materials · 93, 94, 95 
Plot Plan · 149 
Political Campaign Signs · 15 
Polluting Material · 136 
Pools, Swimming · 11 
Pools, Wading · 11 
Porches · 148 
Portable Signs · 118 
Post Office Buildings · 29 
Preliminary PUD Plan Submission · 54 
Preservation Of Environmental Quality · 128 
Principal Building · 12 
Principal Use · 12 
Principal Uses Permitted · 21, 24, 26, 29, 30, 32, 33, 40, 42, 44 
Principal Uses Permitted Subject To Special Conditions · 21, 24, 26, 30, 33, 44 
Private Clubs · 77 
Private Traffic Direction · 15 
Private Traffic Direction Signs · 15 
Professional Services · 24 
Prohibited Signs · 118 
Projecting Sign · 15 
Projection · 15 
Projection Signs · 15 
Property Rental Signs · 15 
Public Service Buildings · 22 
Public Signs · 15 
Public Street · 12 
Public Utility · 12 
PUD Development Time Limits · 55 
PUD Review Procedures · 53 
Purpose And Objectives · 1 
R 
R-1, R-2, And R-3 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS · 21 
Real Estate Signs · 15 
Record Of Certificates · 151 
Recreation Centers · 22 
Recreational Areas · 22, 116 
Recreational Vehicle · 12 
Recreational Vehicle Storage · 88 
Recreational Vehicles · 88 
Recycling Centers · 43 
Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses · 141 
Rehearing · 161 
Removal Of Abandoned Wcsfs · 127 
Repairs And Maintenance · 73 

City of Durand Zoning Ordinance 
Replacement Of Existing WCSF · 123 
Required Conditions · 28, 30, 45 
Residential Development Signs · 112 
Residential Entranceway · 90 
Residential Fences · 97 
Residential/Office · 19, 24 
Restaurant · 12 
Restaurant, Carry-Out · 12 
Restaurant, Drive-In · 12 
Restaurant, Fast-Food · 13 
Restaurant, Standard · 13 
Restaurants · 29, 37 
Restrictive Covenants · 63 
Retail Business · 18, 29 
Retail Stores · 80 
Retail Uses Which Have An Industrial Character · 43 
Review Criteria For All New Wcsfs · 124 
Review Procedures For Sexually Oriented Businesses · 146 
Right-Of-Way · 13 
R-M Multiple-Family Residential Districts · 26 
R-O Residential/Office Districts · 24 
Roadside Stand · 13 
Roof Line · 15 
Roof Sign · 15 
Rubbish · 13 
Rules Applying To The Text · 2 
S 
S.E.V. · 13 Sales Area · 13 Sanitary Landfill · 13 Savings And Loan Associations · 29 Schedule Of Regulations · 23, 24, 25, 28, 31, 39, 41, 
46, 47, 50 
Schools · 21, 22, 40, 43, 86 
Schools · 21, 86 
Screening Of Trash Storage Areas · 99 
Screening Walls · 87, 96 
Sectional Home · 13 
Self-Storage Facility · 13 
Senior High Schools · 77 
Service Stations · 34 
Service/Business District · 19 
Severance Clause · 167 
Sexual Encounter Center · 143 
Sexually Oriented Business · 143 
Shopping Center · 78 
Short Title · 1 
Sign · 14, 15, 16 
Sign Height · 111 
Sign Permit Procedures · 110 
Signs · 131 
Signs Permitted In The Downtown (Development 
Authority District) Overlay Zone · 113 Single-Family Detached Condominiums · 64 Single-Family Dwelling · 6 Site Plan And Special Approval Use Review · 56 Site Plans · 52, 59, 65 Site, Area · 16 Skating Rink · 32 Skating Rinks · 79 Smoke And/Or Air Pollution Control · 45 Special Purpose Signs · 16 
Special Use · 16 
Specified Acts Of Violence · 143 
Specified Anatomical Areas · 143 
Specified Sexual Activities · 144 
Stable, Private · 16 
Stadium · 77 
Standard Restaurant · 79 
Standards For Approval Of PUD Plans · 53 
Standards For Site Plan Approval · 59 
Standards For Special Use Approval · 66 
Standards For The Number Of Commercial Driveways · 137 
State Licensed Residential Facility · 16 
Storage · 43, 135 
Storage Facilities For Building Materials · 43 
Storage Rooms · 135 
Storage Yards · 22, 40, 43 
Story, Half · 16 
Story, Height Of · 16 
Street Banners · 16 
Street Line · 17 
Streets · 17 
Swimming Pool · 22, 23, 41, 98, 103, 104 
Swimming Pool Clubs · 22 
Swimming Pools · 103 
T 
Table · 6, 60 Tavern · 17 Temporary Building · 68 Temporary Buildings · 41 Temporary Outdoor Use · 17 Temporary Sign · 16 Temporary Signs · 117 Tennis Courts · 32, 41 Theaters · 29, 77 Towers · 131 Townhouse · 6 Townhouses · 26 Trade Or Industrial Schools · 43 Trash Receptacles · 96 Trees Not Permitted · 95 Two-Family Dwelling · 6 Two-Family Dwellings · 23, 26 
U 
Underground Storage Tanks · 135 Unlawful Building · 68 Unloading · 135, 136 Urban Design Standards · 69, 130 Usable Floor Area · 76 Use · 17, 102, 132, 133, 135, 136 Use Variances · 156 Utility · 22, 96 
V 
Variance · 17 Variance Revocation · 157 Variances · 127, 155 Variety Stores · 30 Vehicle Dealers · 33 Vested Right · 165 Veterinarian · 17 Veterinary Clinics · 24, 29 Veterinary Hospitals · 33 Vibration · 46 Video Arcade · 32 Violations, Penalties, And Other Remedies · 166 Visual Screen · 17 Voting Place · 147 

City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -173-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

W 
Wading Pool · 11, 103, 104 Wall · 112, 113 Wall Sign · 16 Wall Sign, Flat · 16 Wall Signs · 112 Walls · 131, 132 Warehousing · 42 Wholesale Business · 18 Wireless Communication Antenna (WCA) · 18 
Wireless Communication Antennas · 21, 24, 26, 30, 40, 44, 121 
Wireless Communication Support Facilities · 44, 121, 122 
Wireless Communication Support Facility (WCSF) · 18 
Y 
Yard· 8, 18 Yard Regulations · 147 Yard, Front · 18 Yard, Rear · 18 Yard, Side · 18 Yards · 131 
Z 
Zoning District · 18, 19, 130, 131 Zoning Districts And Maps · 19 Zoning Of Annexed Areas · 20 Zoning Of Vacated Areas · 20 Zoning, Lot · 10 

City of Durand  Zoning Ordinance  
May 2003  -174-C:\Users\jlundgren\Desktop\New  folder  (2)\Durand  Zoning  Ordinance  Update  
7_2005.doc  

FEE SCHEDULE FY 2019-2020
Water Sewer
$17.69 $25.06
$30.91 $56.31
Water and Sewer Rates*
Ready to Serve Fees (monthly rates):
¾” Meter Residential
1” Meter
1 ½” Meter $55.25 $105.86
2” Meter $84.22 $165.26
3” Meter $160.64 $324.53
4” Meter $248.45 $502.45
Cost is based on construction
value: up to $1,000 is $65.00 each
add’l $1000 is +$7.00
Cost based on individual jobs
Cost based on individual jobs
Cost based on individual jobs
$100.00
$25.00
$15.00 per vehicle
$2.00 (three days)
$3.00
$50.00
$100.00
$100.00
Water Rates: $4.74 per 1000 gallons
Sewer Rates: $5.68 per 1000 gallons
Refuse
Senior Citizens: $12.40/mo
Regular: $15.45/mo
Permits
Building Permit
Mechanical Permit
Electrical Permit
Plumbing Permit
Sign Permit
Fence Permit
Winter Parking Permit (Dec. 1st
– April 1
st)
Garage Sale Permit
Bike Permit
Pool Permit: Above Ground
Pool Permit: In Ground
Demolition Permit
Moving a Structure Permit $100.00
*All rates and fees double for Vernon Township residents
 wishing to access city services.
Site Plan & Zoning Reviews
Lot Split Consolidation – single split $150
Lot Split Consolidation – two or more parcels $150 plus any necessary engineering
consulting fees
Commercial or Industrial $440 + $40 per acre
Apartment/Townhouse $550 + 4.50 per unit
Mobile Home Park $675 + 5.00 per unit
Subdivision – Preliminary $550 + 4.85 per lot
Subdivision – Final $500 + 2.80 per lot
Re-zoning $400 + 6.00 per acre
Special Land Use $400 + 6.00 per acre
Use Variance Fee $400 + $40 per acre
Planned Unit Development/Mixed Use Development $550 + $40 per acre
Preliminary Site Plan Review 75% of Site Plan Fee
Site Plan Revision/Review 75% of Site Plan Fee
The site plan reviews listed above DO NOT include the cost of the City’s Consultant Planner to review
submitted plans. The cost of the Planner is in addition to these costs and must be paid before the Site
Plan meeting is held.
Planning/Engineering Review Fees for Site Plan Approval
In addition to the above fees, a cash deposit of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000) shall be placed with the
City of Durand. All fees, as determined by agreement with the City’s planning and/or engineering
consulting firm or other fees as adopted by the City of Durand may be deducted by the City and the
balance remitted to the depositor. Any fees in excess of the deposits shall be paid, in full, immediately
to the City of Durand by the owner and/or agent. The City may withhold all approvals until receipt of
such payment. A schedule of current consultant fees is included with this packet.
Supplemental Reviews
Site Plan requiring review by Planner/Engineer All costs paid by owner/applicant
Special meetings with Planner/Engineer All costs paid by owner/applicant
Request for Special Planning Commission Meeting
All special request $500.00
Zoning Board of Appeals – Request for Ordinance Variances
Residential $250.00
Commercial $500.00
Zoning Permits
Residential One & Two Family: $ 50.00
All Other Classifications $100.00 
 Costs of these permits will become part of the total applicable Building Permit fee unless a
building permit is not issued.
Certificate of Occupancy
Residential One and Two Family $ 50.00
All Other Classifications $100.00
Performance Guarantees
Work performed in the right of way or where road contact is made requires the following performance
guarantees:
Residential $2,000
Non-residential $2,000
Additional funds may be required for work done in right-of-way, dependent upon work performed.
Temporary Construction Building/Trailer Permits
A cash deposit of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) shall be required for all temporary trailer permits
issued under the provisions of the City of Durand Zoning Ordinance.
Capital Recovery Fee Schedule (Sewer)
Meter Size Fee
¾” Residential $ 2,100
1” Commercial/Industrial $ 5,150
1 ½” $ 10,250
2” $ 16,500
3” $ 32,750
4” $ 52,000
6” $102,350
 Manpower, equipment, and materials are additional costs; including inspection fee of $50. The
City can offer an estimate upon request.
Capital Recovery Fee Schedule (Water)
Meter Size Fee
¾” Residential $ 1,700
1” $ 4,200
1 ½” $ 8,400
2” $ 13,500
3” $ 27,000
4” $ 42,000
6” $ 84,000
 Manpower, equipment and materials are additional costs; including $300 meter charge and $50
inspection fee. The City can offer an estimate upon request.
