CHAPTER II. MUNICIPAL POWERS
GENERAL POWERS
Section 2.1 Unless otherwise provided or limited in this charter the City shall possess and be
vested with all the powers, privileges, and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities are permitted
by law to exercise or to include in their charter.
EXERCISE OF POWERS
Section 2.2 Where no procedure is set forth in this charter for the exercise of any power
granted to or possessed by the city or its officers, the Council shall prescribe a reasonable procedure for
the exercise thereof by ordinance, subject to such limitations as may be imposed by law. Where a
particular mode for exercising the power is made mandatory by law, then such law shall govern. Where
alternative procedures are found in different laws, the Council shall adopt the procedure which it deems
to be most expedient and to the best advantage of the City and its inhabitants.
UTILITY POWERS
Section 2.3 The City shall have the right as provided by the Constitution of the State of Michigan
and the laws of this state to acquire, own or operate, within or without its corporate limits, public
service facilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, sewage disposal and transportation to the
municipality and the inhabitants thereof; to provide by ordinance for the collection of all utility service
charges and for a lien upon the real property supplied by each utility service for the collection of such
utility service charges; and for the disposal of public service facilities in accordance with the Constitution
and laws of this state.
Cross-reference:
Sewers, see Chapter 51 of the City Code
Water, see Chapter 52 of the City Code
CHAPTER III. ELECTIONS
ELECTORS
Section 3.1 The residents of the City having the qualifications of electors in the State of
Michigan shall be electors of the City.
ELECTION OF OFFICERS
Section 3.2 The election of all City officers shall be on a nonpartisan basis. The general election
laws shall apply to and control, as near as possible, all procedures relating to registration and city
elections except as such laws relate to political parties or partisan procedure and except as otherwise
provided in this charter.
WARDS AND PRECINCTS
Section 3.3 The City of Ferrysburg shall consist of one (1) ward. The City Council shall by
ordinance establish convenient election precincts.
PRIMARY ELECTIONS
Section 3.4 A primary city election shall be held on the date provided by statute for the holding
of the general fall primary election. If upon the expiration of the date for filing nominating petitions for
any elective office, valid petitions have been filed for no more than twice the number of candidates for
such office or offices to be elected at the following regular city election, then no primary election shall
be held with respect to such office or offices. Candidates, equal in number to twice the number of
persons to be elected to each office or offices at the next subsequent regular city election, who receive
the highest number of votes at any such primary election shall be declared to be the nominees for the
election to the respective offices for which they are candidates. The names of such candidates, together
with the names of candidates who filed valid nominating petitions for any office or offices for which no
primary election was held, shall be certified by the City Clerk to the election commission as nominees for
the next regular city election.
Statutory reference:
Odd Year Election Law, see Public Act 239 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. §§ 168.644a et seq.
REGULAR CITY ELECTIONS
Section 3.5 The regular city election shall be held on the date provided by law for the holding of
the general fall election.
Statutory reference:
Odd Year Election Law, see Public Act 239 of 1970, being M.C.L.A. §§ 168.644a et seq.
ELECTION COMMISSION
Section 3.6 The election commission shall consist of the City Clerk and two electors of the City
who shall be appointed by the City Council, not less than 30 days prior to the city primary election, and
shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. All members shall serve without compensation. The City
Clerk shall act as chairman of such commission.
No member of the election commission, other than the City Clerk, shall be a city officer or
employee or be a nominee or candidate for any elective office. The City Clerk, except as otherwise
required by law, is hereby authorized to appoint the Board of Election Inspectors for each precinct and
to perform such functions and duties as are required by law and this charter relating to the conduct of
city elections.
NOMINATION PETITIONS
Section 3.7 The method of nomination for all candidates for city elections shall be by petition.
Such petition for each candidate shall be signed by not less than 15 nor more than 30 registered electors
of the City. No elector shall sign the petition of more than one person who is a candidate for the same
elective office of the City.
Nominating petitions shall be filed with the City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall, prior to every city primary election, publish notice of the last day permitted
for filing nominating petitions and of the number of persons to be nominated or elected to each office
or offices at least one week and not more than three weeks before such day.
Editor's Note:
M.C.L.A. § 168.551 provides for the filing of nominating petitions by candidates for city offices
with the City Clerk up to four o'clock (4:00) p.m. Eastern Standard Time of the twelfth Tuesday
preceding the August Primary.
PETITION FORM
Section 3.8 The form of petition shall be substantially as that designated by the Secretary of
State for the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers. A supply of official petition forms shall be
provided and maintained by the City Clerk.
NOMINATING PETITIONS - PROCEDURE
Section 3.9 The City Clerk shall accept only nomination petitions which conform with Section
3.8 of this charter and which contain the required number of valid signatures for candidates having the
qualifications required for elective city offices by this charter. All petitions shall be accompanied by the
affidavit of qualifications provided for in Section 4.4. When a petition is filed by persons other than the
person whose name appears thereon as a candidate, it may be accepted only when accompanied by the
written consent of the candidate. Where the signature of any individual appears on more petitions than
he is so permitted to sign, such signatures shall be counted only to the extent he is permitted to sign in
the order of the respective dates and hour of filing the petition containing such signatures. But where it
is impossible for the City Clerk to determine with certainty which petition has been filed first, the
signature on both shall be void. The City Clerk shall, forthwith after the filing of a petition, notify in
writing any candidate whose petition is then known not to meet the requirements of this Section, but
the failure to so notify any candidate shall not prevent a final determination that the petition does not
meet such requirements. Within three days after the last date for filing petitions, the City Clerk shall
make his final determination as to the validity and sufficiency of each nomination petition and write his
determination thereof on the face of the petition. No petition shall be determined to be valid unless the
affidavit of qualifications provided for in Section 4.4 shall be filed with such petition.
The City Clerk shall immediately notify in writing the candidate whose name appears thereon of
his determinations. Such notice to any candidate whose petition is found invalid or insufficient shall be
delivered by personal messenger if possible. In the absence of bad faith on the part of the candidate,
any candidate whose petition is found invalid or insufficient shall be allowed to file supplementary or
replacement petitions before 5:00 p.m. at the then prevailing local time on the fifth day after the last
date for filing original petitions; thereafter no further petitions may be filed.
PUBLIC INSPECTION
Section 3.10 All nomination petitions shall be open to public inspection in the office of the City
Clerk.
BALLOT FORM
Section 3.11 The form, printing and numbering of ballots or the preparation of the voting
machines used in any city election shall conform as nearly as possible to the provisions of statute, except
that no party designation or emblem shall appear. In all city elections, the names of qualified candidates
or nominees for each office shall be listed under a separate heading and shall be rotated systematically
in the manner prescribed by statute for rotation of names.
If two or more candidates or nominees for the same office have the same or similar surnames,
the Election Commission shall print the occupation and residence address under the respective names
of each of such candidates or nominees on the ballots (or on labels or slips to be placed on voting
machines when used), provided that for any of such candidates who is an incumbent of such office, the
occupation shall be designated as “Incumbent”.
Except as provided in this Section there shall be no supplementary identification of candidates
or nominees on the ballot.
BOARD OF CANVASSERS
Section 3.12 The members of the City Council shall be the board of canvassers to publicly
canvass the votes of all city elections. The board of canvassers shall convene not later than the second
business day following each city election and determine the results of the city election upon each
question and proposition voted upon and what persons are duly nominated or elected to the several
offices respectively at said election, and shall notify in writing the successful candidates or nominees of
their nomination or election. The City Clerk shall make under the corporate seal of the city duplicate
certificates of the determinations of the board and shall file one certificate with the County Clerk and
the other in his own office, and shall report the same to the City Council.
Editor's note:
The duties of the Board of Canvassers is transferred to the Board of County Canvassers, see
M.C.L.A. § 168.24a
TIE VOTES
Section 3.13 If, at any city election, there shall be no choice between candidates by reason of
two or more persons having received an equal number of votes, then the City Council shall name a date
for the appearance of such persons for the purpose of determining the election of such candidates by
lot as provided by statute.
RECOUNT
Section 3.14 A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office or upon any
proposition may be had in accordance with election statutes. Unless otherwise required by statute:
3.14:1 The petition for a request for a recount of the votes cast at any city election shall be filed
with the City Clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the second full day on which the City Clerk's office is open for
business after the board of canvassers has made its official report of the result of the election at which
such votes were cast.
3.14:2 Any counter petition shall be filed by 5:00 p.m. of the next full day thereafter on which
the City Clerk's office is open for business.
3.14:3 No officer shall be qualified to take office until final determination of any recount of the
votes cast for such office.
Statutory reference:
Michigan Election Law, Chapter XXXIII, M.C.L.A. §§ 168.861 - 168.894
RECALL
Section 3.15 Any elected official may be recalled from office by the electors of the city in the
manner provided by statute. A vacancy created by such recall shall be filled in the manner prescribed by
this charter.
CHAPTER IV. ORGANIZATION OF GOVERNMENT
CITY COUNCIL
Section 4.1 Until the first regular city election following the adoption of this Charter
Amendment, all legislative or policy forming powers shall be vested in, exercised, and determined by a
Council of five (5) members, who shall be designated and known as Council Members, and a Mayor.
Effective the first regular city election following the adoption of this Charter Amendment, all legislative
or policy forming powers shall be vested in, exercised, and determined by a Council of six (6) members
who shall be designated and known as Council Members and a Mayor. In all cases where the word
“Council” is used in this Charter, the same shall be synonymous with the term “commission”, “common
council”, “board of aldermen”, “governing body”, or “legislative body” or any other synonymous term,
as the same may be used in any state or Federal law referring to legislative or governing bodies of cities.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-3-70; Amendment adopted by electorate 11-5-91)
ELECTION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS AND MAYOR
Section 4.2 At the first regular city election held after adoption of this Charter Amendment, four
(4) Council Members shall be elected from the City at large. The three (3) candidates for the office of
Council Member receiving the largest number of votes shall hold office until 8:00 P.M. on the second
Monday following the third regular city election held after adoption of this Charter Amendment. The
one (1) candidate for the office of Council Member receiving the next highest number of votes shall hold
office until 8:00 P.M. on the second Monday following the second regular city election held after
adoption of this charter amendment.
At each regular election thereafter, three (3) Council Members shall be elected from the City at
large. The three (3) candidates for Council Member receiving the highest number of votes shall hold
office for a term of four (4) years from and after 8:00 P.M. on the second Monday following the election.
At each regular city election held hereafter a Mayor shall be elected from the City at large for a
term of two (2) years to hold office until 8:00 P.M. on the second Monday following the next regular city
election.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-3-70; Amendment adopted by electorate 11-5-91)
ELECTION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS AND MAYOR; TERM LIMITS
Section 4.2A Effective with elected terms of office commencing on or after November 21, 1994,
no council member or mayor shall hold the same position for more than eight (8) successive years of
elected terms of office.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-8-94; Amendment adopted by electorate 11-6-01)
FILLING VACANCY IN OFFICE OF COUNCIL MEMBER.
Section 4.3 In case of vacancy in the office of council member, the vacancy shall be filled by an
appointee named by the remaining members of the City Council by a majority vote thereof. A council
member appointed pursuant to this section shall take office immediately upon taking the oath of office
and shall hold office for the remainder of the unexpired term in which the vacancy occurred.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-6-01; Amendment adopted by electorate 11-2-04)
Cross-reference:
Vacancy in office of Mayor, see § 30.01 of the City Code
ELIGIBILITY FOR OFFICE
Section 4.4 To be eligible for election to the office of councilmen or to be eligible for
appointment to fill a vacancy in the office of councilmen a person shall be an elector of the city and shall
have been a resident of the city or of the territory annexed to the city for a period of one year prior to
the last day for filing nominating petitions or prior to the date of appointment to fill a vacancy.
ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING
Section 4.5 At 8:00 p.m. of the second Monday following such regular city election, the City
Council shall meet for the purpose of organization and shall elect one of its members as mayor pro tem
to serve until the next such organizational meeting.
MAYOR - MANDATORY DUTIES
Section 4.6 Insofar as required by statute, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be
the executive head of the city. He shall have a voice and vote in all proceedings of the Council equal with
that of other members of the Council but shall have no veto power. He shall be the presiding officer of
the Council.
4.6:1 The Mayor shall be a conservator of the peace, and in emergencies may exercise within
the city the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress riot and disorder, and shall have authority to
command the assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the city ordinances and
state laws to suppress riot and disorder.
4.6:2 The Mayor shall execute or authenticate by his signature such instruments as the Council,
this charter or any statute or laws of the United States or State of Michigan shall require.
4.6:3 Except as may be required by statute, the Mayor shall exercise only such powers as this
charter or the Council shall specifically confer upon him.
4.6:4 In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro-Tem shall perform the duties of
Mayor. In the absence or disability of both, the designated Acting Mayor shall perform such duties.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-8-94; Amendment adopted by electorate 11-2-04)
CITY MANAGER - MAYOR - DUTIES
Section 4.7 The Council may by ordinance create the office of City Manager who shall be the
chief administrative officer of the city and shall specify in such ordinance the duties, authorities and
responsibilities of such officer. The city manager shall have the following duties, which, until such office
is created by ordinance and appointment is made, shall be performed by the Mayor:
4.7:1 He shall see that all ordinances and applicable State laws are enforced and that all terms
and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise or any
contract are faithfully kept and performed.
4.7:2 He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments of the city
government.
4.7:3 He shall be responsible for the proper discharge of all duties and obligations of the city.
4.7:4 He shall prepare in accordance with law and this charter a budget for submission to the
City Council and see to the administration thereof after its adoption.
4.7:5 He shall recommend to the Council for adoption of such measures as he may deem
necessary or expedient; and to attend Council meetings with the right to take part in discussions but not
to vote.
4.7:6 He shall exercise and perform all administrative functions of the city that are not imposed
by this charter or ordinance upon some other official.
4.7:7 He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or as may be
required of him by ordinance or by direction of the Council.
Cross-reference:
City Manager, see § 30.02 of the City Code
CITY MANAGER - PERMISSIVE POWERS
Section 4.8 In event the office of City Manager is created the City Council may provide that any
administrative officer or department of the city except that of City Attorney may be placed under the
administrative direction of such Manager and in such event the Manager shall have the power to
appoint and remove such administrative officers of the city as are placed under his administrative
control subject to the approval of the City Council.
Cross-reference:
City Manager, see § 30.02 of the City Code
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS
Section 4.9 The administrative officers of the city shall be the City Clerk, City Treasurer, City
Assessor, and such additional administrative officers as may be created by ordinance.
The City Council may by ordinance combine any administrative offices. The same person may be
appointed to hold more than one administrative office at the same time. Until such time as the
administrative officers are placed under the direction and control of the City Manager, all administrative
officers of the city shall be appointed by a majority of the City Council for an indefinite term and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Council.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS - RESIDENCE
Section 4.10 All administrative officers of the City shall become residents of the City within sixty
(60) days and remain residents of the City during their service as officers of the City unless such
requirement is waived by a majority vote of the City Council.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS - DEPUTIES
Section 4.11 All administrative officers of the city shall, when required by the City Council,
appoint and remove a deputy subject to the approval of the City Council and such deputy shall have the
power to exercise all the duties, powers and functions of the administrative officer of which he is a
deputy. The deputy shall act in case of the absence or disability of the administrative officer of which he
is a deputy.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS - DUTIES
Section 4.12 All administrative officers of the City shall perform such duties as are provided for
such officers by state law, this charter, the city ordinances and the administrative directives of the
Council.
CITY CLERK - DUTIES
Section 4.13 The City Clerk shall be the chief accountant of the City and shall maintain a system
of accounts which shall conform to such uniform system as may be required by state law.
CITY TREASURER - DUTIES
Section 4.14 The City Treasurer shall have such powers and duties and prerogatives with regard
to the collection and custody of state, county, school district, and city taxes and moneys as are
conferred by law upon township treasurers in connection with state, county, township, and school
district taxes upon real and personal property.
CITY ASSESSOR - DUTIES
Section 4.15 The City Assessor shall have all powers vested in, and shall be charged with all the
duties imposed upon, assessing officers by general laws of the state. He shall prepare all regular and
special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this charter, by ordinance and by the general laws
of the state.
COUNCIL MEMBERS - MAYOR - COMPENSATION
Section 4.16 The compensation of members of the Council excluding the Mayor shall be
$750.00 per year. The Mayor shall receive $1,000.00 per year. Such compensation shall be paid
quarterly and except as otherwise provided in this charter, shall constitute the only compensation which
shall be paid to the Mayor or Councilmen for the discharge of any services for and on behalf of the City
during their tenure of office. The City Council may not change the compensation provided in this
section. The Mayor and Councilmen may upon order of the Council be reimbursed for necessary
expenses incurred on behalf of the city.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-6-01)
APPOINTMENT, EMPLOYMENT OF RELATIVES - RESTRICTION
Section 4.17 Unless the City Council shall, by unanimous vote, which vote shall be recorded as
part of its official proceedings, determine that the best interests of the city shall be served, the following
relatives of any elective or appointive officer are disqualified from holding any appointive office or
employment during the term for which said elective or appointive officer was elected or appointed:
spouse, child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, or the spouses of
any of them. All relationships shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in no way
disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are bona fide appointive officers or employees of the city
at the time of the election of any elective official.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
Editor's Note: Sections 4.18 through 4.20 inclusive have been superseded by Public Act 261 of 1966,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 46.401 et seq.
OFFICERS - EMPLOYEES COMPENSATION
Section 4.21 The compensation of all employees and officers of the city whose compensation is
not provided for herein shall be fixed by the appointing officer or body within the limits of budget
appropriations and in accordance with any pay plan adopted by the City Council.
Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment of necessary bona fide expenses
incurred in service in behalf of the city by appointive officers and employees of the city.
PLANNING COMMISSION
Section 4.22 The City Council shall by ordinance create a planning commission consisting of a
number of members to be determined by ordinance to serve for terms of office and have such duties as
prescribed by ordinance.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-3-70; Amendment adopted by electorate 11-5-91; Amendment
adopted by electorate 11-4-08)
Cross-reference:
Planning Commission, see §§ 32.01 et seq. of the City Code
ZONING ORDINANCE
Section 4.23 The City Council shall enact a zoning ordinance and until the enactment of such
zoning ordinance, the zoning ordinance of the Township of Spring Lake shall remain applicable upon the
adoption of this charter.
CONSTABLES
Section 4.24 The City Council shall appoint one or more constables. Such constables shall have
like powers and authority in matters civil or criminal and in relation to the service of process, civil and
criminal, as are conferred by law on constables in townships. They shall have power also to serve all
process issued for breaches of ordinances of the city. The bond of the constables shall be that required
of constables in townships, which bond shall be paid by the city. The constables shall be entitled to
retain as their full compensation, the statutory fees for constables as provided by law except that the
City Council may by ordinance provide for compensation of constables in lieu of such statutory fees and
in such event such statutory fees collected by them shall be deposited with the City Treasurer. Editor's
note:
Constables are no longer used in the city. Spring Lake-Ferrysburg Police Department was created
pursuant to Public Act 25 of 1951 as amended, being M.C.L.A. § 124.1, and Public Act 8 of 1967, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. § 124.531.
Cross-reference:
Police Department, see §§ 31.01 et seq. of the City Code
OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section 4.25 The City Council may create by ordinance any board or commission. An ordinance
creating a board or commission shall include a description of the purposes and duties of the board or
commission, the number and qualifications of members to be appointed, the procedure for
appointment of members, and the length of terms for members appointed. A board or commission
created by the City Council shall be only advisory to the City Council unless additional powers are
provided by the laws of the State of Michigan.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-5-91;Amendment adopted by electorate 11-6-01)
ELECTIVE OFFICE VACANCY
Section 4.26 Any elective city office shall be declared vacant by the City Council before the
expiration of the term of such office:
4.26:1 For any reason specified by statute or by this charter as creating a vacancy in office.
4.26:2 If no person is elected to, or qualified for, the office at the election at which such office is
to be filled.
4.26:3 If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent court of any act constituting
misconduct in office under the provisions of this charter.
4.26:4 In the case of any member of the City Council, if such officer shall miss four consecutive
regular meetings of the City Council or twenty five per cent (25%) of such meetings in any fiscal year of
the city, unless such absence be excused by the City Council and the reason therefor entered in its
proceedings at the time of each absence.
4.26:5 If the officer is removed from office by the City Council in accordance with provisions of
Section 4.28.
BOARD OR COMMISSION VACANCY
Section 4.27 The office of any member of any board or commission created by, or pursuant to,
this charter shall be declared vacant by the City Council before the expiration of the term of such office:
4.27:1 For any reason specified by statute or by this charter as creating a vacancy in office.
4.27:2 If the officer shall be found guilty by a competent court of any act constituting
misconduct in office under the provisions of this charter.
4.27:3 If such officer shall miss four consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission
or twenty five per cent (25%) of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absence shall be
excused by such board or commission and the reason therefor entered in the proceedings at the time of
each absence.
4.27:4 If the officer is removed from office by the City Council in accordance with the provisions
of Section 4.28.
REMOVAL FROM OFFICE
Section 4.28 Removals by the City Council of elective officers or of members of boards or
commissions shall be made for either of the following reasons:
4.28:1 For any reason specified by statute for removal of city officers by the Governor.
4.28:2 For any act declared by this charter to constitute misconduct in office.
Such removals by the City Council shall be made only after a hearing of which such officer has
been given notice by the City Clerk at least ten (10) days in advance, either personally or by delivering
the same at his known place of residence. Such notice shall include a copy of the charges against such
officer. The hearing shall afford an opportunity to the officer, in person or by attorney, to be heard in his
defense, to cross-examine witnesses and to present testimony. If such officer shall neglect to appear at
such hearing and answer such charges, his failure to do so may be deemed cause for his removal. A
majority vote of the members of the City Council in office at the time, exclusive of any members whose
removal is under consideration, shall be required for any such removal.
RESIGNATIONS
Section 4.29 Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing and filed with the City
Clerk and shall be acted upon by the City Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by
the City Clerk. Resignations of officers appointed by the City Council shall be made in writing to the City
Council. All resignations shall be immediately acted upon.
FILLING VACANCIES IN APPOINTIVE OFFICES.
Section 4.30 Vacancies in appointive offices shall be filled in the manner provided for making
the original appointment.
OATH OF OFFICE
Section 4.31 Every officer, elective or appointive, before entering upon the duties of his office,
shall take the oath of office prescribed for public officers by the Constitution and shall file the oath with
the City Clerk, together with any bond required by statute, this charter or by the City Council. In case of
failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten (10) days from the date he is notified in
writing of his election or appointment, such officer shall be deemed to have declined the office and such
office shall thereupon become vacant unless the City Council shall by resolution extend the time in
which such officer may qualify.
OFFICERS' BONDS
Section 4.32 Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all officers of the city whose duties
involve the custody of public property or the handling of public funds, either by way of receipt or
disbursement or both, and all other officers and employees so required by the City Council shall, before
they enter upon the duties of their respective offices, file with the City an official bond, in such form and
amount as the City Council shall direct and approve. Such official bond of every officer and employee
shall be conditioned that he will faithfully perform the duties of his office, and will on demand deliver
over to his successor in office, or other proper officer or an agent of the city, all books, papers, moneys,
effects and property belonging thereto, or appertaining to his office, which may be in his custody as an
officer or employee; and such bonds may be further conditioned as the City Council shall prescribe. The
official bond of every officer whose duty it may be to receive or pay out money, besides being
conditioned as above required, shall be further conditioned that he will, on demand, pay over or
account for to the city, or any proper officer or agent thereof, all moneys received by him as such officer
or employee. The requirements of this paragraph may be met by the purchase of one or more
appropriate blanket surety bonds covering all, or a group of, city employees and officers.
All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premium thereon shall be paid by the
city. The City Clerk shall be custodian of all the bonds of all officers and employees, except that the City
Treasurer shall be custodian of any bonds pertaining solely to the City Clerk. No bond shall be renewed
but a new bond for each fiscal year shall be required.
DUTIES ON LEAVING OFFICE OR EMPLOYMENT
Section 4.33 Whenever any officer or employee shall cease to hold such office or employment
for any reason whatsoever, he shall within five (5) days, or sooner on demand, deliver to his successor in
office or to his superior all the books, papers, moneys and effects in his custody as such officer or
employee. Any officer violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public
officers generally for a like offense under statute. Any employee found guilty of violating this provision
by a competent tribunal may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment for not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
CHAPTER V. THE COUNCIL, LEGISLATION AND RESTRICTIONS
REGULAR MEETINGS
Section 5.1 The council shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular
meetings and shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month.
SPECIAL MEETINGS
Section 5.2 Special meetings shall be called by the City Clerk on the written request of the
Mayor or any two (2) members of the Council on at least twenty four (24) hours' written notice to
each member of the Council served personally or left at his usual place of residence; but any special
meeting at which all members of the Council are present or have waived notice thereof in writing
shall be a legal meeting.
Editor's Note:
For additional requirements imposed by the Open Meetings Act, see generally M.C.L.A. §§
15.261 et seq. For special public notice requirements, see M.C.L.A. § 15.265.
SPECIAL MEETINGS - BUSINESS
Section 5.3 No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the
same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. However, if all the members of the Council
are present at any special meeting of the Council and consent thereto, then any business may be
transacted at such special meeting.
PUBLIC MEETINGS
Section 5.4 All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and
citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard under such rules and regulations as the
Council may prescribe.
COUNCIL PROCEDURE
Section 5.5 The Council shall determine its own organization, rules and order of business
subject to the following provisions:
5.5:1 A journal of the proceedings of each meeting shall be kept in the English language by
the City Clerk and shall be signed by the presiding officer and clerk of the meeting.
5.5:2 A vote upon all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by a roll call vote and entered
upon the records, except that where the vote is unanimous it shall only be necessary to so state.
Charter
5.5:3 No member of the Council shall vote on any question in which he has a financial
interest, or on any question concerning his own conduct, but on all other questions each member
who is present shall vote when his name is called unless excused by the unanimous consent of the
remaining members present. Any member refusing to vote except when not so required by this
paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office.
5.5:4 The proceedings of the Council, or a brief summary thereof, shall be published within
fifteen (15) days following each meeting. Any such summary shall be prepared by the City Clerk
and approved by the presiding officer and shall show the substance of each separate proceeding of
the Council.
5.5:5 There shall be no standing committees of the Council.
QUORUM
Section 5.6 A majority of the members of the Council in office at the time shall be a quorum
for the transaction of business at all Council meetings, but in the absence of a quorum a lesser
number may adjourn any meeting to a later time or date, and in the absence of all members the
City Clerk may adjourn any meeting for not longer than one (1) week.
COMPELLING ATTENDANCE
Section 5.7 The Council may, by vote of not less than two (2) of its members, compel the
attendance of its members and other officers of the city at its regular and special meetings and
enforce orderly conduct therein; and any member of the Council or other officer of the city who
refuses to attend such meetings, unless excused by the Council, or conduct himself in an orderly
manner thereat, shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in the office.
POWER TO INVESTIGATE
Section 5.8 The Council, or any person or committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall
have the power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office, or officer of the city and
make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence.
Failure on the part of any officer of the city to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers,
or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in
office. If such failure shall be on the part of an employee of the city, the same shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section 5.9 The Council shall see that provision is made for the public peace and health, and
for the safety of persons and property. Unless and until a board of health is established for the city
by ordinance, the Council shall constitute the board of health of the city, and it and its officers
shall possess all powers, privileges and immunities granted to boards of health by statute.
RESTRICTION - DEFAULT
Section 5.10 The Council shall not have the power to make any contract with, or give any
official position to one who is in default to the city.
RESTRICTION - SALE OF PROPERTY - BUSINESS ENTERPRISES
Section 5.11 The Council shall not have the power to sell any park, cemetery or any part
thereof, except where such park is not required under an official master plan of the city, or to
engage in any business enterprise requiring an investment of money in excess of ten cents (10¢)
per capita, unless these actions are approved by three fifth (3/5th) majority of the electors voting
thereon at a regular or special election.
ORDINANCE FORM
Section 5.12 All legislation of the City of Ferrysburg shall be by ordinance or by resolution.
The word “resolution” as used in this charter shall be the official action of the Council in the form
of a motion, and such action shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be done by
resolution by this charter or by state or federal law and to matters pertaining to the internal affairs
or concerns of the city government. All other acts of the Council, and all acts carrying a penalty
for the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance.
5.12:1 Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written form. The style of all
ordinances passed by the Council shall be, “The City of Ferrysburg Ordains:”.
5.12:2 No ordinance shall be passed at the same meeting at which it is introduced, unless it
is declared to be an emergency ordinance by a vote of not less than four (4) members of the
Council.
5.12:3 An ordinance may be repealed or amended only by an ordinance passed in the manner
provided in this section.
5.12:4 An ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number or title only.
5.12:5 If a section of an ordinance is amended, such section shall be re-enacted and published
at length. This requirement shall not apply to changes to the zoning map which is part of the zoning
ordinance or to the schedules of one-way streets and to parking limitations contained in any traffic
ordinance.
5.12:6 Each ordinance, after adoption, shall be identified by a number.
5.12:7 Each ordinance shall be recorded by the City Clerk forthwith in the Ordinance Book,
and the enactment of such ordinance shall be certified by him therein by his signature.
ORDINANCE - PUBLICATION
Section 5.13 Each ordinance passed by the Council shall be published at least once within ten
(10) days after the adoption of the ordinance by the Council. All ordinances of the city shall
become effective immediately upon the publication thereof, unless a date upon which an ordinance
shall become effective, which is subsequent to the date of the publication thereof, is specifically
provided in the ordinance itself. The publication of any ordinance in full or by reference in
accordance with state law, after its final passage as part of the published proceedings of the Council
shall constitute publication of such ordinance as required therein. An ordinance which is declared
therein to be immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health or safety may
be given effect before publication as otherwise required by this charter if preliminary publication
is accomplished by posting copies thereof in conspicuous locations in ten (10) public places in the
city; and the City Clerk shall, immediately after such posting, enter in the Ordinance Book under
the record of the ordinance, a certificate under his hand stating the time and place of such
publication by posting, which certificate shall be prima facie evidence of such publication by
posting; however, such ordinance shall also be published in the manner required for other
ordinances within eight (8) days after its adoption.
ORDINANCE - PENALTY
Section 5.14 The Council may provide in any ordinance for the punishment of those who
violate its provisions. The punishment for the violation of any city ordinance shall not exceed a
fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for ninety (90) days or both in the discretion
of the court.
Cross-reference:
General penalty, see § 10.99 of the City Code
Statutory reference:
Maximum penalty established, see M.C.L.A. § 117.4i(k)
ORDINANCE - ADOPTION BY REFERENCE
Section 5.15 The Council may adopt any provision of state law or any detailed technical
regulation of a city ordinance or code by citation of such provision of state law or by reference to
any recognized standard code, official or unofficial, provided that any such provision of state law
or recognized official or unofficial standard code shall be clearly identified in the ordinance
adopting the same as an ordinance of the city. Where any recognized official or unofficial standard
code is so adopted, it may be published by providing the public copies in book or booklet form,
available for public distribution at a reasonable charge, and any amendment to or revision of such
adopted code or detailed technical ordinance may be published in the same manner.
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 5.16 An ordinance may be initiated by petition, or a referendum on an ordinance
enacted by the Council may be had, by a petition as hereinafter provided.
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM - PROCEDURE
Section 5.17 An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less than fifteen
(15) per cent of the registered electors of the city who have signed said petition within six (6)
months before date of filing the petition with the City Clerk. Before being circulated for signatures,
all such petitions may be approved as to form by the City Clerk. No such petition need be on one
paper but may be the aggregate of two (2) or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall
sign his name in ink or indelible pencil, and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and his
place of residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper
there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating the number of signatures
thereto and that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it
purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with
the City Clerk who shall, within fifteen (15) days, canvass the signatures thereon to determine the
sufficiency thereof. If found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors
of the city, or to be improper as to form or compliance with the provisions of this section, the City
Clerk shall notify forthwith the person filing such petitions, and fifteen (15) days from such
notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient
and proper, the City Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting.
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM - DUTIES OF COUNCIL
Section 5.18 Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the City Clerk, the
Council shall within thirty (30) days, either:
5.18:1 If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the petition or
determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the city.
5.18:2 If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the petition refers or
determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the city.
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM - SUBMISSION TO VOTERS
Section 5.19 Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be
submitted at the next election held in the city for any other purpose, or in the discretion of the
Council at a special election called for that specific purpose. In the case of an initiatory petition, if
no election is to be held in the city for any other purpose within one hundred fifty days (150) from
the time the petition is presented to the Council and the Council does not enact the ordinance, then
the Council shall call a special election within sixty (60) days from such date of presentation for
the submission
of the initiative proposal. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting
thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by the Constitution or laws of the State of
Michigan.
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM - AMENDMENTS AND REPEAL
Section 5.20 An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not
be amended or repealed for a period of two (2) years after the date of the election at which it was
adopted and an ordinance repealed by the electorate may not be reenacted for a period of two (2)
years after the date of the election at which it was repealed. It is provided, however, that any
ordinance may be adopted amended or repealed at any time by appropriate referendum or initiatory
procedure in accordance with provisions of this chapter or if submitted to the electorate by the
Council on its own motion.
CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
Section 5.21 If two or more ordinances adopted at the same election shall have conflicting
provisions, the provisions in the ordinance receiving the highest number of affirmative votes shall
govern.
ORDINANCES - SEVERABILITY
Section 5.22 Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an
ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by
a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications are not determined
by the court to be inoperative and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable.
PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISE - RESTRICTIONS
Section 5.23 Public utility franchises and all renewals, and extensions thereof, and
amendments thereto shall be granted by ordinance only. No exclusive franchise shall ever be
granted. No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the Council shall
be enacted nor become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the people at a
regular or special election and received the affirmative vote of three-fifths (3/5ths) of the electors
voting thereon. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the Council for referral to the
electorate before thirty (30) days after application therefor has been filed with the Council nor until
a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the City
Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election for such
purpose shall be ordered unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the Council
shall have first been paid to the City Treasurer by the grantee.
A franchise ordinance or renewal or extension thereof or amendment thereto which is subject
to revocation at the will of the Council may be enacted by the Council without referral to the voters,
but
shall not be enacted unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally enacted
and shall have so been on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection for at least four
(4) weeks after publication of a notice that such ordinance is so on file.
PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISE - REVOCATION
Section 5.24 All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this charter, whether it
be so provided in the granting ordinances or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the city,
but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the Council to insert in such
franchise any provision within the power of the city to impose or require:
5.24:1 To repeal the same for misuse, non-use, or failure to comply with the provisions
thereof.
5.24:2 To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof
at the highest practicable standard of efficiency.
5.24:3 To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust
discrimination in service or rates.
5.24:4 To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the
terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof.
5.24:5 To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and other public
places and the space above and beneath them.
5.24:6 To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive
to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public.
PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISE - RATES
Section 5.25 All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares
and charges and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The value of the
property of the utility used as a basis for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event
include a value predicated upon the franchise, good will or prospective profits.
PUBLIC UTILITY - PUBLIC WAYS
Section 5.26 Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part of the
cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places as shall
arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising
from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the city to permit joint use of its
property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and other public places of the city and by
other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonable practicable and upon payment of
reasonable rental thereof.
In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility, the Council shall provide
for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and compensation to be paid therefor,
and the arbitration award shall be final.
Cross-reference:
Use of streets, see §§ 50.10 et seq. of the City Code
COUNCIL - CONTRACTING POWER
Section 5.27 The power to authorize the making of contracts on behalf of the city is vested in
the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of law and this charter.
CONTRACTS - EXECUTION
Section 5.28 All contracts, except as otherwise provided by ordinance in accordance with the
provisions of Section 5.29 hereof, shall be authorized by the Council and shall be signed on behalf
of the city by the Mayor and the City Clerk.
CONTRACTS - PURCHASING AND SALE PROCEDURES
Section 5.29 The Council shall establish, by ordinance, the procedure for the purchase and
sale of personal property. Such ordinance may provide for centralized purchasing on behalf of the
city. The ordinance shall also provide the dollar limit within which purchases may be made without
the necessity of Council approval. No purchase of personal property shall be made unless a
sufficient unencumbered appropriation is available there for.
CONTRACTS - DEFERRED PAYMENT - RESTRICTION
Section 5.30 The Council shall have power, by the affirmative vote of not less than four (4)
members of the Council approving the same, to enter into contracts which, by the terms thereof,
will be fully executed within a period of ten (10) years or the expected life of the item to be
purchased, whichever is shorter, and the total of such contracts in any one fiscal year shall not
exceed 1/5th of 1%, unless such contracts shall first receive the approval of a majority of the
qualified electors of the city voting thereon at a regular or special election. This limitation shall
not apply to any contract for services with a public utility or one or more other governmental units,
nor to contracts for debt secured by bonds or notes which are permitted to be issued by the city by
law.
CONTRACTS - REAL ESTATE
Section 5.31 The city shall not have power to purchase, sell, lease or dispose of any real estate
unless:
5.31:1 The resolution authorizing the sale, lease or disposal thereof shall be completed in the
manner in which it is to be finally passed and has been published as a part of the Council
proceedings and has remained on file with the City Clerk for public inspection for fifteen (15) days
before the final adoption or passage thereof.
5.31:2 Such action is approved by the affirmative roll call vote of four (4) or more members
of the Council.
5.31:3 When the proposition is to sell, lease, or dispose of any park, cemetery or any part
thereof, the proposition to sell, lease, or dispose of the same shall also be approved by a threefifths
(3/5ths) majority of the electors of the City voting thereon at any general or special election.
(amended 11/7/2017)
CONTRACTS - COMPETITIVE BIDDING
Section 5.32 Except as provided by ordinance authorized by Section 5.29 of this charter, each
contract for the construction of public improvements or for the purchase or sale of personal
property shall be let after opportunity for competitive bidding. All bids shall be opened in public
in the Council room by the City Clerk at the time designated in the notice of letting, and shall be
reported to the Council at its next meeting. The Council may reject any or all bids, if deemed
advisable. If, after two or more opportunities for competitive bidding, no bids are received or such
bids as were received were not satisfactory to the Council, the Council may either endeavor to
obtain new competitive bids or may authorize the proper official of the city to negotiate for a
contract in the open market.
CONTRACTS - DEFAULT
Section 5.33 No contract shall be made with any person who is in default to the city.
CONTRACTS - EXTRA COMPENSATION
Section 5.34 No extra compensation shall be paid to any agent, employee, or contractor after
the service has been rendered or the contract entered into.
CONTRACTS - OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE RESTRICTION
Section 5.35 An officer or employee of the city who intends to have business dealings with
the city, whereby he may derive any income or benefits, other than such as are provided as
remuneration for his official duties or employment, shall file with the City Clerk a statement, under
oath, setting forth the nature of such business dealings, and his interest therein. The statement shall
be filed with the City Clerk and made a part of the record or the proceedings of the Council at the
meeting prior to the meeting at which action will be taken by the Council or any other agency of
the city upon the matter involved. In each case where the type of dealings with the city is on a
continuing basis,
involving more than one or a sequence of transactions described in the statement, each such
statement shall stand for and apply to such transaction for a period of one year's period or for so
long as such transactions continue. Each such renewal shall be filed with the City Clerk and made
a part of the record of the proceedings of the Council at the meeting prior to the meeting at which
action will be taken by the Council or any other agency of the city upon the matter involved, as in
the case of the original statement. In the event that the interest of any officer or employee of the
city in any business dealings with the city changes at any time, he shall file a statement thereof as
herein required, which statement shall also be spread upon the proceedings of the Council and
published as herein required. Approval of any such business dealing shall require a concurring
vote of the members of the Council, not including the member affected and any member who does
not vote under Section 5.5:3 of this charter. Any business dealings with the city made in violation
of this section shall be void.
CHAPTER VI. BUDGET, FINANCE
AND TAXATION
Section 6.1 The fiscal year of the city and of all its agencies shall begin on the first (1st) day of
July of each year and end on the thirtieth (30th) day of June of the following year.
DEPARTMENTAL BUDGET
Section 6.2 Each board, commission, officer and department head shall submit his
recommended budget with supporting explanation for the next fiscal year to the budget officer on or
before April 1 of each year.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-6-01)
BUDGET REQUIREMENTS
Section 6.3 The Budget Officer shall prepare and submit to the Council, on or before the first
regular meeting in May of each year, a budget document covering the next fiscal year tabulating the
recommendations of the several department heads and officials, and shall include therein at least the
following information:
6.3:1 Detailed estimates, with supporting explanations, of all proposed expenditures for each
department and office of the city, together with the expenditures for corresponding items for the last
preceding fiscal year in full and for the current fiscal year to March first 31 and estimated expenditures
for the balance of the current fiscal year.
6.3:2 Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing the debt
redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued and the condition of sinking
funds, if any.
6.3:3 Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from sources other than taxes,
with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar
sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full and for the current fiscal year to March first (1st) and
estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year.
6.3:4 A statement of the estimated balance or deficit for the end of the current fiscal year.
6.3:5 An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and
the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with any available unappropriated surplus
and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.
6.3:6 Such other supporting schedules as the Council may request.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-6-01)
BUDGET - PUBLIC HEARING
Section 6.4 Not later than the first regular meeting in June, the City Council shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed budget. Notice of such public hearing shall be published at least one (1) week
in advance by the City Clerk. A copy of the proposed budget shall be on file and available to the public
for inspection during office hours at the office of the City Clerk for a period of not less than one (1) week
prior to such public hearing.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-6-01)
BUDGET - ADOPTION
Section 6.5 Not later than the second regular meeting in June the Council shall, by resolution,
adopt the budget for the next fiscal year and shall, in such resolution, make an appropriation for the
money needed for municipal purposes during the ensuing fiscal year of the city and provide for a levy of
the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for municipal purposes,
including the amount necessary to pay principal and interest on existing general obligation bonds, which
levy shall not exceed two (2) per cent of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property subject
to taxation in the city.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 11-6-01)
EXPENDITURES - RESTRICTIONS
Section 6.6 Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds, special
assessment, or other method not requiring a budget appropriation, no money shall be drawn from the
treasury of the city without an appropriation thereof, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of
money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such
obligation in the current fiscal year. The Council may transfer any unencumbered appropriation,
balance, or any portion thereof, from one department, fund or agency to another, except that no
unencumbered appropriation for street lighting and purposes other than operating expenses shall be
transferred to defray operating expenses. In the case of emergency arising from a pressing need other
than a regular or recurring requirement and necessary to protect the public health, welfare or safety,
the Council may make additional appropriations to cover unanticipated expenditures required of the city
because of such emergency. The balance in any appropriation which has not been encumbered at the
end of the fiscal year shall revert to the fund from which it was originally appropriated.
At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by
the Council, the officer responsible for maintenance of the city accounting system shall submit to the
Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to date;
and if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may reduce appropriations,
except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep
expenditures within the revenues.
DEPOSITORIES
Section 6.7 The Council shall designate the depository or depositors for city funds, and shall
provide for the regular deposit of all city monies. The Council shall provide for such security for city
deposits as is authorized or permitted by the general laws of the state, except that personal surety
bonds shall not be deemed proper security.
INDEPENDENT AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT
Section 6.8 An independent audit shall be made of all city accounts at least annually, and more
frequently if deemed necessary by the Council. Such audit shall be made by Certified Public Accountants
experienced in municipal accounting selected by the Council.
The Budget Officer shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the city including a financial
report. Copies of such audit and annual report shall be made available for public inspection at the office
of the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after receipt of the audit.
TAX RATE LIMITATION
Section 6.9 The City shall have the power to assess taxes and to levy and collect rents, tolls and
excises. Exclusive of any levies authorized by statute to be made beyond charter tax rate limitations, the
per annum ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed 1/2 of 1% for operating purposes and shall not exceed
1/2 of 1% for street lighting and purposes other than operating expenses, levied on the assessed
valuation of all real and personal property subject to taxation. In addition to any tax authorized by this
Charter, the City may, commencing with the fiscal year 1976-1977, levy a tax not exceeding one-tenth of
one per cent of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the City for general public
transportation purposes.
(Amendment adopted by electorate 6-14-76)
PROPERTY SUBJECT TO TAX
Section 6.10 The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as
for state, county and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this
charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected and returned in the manner provided by statute.
EXEMPTIONS
Section 6.11 No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed except as expressly required or
permitted by law.
TAX STATUS
Section 6.12 Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by law, the taxable status of
persons and property shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law.
ASSESSMENT ROLL
Section 6.13 On or before the first (1st) Monday in March in each year the Assessor shall
prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the city liable to taxation. Such roll shall be
prepared in accordance with statute and this charter. Values shall be estimated according to recognized
methods of systematic assessment. On or before the first (1st) Monday in March the Assessor shall give
by first class mail a notice of any increase, when compared with the previous year, in the assessed value
of any property which exceeds five per cent (5%) or of the addition of any property to the roll to the
owner as shown by such assessment roll. Failure to give any such notice or of the owner to receive it
shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon.
BOARD OF REVIEW
Section 6.14 The Board of Review shall consist of three (3) members, one of whom shall be a
councilman appointed by the council for a term of one (1) year commencing on January second (2) of
each year and two (2) taxpayers to the city who shall also meet the eligibility requirements for election
as a member of the City Council and who during their term of office shall not be a city officer or
employee or be a nominee or candidate for election for a city office. Of the members first appointed,
the Council shall appoint one for a term of two (2) years commencing on January second (2) of the year
following the year in which this charter becomes effective and one for a term of four (4) years
commencing on January second (2) of the year following the year in which this charter becomes
effective; thereafter, the Council shall appoint one member for a four (4) year term as each of the initial
terms expire. The Council shall fix the compensation of the members of the Board of Review and the
member of the Board of Review who is also a councilman shall be entitled to the same compensation as
the taxpayer members of the Board of Review, which compensation shall be in addition to his
compensation as councilman of the city. At the first meeting of the Board of Review, the Board of
Review shall elect one of its members as chairman and the City Assessor shall be clerk of the board of
Review, and as such, be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but without vote. A majority of the Board of
Review shall constitute a quorum.
BOARD OF REVIEW - POWERS
Section 6.15 For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall
have the same powers and perform like duties, in all respects, as are, by law, conferred upon and
required of boards of review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this charter.
BOARD OF REVIEW - MEETINGS
Section 6.16 The Board of Review shall convene at its first session on the second (2nd) Monday
of March of each year and hold a second session the second (2nd) Tuesday of March of each year at
such time of day and place as shall be designated by the Council and shall remain in session for at least
eight (8) hours divided between the two (2) such sessions, two hours of which shall be from the hours of
7:30 o'clock in the evening until 9:30 o'clock in the evening at either session for the purpose of
considering and correcting the roll.
In each case where the assessed value of any property is increased or any property is added to
the roll by the Board, the City Assessor shall give notice thereof to the owners as shown by such roll by
letter mailed first class not later than the day following the end of the session of the Board at which the
change is made. Such notice shall state the time, date and place at which the Board of Review will hear
objections to the changes made by the Board of Review. The failure to give any such notice or of the
owner to receive it shall not invalidate any assessment roll or assessment thereon.
The Board of Review shall continue in session from time to time until all interested persons shall
have an opportunity to be heard. The Board of Review may not increase any assessment or add any
property to the rolls unless it shall give notice as aforesaid and afford the taxpayer an opportunity to be
heard in protest thereof.
BOARD OF REVIEW - NOTICE OF MEETINGS
Section 6.17 Notice of the time and place of the sessions of the Board of Review shall be
published by the City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to each session of the Board. The Council may by
resolution require that additional notice of the meetings of the Board of Review be given.
BOARD OF REVIEW - ENDORSEMENT OF ROLL
Section 6.18 After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and not
later than the first (1st) Monday in April, the majority of its members shall endorse thereon and sign a
statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been
prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll.
Cross-reference:
Alternate members of the Board of Review, see § 32.50
CERTIFICATION OF TAX LEVY
Section 6.19 Within three (3) days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing
year, the City Clerk shall certify to the City Assessor the total amount which the Council determines shall
be raised by general ad valorem tax. He shall also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special
assessments and all other amounts which the Council requires to be assessed, reassessed, or charged
upon the said roll against any property or any person in accordance with the provisions of this charter or
any ordinance of the city.
CITY TAX ROLL
Section 6.20 After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the City
Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the “City Tax Roll” and upon
receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, as provided in Section 6.19, the City
Assessor shall spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the Council to be charged,
assessed, or reassessed against persons or property. He shall also spread thereon the amounts of the
general ad valorem city tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said
assessment roll. To avoid fractions in computation of any tax roll, the City Assessor may add to the
amount of the several taxes to be raised not more than the amount prescribed by law. Any excess
created thereby on any tax roll shall belong to the city.
TAX LIEN
Section 6.21 On July first (1st) the taxes thus assessed shall become a debt due to the city from
the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall
become a lien upon such real property, for such amounts and for all interest and charges thereon, and
all personal taxes shall become a first lien on all personal property of such persons so assessed. Such lien
shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances and liens to the extent provided by statute
and shall continue until such taxes, interest and charges are paid.
TAX WARRANT
Section 6.22 After spreading the taxes the City Assessor shall certify the tax roll, and the Mayor
shall annex his warrant thereto directing and requiring the City Treasurer to collect, prior to March first
(1st) of the following year, from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned
therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment and granting to him, for the purpose of
collecting the taxes, assessments and charges on such roll, all the statutory powers and immunities
possessed by the township treasurers for the collection of taxes. On or before June first (1st) the roll
shall be delivered to the City Treasurer for collection.
CITY TAXES - COLLECTION AND PENALTIES
Section 6.23 City taxes shall be due on July first (1st) of each year. The City Treasurer shall not
be required to call upon the persons named in the city tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the
payment of taxes, but he shall:
6.23:1 Publish, between June fifteenth (15th) and July first (1st), notice of the time when said
taxes will be due for collection and of the penalties and fees for the late payment thereof.
6.23:2 Mail a tax bill between June fifteenth (15th) and July first (1st) of each year to each
person named in said roll. In cases of multiple ownership of property only one bill need be mailed.
Failure on the part of the City Treasurer to publish said notice or mail such bills shall not
invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release the person or property assessed from the penalties and
fees provided in this charter in case of late payment or nonpayment of the same.
All taxes paid on or before the thirty first (31st) day of August shall be collected by the City
Treasurer without additional charge. On the first (1st) day of September the City Treasurer shall add to
all taxes paid thereafter a collection charge of three per cent (3%) of the amount of said taxes and on
the first day of each succeeding month he shall add an additional one per cent (1%) of said taxes for
each of said months or fraction thereof that said taxes remain unpaid. Such collection charges shall not
exceed six per cent (6%) and shall belong to the city and constitute a charge and shall be a lien against
the property to which the taxes apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are
added. If delivery of the tax roll to the City Treasurer, as provided in Section 6.22, is delayed for any
reason by more than thirty (30) days after June first (1st) or if the mailing of the tax bills are delayed for
more than fifteen (15) days after July first (1st), the application of the collection charge provided herein
shall be postponed thirty (30) days for each thirty (30) days or major fraction thereof of such delay.
TAX COLLECTION - PERSONAL PROPERTY
Section 6.24 If any person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to pay any personal
property tax assessed to him or them, the City Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the personal
property of such person, firm or corporation to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, fees and charges
for subsequent sale, wherever the same may be found in the state, and from which seizure no property
shall be exempt. He may sell the property seized to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges
in accordance with statutory provisions. The City Treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect a tax on
personal property, sue, in accordance with statute, the person, firm or corporation to whom it is
assessed.
TAX ROLL - RETURN TO COUNTY TREASURER
Section 6.25 All city taxes on real property remaining uncollected by the City Treasurer on the
first (1st) day of March following the date when said roll was received by him shall be returned to the
County Treasurer in the manner and with like effect as provided by statute for returns by township
treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall include all the additional
assessments, charges and fees hereinbefore provided, which shall be added to the amount assessed in
said tax roll against each property or person. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same
manner as other taxes returned to the County Treasurer are collected, in accordance with statute, and
shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid. If by change in
statute or otherwise, the Treasurer of the County of Ottawa is no longer charged with the collection of
delinquent real property taxes, such delinquent taxes shall be collected in the manner then provided by
statute for the collection of delinquent township, school and county taxes.
TAXES - COUNTY AND SCHOOL - COLLECTION
Section 6.26 For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county and school
purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of law relative to the
collection of and accounting for such taxes shall apply. For these purposes the City Treasurer shall
perform the same duties and have the same powers as are granted and imposed upon township
treasurers by law.
CITY TAXES - PROTECTION OF
Section 6.27 The city shall have the power to acquire by purchase any premises within the city
at any tax or other public sale, or by direct purchase from the State of Michigan or the fee owner, when
such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of the city for taxes or special assessments, or both, on
said premises and may hold, lease or sell the same for the purpose of securing therefrom the amount of
such taxes or special assessments, or both, together with any incidental expenses incurred in connection
with the exercise of this power. Any such procedure exercised by the city in the protection of its tax lien
shall be deemed to be for a public purpose.
CHAPTER VII. SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS POWERS
Section 7.1 The Council shall have the power to determine the necessity of any local or public
improvement and to determine that the whole or any part of the expense shall be defrayed by special
assessment upon the property especially benefited, provided that, in each case, such special
assessments shall be based upon or be in proportion to benefits derived or to be derived.
Cross-reference:
Public improvements, see §§ 33.01 et seq. of the City Code
Statutory reference:
Special assessment hearings, additional state law requirements, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.741 et seq.
POWERS - LIMITATIONS
Section 7.2 The Council shall, in the exercise of its powers of special assessment, have power to
provide for the following, but this list shall not be exclusive:
7.2:1 For the payment of special assessments in annual installments not to exceed fifteen (15)
in number, the first (1st) such installment to be due either upon confirmation of the special assessment
roll or on the following July first (1st) and subsequent installments to be due on July first (1st) of
succeeding years and to be placed upon the annual city tax roll, and for an interest charge until the due
date of each such deferred installment not to exceed six per cent (6%) per year, subject to the right of
advance payment of any such installment with interest only to the date of payment.
7.2:2 For making additional pro rata assessments when any special assessment roll proves
insufficient to pay for the improvement for which it was levied and the expenses incident thereto,
provided that the additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed twenty five per cent (25%) of the
assessment as originally confirmed unless a meeting of the Council be held to review such additional
assessment, for which meeting notices shall be mailed as provided in the case of review of the original
special assessment roll.
REQUIREMENTS
Section 7.3 The Council shall prescribe by ordinance the complete special assessment
procedure governing the initiation of projects, preparation of plans and cost estimates, creation of
districts, making and confirming of assessment rolls, correction of errors in the rolls, collection of
assessments and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by the special assessment
method.
Such ordinance shall be subject to the following provisions:
7.3:1 No resolution finally determining to proceed with establishing any special assessment
district for the making of any public improvement shall be enacted until cost estimates have been
prepared and a public hearing has been held for the determination of the public necessity of such public
improvement, which hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days after notice thereof has been
published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the
current assessment roll of the city.
7.3:2 No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed until after a meeting of the Council
has been held for the purpose of reviewing such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten (10)
days after notice thereof has been published and sent by first class mail to all property owners in the
proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city.
7.3:3 No resolution determining the necessity of a public improvement to be financed in whole
or in part by special assessment shall be adopted except by the affirmative vote of four (4) members of
the Council if prior to the hearing on public necessity written objections to the public improvement have
been filed by the owners of property in the district which will be required to bear more than fifty per
cent (50%) of the amount of such special assessment.
7.3:4 No public improvement to be financed in whole or part by special assessment shall be
made before the confirmation of the special assessment roll for such improvement.
7.3:5 No special assessment district or districts shall be created by the Council for any one
public improvement which includes property having an area in excess of twenty five per cent (25%) of
the total area of the city. No public improvement project shall be divided geographically for the purpose
of circumventing this provision.
Cross-reference:
Public improvements; special assessment procedures, see §§ 33.01 et seq. of the City Code
EXCESS AND DEFICIENCY
Section 7.4 The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the
improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such
excess is five per cent (5%) or less of the assessment, but should the assessment prove larger than
necessary by more than five per cent (5%), the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rate basis to the
owners of the property assessed as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. Such refund shall
be made by credit against future unpaid installments to the extent such installments then exist and the
balance of such refund shall be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions
of any outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or in part by such special assessment.
INVALIDITY
Section 7.5 Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council, be invalid by
reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall
adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or
not, or whether any part of the assessments have been paid or not, have power to cause a new
assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. All
proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner
as provided for the original assessment, and whenever any sum or part thereof levied upon any
property in the assessment so set aside has been paid and not refunded, the payment so made shall be
applied upon the reassessment or if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refunds
shall be made.
COURT JUDGMENTS
Section 7.6 No judgment nor any act of the Council vacating a special assessment shall destroy
or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be
equitably charged against the same or as by regular mode of proceedings might have been lawfully
assessed thereupon.
COURT ACTION - LIMITATION
Section 7.7 No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of
contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment:
7.7:1 Unless within thirty (30) days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll written
notice is given to the Council of intention to file such suit or action stating the grounds on which it is
claimed such assessment is illegal.
7.7:2 Unless such suit or action shall be commenced within sixty (60) days after confirmation of
the roll.
LIEN FOR PAYMENT
Section 7.8 Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon from the date of
confirmation of the roll shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of same character and
effect as the lien created by this charter for city taxes. The Council may provide for fees and penalties for
late payment or nonpayment of special assessments, which fees and penalties shall be a lien and shall
be collectible as are similar charges upon city taxes. Special assessments, together with any accrued
fees, penalties and interest, shall be collected in the same manner as city taxes.
Cross-reference:
Special assessment requirements; payments and penalties, see § 33.07 of the City Code
RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF MONEY
Section 7.9 Except as otherwise provided in this charter, moneys raised by special assessment
for any public improvement shall be credited to a special account and shall be used to pay for the costs
of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and expenses incidental thereto or to repay
any money borrowed therefor.
REMOVAL OF NUISANCE OR HAZARD
Section 7.10 When any lot, building or structure within the city, because of the accumulation of
refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of weeds, or age or dilapidation, or because of any other
condition or happening, becomes, in the opinion of the Council, a public hazard or nuisance which is
dangerous to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the city or those of them residing or habitually
going near such lot, building or structure, the Council may after investigation, give notice to the owner
of the land upon which such hazard or nuisance exists, or to the owner of the building or structure itself,
specifying the nature of the hazard or nuisance, and requiring such owner to alter, repair, tear down, or
remove same promptly and within a time to be specified by the Council, which shall be commensurate
with the nature of the hazard or nuisance. If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, said owner
has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the
building or structure itself is not known, the Council may order such hazard or nuisance abated by the
proper department or agency of the city which is qualified to do the work required, and the costs of
such abatement, assessed against the lot, premises or description of real property upon which said
hazard or nuisance was located.
Cross-reference:
Nuisances, see Chapter 91 of the City Code
Code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, see § 150.14 of the City Code
MORTGAGE IN LIEU OF PAYMENT
Section 7.11 The Council may provide for the deferred payment of special assessments from
persons who, in the opinion of the Council and City Assessor, by reason of poverty, are unable to
contribute toward the cost thereof. In all such cases, as a condition to the granting of such deferred
payments, the city shall require mortgage security on the real property of the beneficiary, payable upon
his death.
NOTICE - FAILURE
Section 7.12 Failure to mail or receive any notice required to be so sent by this charter or by
ordinance shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll.
CHAPTER VIII. BORROWING POWERS
GENERAL POWERS AND RESTRICTIONS
Section 8.1 Subject to the applicable provisions of law and this charter, the Council may by
ordinance authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of powers vested in the
City and permitted by law and may authorize the issuance of bonds or other evidences of indebtedness
therefor. Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include but not be limited to the
following types:
8.1:1 General obligation bonds which pledge the full credit and resources of the city for the
payment of such obligations, including bonds for the city's portion of public improvements, except that
the total amount of such general obligation bonds shall not exceed ten per cent (10%) of the assessed
valuation of all real and personal property subject to taxation.
8.1:2 Notes issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes, but the proceeds of such notes may
be spent only in accordance with appropriations as provided in Section 6.6.
8.1:3 In case of fire, flood or other calamity, emergency loans due in not more than five (5)
years for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property, provided
that the total amount of such bonds shall not exceed 3/8ths of 1% of the assessed valuation of all real
and personal property subject to taxation.
8.1:4 Special assessment bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments
made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public improvement, or in anticipation of the payment
of any combination of such special assessments. Such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of
the special assessment district or districts alone or may be both an obligation of the special assessment
district or districts and a general obligation of the city, provided, however, that the total amount of such
assessment bonds at time of issue shall not exceed ninety per cent (90%) of the special assessments
receivable as shown on the special assessment rolls of the city.
8.1:5 Mortgage bonds for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving, or
operating of any public utility which the city is authorized by this charter to acquire or operate; provided
such bonds shall not impose any liability upon such city but shall be secured only upon the property and
revenues of such public utility, including a franchise, stating the terms upon which, in case of
foreclosure, the purchaser may operate the same, which franchise shall in no case extend for a longer
period than twenty (20) years from the date of the sale of such utility and franchise on foreclosure. Such
bonds shall be authorized by a three-fifths (3/5ths) vote of the electors voting thereon at any general or
special election. A sinking fund shall be created in the event of the issuance of such bonds, by setting
aside such percentage of the gross or net earnings of the public utility as may be deemed sufficient for
the payment of the mortgage bonds at maturity, unless serial bonds are issued of such a nature that no
sinking fund is required.
8.1:6 Bonds for the refunding of the funded indebtedness of the city.
8.1:7 Revenue bonds as authorized by statute which are secured only by the revenue from a
public improvement and do not constitute a general obligation to the city.
8.1:8 No bond of the city shall be issued bearing an interest rate greater than six per cent (6%)
per annum.
Statutory reference:
Bonds, see M.C.L.A. §§ 141.151 through 141.153
BOND - REQUIREMENTS
Section 8.2 Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement
specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and it shall be unlawful for any officer of the city to
use the proceeds thereof for any other purpose, and any officer who shall violate this provision shall be
deemed guilty of misconduct in office, except that whenever the proceeds of any bond issue or part
thereof shall remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was
made, the Council may authorize the use of said funds for the retirement of bonds of such issue. All
bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the City Clerk, under the seal of the City and interest coupons may be executed with
the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and the City Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and
other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be kept by the City Clerk. Upon the payment of
any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be “cancelled”.
BONDS - TIME OF ISSUE
Section 8.3 No unissued bonds of the city shall be issued or sold to secure funds for any purpose
other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if any such bonds are not sold within
three (3) years after authorization, such authorization shall, as to such bonds, be null and void, and such
bonds shall be cancelled.
CHAPTER IX. JUSTICE OF THE PEACE
Editor's note: Sections 9.1 through 9.4, inclusive, have been rendered void by Public Act 154 of 1968,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8101 et seq., as amended, which established district courts subsequent to the
passage of this charter.
CHAPTER X. MISCELLANEOUS CITY RECORDS
Section 10.1 All records of the city shall be public.
EFFECT OF ILLEGALITY OF ANY PART OF CHARTER
Section 10.2 Should any portion of this charter be declared void, illegal and unconstitutional,
such finding shall not invalidate the remainder of the charter.
AMENDMENTS
Section 10.3 This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided in Act Number
279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended. Should two (2) or more amendments, adopted at the same
election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to
those provisions.
Statutory reference:
For codified provisions of Public Act 279 of 1909, see M.C.L.A. §§ 117.1 et seq.
CITY RECORDS
Section 10.4 All books, records, compilations, etc., in and pertaining to any city office, elective
or appointive, shall be and remain the property of the city.
CITY LIABILITY
Section 10.5 The city shall not be liable for damages sustained by any person to his person or
property by reason of the negligence of the city, its officers or employees, nor by reason of any defective
condition of or obstruction in any public place unless such person shall serve or cause to be served upon
the City Clerk, within sixty (60) days after the injury resulting in such damages shall have occurred, a
notice in writing, which notice shall be set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the
manner in which it occurred, the extent of such damages as far as the same has become known, the
names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time by the claimant, and a statement that the
person sustaining such damages intends to hold the city liable for such damages as may have been
sustained by him.
The city shall not be liable for any damages to person or property arising out of any such injury
unless there shall have been first presented to the City Clerk a claim in writing and under oath setting
forth particularly the time, place, nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed
by reason thereof. No person shall bring any action against the city for any such damages until such
claim shall have been filed with the City Clerk and until the Council shall have been given opportunity to
act thereon either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim.
It shall be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or proceeding for the collection
of any demand or claim against the city under this section that the notice of injury and the verified proof
of claim as in this section required were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as
herein provided.
NO ESTOPPEL
Section 10.6 No estoppel may be created against the city.
TRUSTS
Section 10.7 All trusts established for any municipal purpose shall be used and continued in
accordance with the terms of such trust, subject to the cy pres doctrine. The Council may in its
discretion receive and hold any property in trust for any municipal purpose and shall apply the same to
the execution of such trust and for no other purpose except in cases where the cy pres doctrine shall
apply.
DEFINITION OF PUBLICATION - MAILING OF NOTICES
Section 10.8 The requirement contained in this charter for the publishing or publication of
notices, ordinances or proceedings shall be met by publishing any appropriate insertion in a newspaper
published in the English language for the dissemination of news of a general character which newspaper
shall have had a general circulation at regular intervals in the city for at least two (2) years immediately
preceding the time that it is used for such publication purposes. The affidavit of the printer or publisher
of such newspaper, or of his foreman or principal clerk, annexed to a printed copy of such notice,
ordinance or proceeding taken from the paper in which it was published and specifying the times of
publication shall be prima facie evidence of such publication. In any case in which this charter requires
the mailing of notices, the affidavit of the officer or employee responsible for such mailing that such
notice was mailed shall be prima facie evidence of such mailing.
SUNDAYS AND HOLIDAYS
Section 10.9 Whenever the date fixed by this charter for the doing or completion of any act falls
on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is
not a Sunday or legal holiday.
CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS
Section 10.10 The chapter, section and sub-section headings used in this charter are for
convenience only and shall not be considered as part of the charter.
INTERPRETATIONS
Section 10.11 Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context:
10.11:1 All words used in this charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the
time of the adoption of this charter but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any
event or requirement for which provision is made herein.
10.11:2 The singular number shall include the plural, the plural number shall include the
singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter.
10.11:3 The word “person” may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to
partnerships as well as to individuals.
10.11:4 The words “printed” and “printing” shall include reproduction by printing, engraving,
stencil duplicating, lithographing or any similar method.
10.11:5 Except in reference to signatures, the words “written” and “in writing” shall include
printing and typewriting.
10.11:6 The word “office” shall include the members of the Council, the administrative officers
and the Justice of the Peace. [See Editor's Note at Chapter IX.]
10.11:7 All references to statutes shall be considered to be references to such statutes as
amended.
10.11:8 The word “default” shall be defined to include being delinquent in taxes and public
utility service charges among its meanings.
10.11:9 All references to specific Public Acts of the State of Michigan shall be to such acts as are
in effect at the time the reference to such act is to be applied.
10.11:10 The words “law” or “general laws of the state” or “statute” denote the Constitution
and the Public Acts of the State of Michigan in effect at the time the provision of the charter containing
the words “law” or “general laws of the state” or “statutes” is to be applied, and applicable common
law.
10.11:11 All references to section numbers shall refer to section numbers of this charter.
10.11:12 The words “assessed valuation” or “assessed value” shall mean the local assessment
as approved or changed and corrected through the process of state equalization.
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF CHARTER
Section 10.12 Any officer of the city found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of any act
declared by this charter to constitute misconduct in office may be punished by a fine of not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not to exceed ninety (90) days or both in the
discretion of the court. The punishment provided in this section shall be in addition to that of having the
office declared vacant, as provided in Section 4.28.
Editor's note:
The provisions for declaring an office vacant are found at Sections 4.26 and 4.27; Section 4.28
deals with removal from office.
CHAPTER 30: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
30.01 Vacancy in office of Mayor
30.02 City Manager
Cross-reference:
Municipal powers, see Charter Ch. II
Elections, see Charter Ch. III
Organization of government; offices and officers, bonds, and the like, see Charter Ch. IV
The Council, legislation, and restrictions, see Charter Ch. V
§ 30.01 VACANCY IN OFFICE OF MAYOR.
(A) Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Mayor Pro-Tem shall
assume the duties and powers of the Mayor and shall be designated as the Mayor during the remainder
of the term of the Mayor that vacated the office. Upon assuming the powers and duties of the Mayor,
the Mayor Pro-Tem shall vacate the council seat to which he or she was elected. This vacated council
seat shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter.
(B) In the event that, upon a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the designated Mayor Pro-Tem
does not assume the duties and powers of the office of Mayor, then the Acting Mayor shall assume the
duties and powers of the Mayor and shall be designated as the Mayor during the remainder of the term
of the Mayor that vacated the office. Upon assuming the powers and duties of the Mayor, the Acting
Mayor shall vacate the council seat to which he or she was elected. This vacated council seat shall be
filled in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter.
(C) The Acting Mayor shall be elected by a majority vote of the City Council at a regular or
special meeting of the City Council.
(Ord. 128, passed 10-26-92)
Cross-reference:
Election of Mayor, see Charter §§ 4.2 et seq.
Organization meeting; election of Mayor Pro Tem, see Charter § 4.5
Mayor - duties, see Charter §§ 4.6 - 4.7
Councilmen - Mayor - compensation, see Charter § 4.16
§ 30.02 CITY MANAGER.
There is hereby created an office of City Manager, who shall be the chief administrative officer
of the city, with the following duties, authorities and responsibilities:
(A) The City Manager shall see that all ordinances and applicable state laws are enforced
and that all terms and conditions in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise or
any contract are faithfully performed.
(B) The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments
of the city government which are placed under his or her control.
(C) The City Manager shall be responsible for the proper discharge of all duties and
obligations of the city.
(D) The City Manager shall prepare, in accordance with law and the Charter, a budget for
submission to the City Council annually and see to the administration thereof after its adoption.
(E) The City Manager shall recommend to the Council for the adoption of such measures as
he or she may deem necessary or expedient; and attend Council meetings, with the right to take part in
discussions but not to vote.
(F) The City Manager shall exercise and perform all administrative functions of the city that
are not imposed by the Charter or ordinance upon some other official.
(G) The City Manager shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Charter
or as may be required of him or her by ordinance or by direction of the Council.
(H) All administrative officers and departments of the city, except the City Attorney, shall be
under the administrative direction of the City Manager.
(1) Nothing herein shall affect the power of the City Council to compel the
attendance of officers pursuant to Charter § 5.7.
(2) Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent officers of the city from
approaching or contacting the City Council, unless prohibited from so doing by the City Council.
(3) Nothing herein shall affect the power of the City Council to approve the
appointment and removal of administrative officers pursuant to Charter § 4.8.
(4) The term “administrative direction” shall not confer upon the City Manager the
power to control an officer in the independent exercise of duties required by state law or the Charter.
(I) The City Manager shall be required to be a resident of the city. He or she shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority of the City Council and shall serve at the pleasure
of the Mayor and City Council.
(J) The duties hereinbefore specified to be performed by the City Manager shall be in
addition to those duties from time to time imposed upon him or her by the Mayor.
(Ord. 41, passed 6-23-76; Am. Ord. 126, passed 4-6-92)
Cross-reference:
City Manager, see Charter §§ 4.7-4.8
Administrative officers - residence, see Charter § 4.10
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 1
CHAPTER 31: DEPARTMENTS
Section
Police Department
31.01 Established
31.02 Police Commission
31.03 Police Chief; other officers and employees
31.04 Budget
31.05 Police Reserve Force
31.06 Reports to City Council
Fire Department
31.15 Established
31.16 City Manager; Fire Chief
31.17 Other officers and employees
31.18 Administrative regulations
Public Works Department
31.30 Established
31.31 Public Works Commission
31.32 Jurisdiction and duties of Commission
31.33 Superintendent of Public Works; other officers and employees
Editor's Note:
The city no longer uses a Public Works Commission. The current Public Services
Department operates under the direction of the City Manager pursuant to § 30.02(H) of
this code.
POLICE COMMISSION
§ 31.01 ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION; DUTIES.
(A) Police Commission established. Ferrysburg and Spring Lake agree to form a
Police commission to provide oversight regarding police service provided by Ottawa County,
through the Ottawa County Sheriff’s Office, after the effective date, for Ferrysburg and Spring
Lake.
(B) Composition. The Police Commission will be comprised of two elected officials
from Ferrysburg, two elected officials from Spring Lake, one appointed representative from
Ferrysburg, and one appointed representative from Spring Lake. A representative from the
Ottawa County Sheriff's Office will be an advisory, non-voting member. A Chairperson of the
Police Commission will be elected by the voting members of the Police Commission to a
one-year term, beginning each July 1 after the effective date. The Chairperson of the Police
Commission will alternate between a representative from Ferrysburg and a representative from
Spring Lake on a yearly basis (the first year the Chairperson shall be a representative from
Ferrysburg).
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 2
(C) Duties. Ferrysburg and Spring Lake agree that the Police Commission will review
the budget set forth by Ottawa County for the Ottawa County Sheriff's Office, and particularly
for the provision of police services in Ferrysburg and Spring Lake, and provide
recommendations to Ferrysburg and Spring Lake. Copies of all invoices from Ottawa County for
police services in Ferrysburg and Spring Lake shall be provided to the Police Commission. Upon
receiving any invoice for what the Police Commission deems to be an extraordinary cost from
Ottawa County, the Police Commission will review the invoice and provide a recommendation to
Ferrysburg and Spring Lake. Pursuant to the agreement with Ottawa County for the Ottawa
County Sheriff's Office to provide police services to Ferrysburg and Spring Lake after the
effective date, the Police Commission shall have power on behalf of Ferrysburg and Spring
Lake, on reasonable notice to Ottawa County and the Ottawa County Sheriff's Office, to inspect
the books and records of Ottawa County and the Ottawa County Sheriff's Office with respect to
those police services.
(Ord. 289, passed 4-18-16)
§ 31.15 ESTABLISHED.
(A) There is hereby established as the City of Ferrysburg Fire Department.
(B) The duties of said Department shall be to protect persons and property from fire
and other disasters.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-20-64)
§ 31.16 CITY MANAGER; FIRE CHIEF.
(A) The management of the Department shall be under the City Manager. The City
Manager, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint a Fire Chief to be head of the
Department.
(B) The Fire Chief shall perform all the duties imposed upon a Fire Chief, Fire
Marshall, or other officer in charge of fire protection equipment and such department as
prescribed by state law and in such capacity shall be a representative of the city.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-20-64; Am. Ord. 63, passed 9-26-79)
§ 31.17 OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
(A) The following officers shall be appointed by the Fire Chief, subject to the
approval of the City Council and budget limitations:
(1) Fire Inspector (with the rank of Assistant Fire Chief);
(2) Operations Officer (with the rank of Assistant Fire Chief);
(3) Medical Officer (with the rank of Lieutenant);
(4) Dive Officer (with the rank of Lieutenant); and
(5) Engineer Officer (with the rank of Lieutenant).
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 3
(B) The Fire Chief shall also appoint such firefighters as required to operate the
Department, subject to City Council and budget limitations.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-20-64; Am. Ord. passed 7-20-64; Am. Ord. 63, passed 9-26-79; Am. Ord. 214,
passed 6-7-04; Am. Ord. 267, passed 12-6-10)
Cross-reference:
Budget submission, see Charter § 6.2
§ 31.18 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.
The Fire Chief shall establish such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the
regulation of the Fire Department, a copy of which shall be filed with the City Clerk at all times
and the City Council shall have the right to suspend, amend or modify such rules and regulations
at any time.
(Ord. 4, passed 1-20-64; Am. Ord. passed 7-20-64; Am. Ord. 63, passed 9-26-79)
§ 31.30 ESTABLISHED.
(A) There is hereby established a Public Works Department to be known as the City
of Ferrysburg Public Works Department.
(B) The duties of said department are to maintain and protect all city infrastructure
and city properties.
(Ord. 35, passed 9-11-74; Am. Ord. 289, passed 4-18-16)
§ 31.31 CITY MANAGER; PUBLIC WORKS SUPERVISOR.
(A) The management of the department shall be under the City Manager. The City
Manager, with the approval of City Council, shall appoint the Public Services Supervisor to be
the head of the department.
(B) The Public Services Supervisor shall perform all duties associated with running
the department.
(Ord. 289, passed 4-18-16)
CHAPTER 32: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Planning Commission
32.01 Established
32.02 Composition; term of office
32.03 Conflicts of interest
32.04 Removal
32.05 Employees appointed; consultants; expenditures
32.06 Compensation
32.07 Bylaws, records
Recreation Commission
32.15 Established
32.16 Composition of board; appointment; terms
32.17 Funding; expenditures
32.18 Duties
Youth Advisory Council
32.20 Youth Advisory Council established
32.21 Purpose
32.22 Composition, terms, and appointment
32.23 Eligibility for appointment
32.24 Bylaws
32.25 Funding
Kitchel-Lindquist-Hartger Dunes Preserve Board
32.30 Established
32.31 Purposes
32.32 Board
32.33 Membership
32.34 Bylaws
Beautification Commission
32.40 Established
32.41 Purpose
32.42 Membership
32.43 Finance and business
32.44 Bylaws
Board of Review
32.50 Alternate members of the Board of Review
Cross-reference:
Creation of boards and commissions, see Charter § 4.25
Budget submission, see Charter § 6.2
Board of Review, see Charter §§ 6.14 et seq.
Departments, see Chapter 31
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 32.01 ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby created a commission to be known as the “City of Ferrysburg Planning
Commission,” which Commission shall be vested with any and all powers permitted to be fixed in a
Planning Commission as provided by law.
(Ord. 1, passed 11-4-63; Am. Ord. 260, passed 2-1-10)
Cross-reference:
Planning Commission, see Charter § 4.22
§ 32.02 COMPOSITION; TERM OF OFFICE.
(A) The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members. Members of a planning
commission, other than ex officio members as provided herein, shall be appointed for three-year terms.
A member shall hold office until his or her successor is appointed. If a vacancy occurs on the Planning
Commission the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for an
original appointment.
(B) The Mayor shall appoint members of the Planning Commission, subject to approval by a
majority vote of the members of the City Council elected and serving.
(C) The membership of the Planning Commission shall be representative of important
segments of the city, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development of the
local unit of government, in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the city such as
agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public health, government, transportation,
industry, and commerce. The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the
city to the extent practicable.
(D) Members of the Planning Commission shall be qualified electors of the city.
(E) The City Manager or a person designated by the City Manager, the Mayor, one or more
members of the City Council, or any combination thereof, may be appointed to the
PlanningCommission, as ex officio members with the consent of the City Council. Not more than onethird
of the members of the Planning Commission may be ex officio members. Except as provided in this
division, an elected officer or employee of the city is not eligible to be a member of the Planning
Commission. Ex officio members shall have full voting rights and the right to make motions. The term
of an ex officio member of a Planning Commission shall expire as follows:
(1) The term of the Mayor shall expire with his or her term as Mayor.
(2) The term of the City Manager or designee shall expire with the term of the
Mayor or with the office of the City Manager, whichever is first to occur.
(3) The term of a member of the City Council shall expire with his or her term on
the City Council.
(Ord. 1, passed 11-4-63; Am. Ord. 123, passed 12-2-91; Am. Ord. 254, passed 6-1-09; Am. Ord. 260,
passed 2-1-10)
§ 32.03 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
Before casting a vote on a matter on which a member may reasonably be considered to have a
conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the Planning
Commission. The member is disqualified from voting on the matter if so provided by the bylaws or by a
majority vote of the remaining members of the Planning Commission. Failure of a member to disclose a
potential conflict of interest as required by this section constitutes malfeasance in office. Unless the
legislative body, by ordinance, defines conflict of interest for the purposes of this section, the Planning
Commission shall do so in its bylaws.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-1-09; Am. Ord. 260, passed 2-1-10)
§ 32.04 REMOVAL.
The City Council may remove a member of the Planning Commission for misfeasance,
malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-1-09; Am. Ord. 260, passed 2-1-10)
§ 32.05 EMPLOYEES APPOINTED; CONSULTANTS; EXPENDITURES.
The Planning Commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work,
whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as
govern other corresponding civil employees of the city. The Planning Commission may also contract with
city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The
expenditures of said Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within amounts appropriated for the
purpose by the City Council, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary
for the Planning Commission’s work.
(Ord. 1, passed 11-4-63; Am. Ord. 260, passed 2-1-10)
§ 32.06 COMPENSATION.
Members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 254, passed 6-1-09; Am. Ord. 260, passed 2-1-10)
§ 32.07 BYLAWS, RECORDS.
The Planning Commission shall, with the approval of City Council, adopt bylaws for the
transaction of business and the retention of public records of its resolutions, findings, and
determinations.
(Ord. 1, passed 11-4-63; Am. Ord. 254, passed 6-1-09; Am. Ord. 260, passed 2-1-10)
RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 32.15 ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby created a Recreation Commission for the city in accordance with the City
Charter.
(Ord. 76, passed 3-10-82)
Cross-reference:
Creation of boards and commissions, see Charter § 4.25
§ 32.16 COMPOSITION OF BOARD; APPOINTMENT; TERMS.
(A) The Recreation Commission shall consist of eight members who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. Members will serve without compensation. All members
shall be not less than the age of 18 and a resident of the city and shall serve for terms described as
follows:
(1) Seven members shall serve for terms of three years.
(2) One member shall be selected by the Youth Advisory Council from its
membership to serve as an ex officio member for a term commencing on or after October 1st of the
year of appointment and terminating on September 30th of the following year. The ex officio member
shall have the powers and responsibilities of the other members except that the ex officio member may
not vote and his or her presence or absence is not considered in the determination of a quorum. In the
event of a vacancy, the position of the ex officio member may be filled by the Youth Advisory Council.
(B) In the event of a vacancy, a new member shall be appointed in the manner provided
above and shall serve for the remaining term of the vacancy. Members of the Recreation Commission
may be removed by the City Council as provided in the City Charter.
(Ord. 76, passed 3-10-82; Am. Ord. 263, passed 5-17-10; Am. Ord. 279, passed 9-16-13)
§ 32.17 FUNDING; EXPENDITURES.
All funds of the Recreation Commission shall be appropriated and expended under the authority
of the City Council.
(Ord. 76, passed 3-10-82)
§ 32.18 DUTIES.
The duties of the Recreation Commission will be to recommend purchase of recreational
facilities and the formulation of programs, and in all ways to assist the City Council in an advisory
capacity with reference to all matters of a recreational nature.
(Ord. 76, passed 3-10-82)
YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL
§ 32.20 YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established a Youth Advisory Council.
(Ord. 262, passed 5-17-10)
§ 32.21 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the Youth Advisory Council is to (1) involve youth in the process of city
government for their education and experience; (2) foster in youth good citizenship, leadership, and
planning skills; and (3) to represent the concerns and interests of youth within the City.
(Ord. 262, passed 5-17-10)
§ 32.22 COMPOSITION, TERMS, AND APPOINTMENT.
The Youth Advisory Council will consist of seven members serving terms commencing the first
day of October of the calendar year of appointment and ending on the 31st day of May of the following
calendar year. Members will be appointed to the Youth Advisory Council by the Mayor with the consent
of the City Council. Vacancies on the Youth Advisory Council shall be filled in the same manner for the
balance of the term for which the vacancy is filled.
(Ord. 262, passed 5-17-10)
§ 32.23 ELIGIBILITY FOR APPOINTMENT.
To be eligible for appointment a proposed member must (1) be a full time student enrolled in
9th through 12th grade in a private or public school or a home schooled student of equivalent
education; (2) be a resident of the city; (3) accurately complete an application for membership on a form
provided by the city; and (4) present written permission of a parent or guardian on a form provided by
the city.
(Ord. 262, passed 5-17-10)
§ 32.24 BYLAWS.
The Youth Advisory Council and its members shall act in accordance with bylaws established
pursuant to a resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 262, passed 5-17-10)
§ 32.25 FUNDING.
All funds for the Youth Advisory Council are to be appropriated by the City Council in the sole
discretion of the City Council.
(Ord. 262, passed 5-17-10)
KITCHEL-LINDQUIST-HARTGER DUNES PRESERVE BOARD
§ 32.30 ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established a Kitchel-Lindquist-Hartger Dunes Preserve Board in accordance
with Charter § 4.25.
(Ord. 137, passed 5-2-94; Am. Ord. 275, passed 6-4-12)
§ 32.31 PURPOSES.
The purposes of the Board are to advise and assist the city:
(A) To operate, maintain, and safeguard forever the Kitchel-Lindquist-Hartger Dunes
Preserve in its natural state for scientific, educational, and aesthetic purposes.
(B) In sponsoring public activities and events which promote the appreciation, enjoyment,
and preservation of the Preserve.
(Ord. 137, passed 5-2-94; Am. Ord. 275, passed 6-4-12)
§ 32.32 BOARD.
The Board shall consist of nine members who shall serve for terms of three years ending on July
1. Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. Any vacancy
on the Board shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term of office, by appointment by the
Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 137, passed 5-2-94; Am. Ord. 175, passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. 255, passed 7-6-09; Am. Ord. 263,
passed 5-17-10; Am. Ord. 275, passed 6-4-12)
§ 32.33 MEMBERSHIP.
Any person who subscribes to the purposes of the Board is eligible to be appointed by the
Mayor.
(Ord. 137, passed 5-2-94; Am. Ord. 275, passed 6-4-12)
§ 32.34 BYLAWS.
(A) Officers. The Board shall select a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson, a Secretary, and a
Treasurer from the members of the Board. Terms of offices shall be for three years and commence on
July 1 and shall expire on June 30.
(B) Meetings of the board.
(1) The Board shall schedule not less than one regular meeting each month which
may be cancelled if there is no business.
(2) Special meetings of the Board may be called at any time by the chairperson and
shall be called upon the request of any two Board members. Ten days advance written notice shall be
given for special meetings, except when the chairperson declares an emergency which requires a
shorter notice period.
(3) Meetings of the Board shall be held at City Hall, 17290 Roosevelt Road,
Ferrysburg, Michigan, unless another location is required for a meeting and is stated in the meeting
notice.
(4) Five members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
Board business.
(C) Officer duties and responsibilities.
(1) The Chairperson shall conduct the business of the Board according to the
resolutions of the Board and according to his or her own discretion whenever and wherever it is not
limited expressly by such resolutions. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Board at
which he or she is present.
(2) The Vice-chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Board at which the
chairperson is absent. The Vice-chairperson shall have such powers and duties and authority as may be
prescribed from time to time by the Board.
(3) The Secretary shall record or provide for the recording of minutes of all
meetings of the Board. The Secretary shall give all notices required by these bylaws and shall have such
powers and duties and authority as may be prescribed from time to time by the Board.
(4) The Treasurer shall place his or her signature on requests for withdrawal of
money from funds held by the Grand Haven Area Community Foundation on behalf of the Board, along
with the signature of the City Manager or his or her designee.
(D) Finances.
(1) The City Treasurer shall account for all funds received and disbursed regarding
the operation of the Preserve. The City Treasurer shall prepare and present a proposed annual budget
for the Preserve and shall consider input from the Board in that regard.
(2) The City Treasurer shall prepare and present a monthly financial report for the
Preserve. The City Treasurer shall prepare and present an annual financial report for the Preserve as of
June 30 each year.
(3) Expenditures of Board funds shall be authorized by the Board, with approval of
City Council. Any requests for grants shall be authorized by the Board, with the approval of City Council,
and shall be signed by the Board Treasurer and the City Manager or his or her designee.
(4) Revenues to be raised by the Board shall be authorized by the Board.
(5) The fiscal year of the Board shall begin on July 1 of each year and shall end on
June 30 of the following year.
(E) Amendments.
(1) An amendment to these bylaws may be recommended by the Board. An
amendment may be adopted at any regular or special meeting of the Board, provided that ten days prior
written notice of the proposed amendment has been given to the Board membership.
(2) Before any amendment adopted by the Board becomes effective, it must first
be approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 137, passed 5-2-94; Am. Ord. 275, passed 6-4-12)
BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION
§ 32.40 ESTABLISHED.
There is hereby established a Beautification Commission in accordance with City Charter § 4.25.
(Ord. 197, passed 10-21-02)
§ 32.41 PURPOSE.
The purpose of the Beautification Commission is to advise and assist the City Council regarding
aesthetic improvements to the city.
(Ord. 197, passed 10-21-02)
§ 32.42 MEMBERSHIP.
(A) The Beautification Commission shall consist of eight members and two alternate
members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. Members will serve
without compensation. All members shall be not less than the age of 18 and a resident of the city and
shall serve for terms described as follows:
(1) Six members shall serve for terms of three years, provided that the first
members of the Commission shall be designated as serving for initial terms of one, two, or three years
to provide for the subsequent appointment of an equal number of members each year. Subsequent
members shall serve for terms of three years.
(2) One member shall be selected from the City Council to serve for a term of three
years or until the term of the City Council seat expires, whichever is first to occur.
(3) One member shall be selected by the Youth Advisory Council from its
membership to serve as an ex officio member for a term commencing on or after October 1st of the
year of appointment and terminating on September 30th of the following year. The ex officio member
shall have the powers and responsibilities of the other members except that the ex officio member may
not vote and his or her presence or absence is not considered in the determination of a quorum. In the
event of a vacancy, the position of the ex officio member may be filled by the Youth Advisory Council.
(4) Two alternate members shall serve for terms of three years. In the event of the
absence of a member, alternate members shall be called on a rotating basis.
(B) In the event of a vacancy, a new member shall be appointed in the manner provided
above and shall serve for the remaining term of the vacancy. Members of the Beautification
Commission may be removed by the City Council as provided in the City Charter.
(Ord. 197, passed 10-21-02; Am. Ord. 263, passed 5-17-10; Am. Ord. 279, passed 9-16-13)
Cross-reference:
Board or Commission vacancy, see Charter § 4.27
Removal from Board or Commission office, see Charter § 4.28
§ 32.43 FINANCE AND BUSINESS.
All funds shall be appropriated and expended under the authority of the City Council. The
Beautification Commission is advisory only and shall not have authority to expend funds or enter into
contracts or agreements on behalf of the city or the Beautification Commission. The Beautification
Commission shall report to the City Council and to the Planning Commission as requested by the City
Council.
(Ord. 197, passed 10-21-02)
§ 32.44 BYLAWS.
The Beautification Commission may adopt and amend bylaws subject to the approval of the City
Council. Unless amended by the bylaws, Robert's Rules of Order shall govern the procedures of the
Beautification Commission.
(Ord. 197, passed 10-21-02)
BOARD OF REVIEW
§ 32.50 ALTERNATE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF REVIEW.
The City Council may appoint not more than two alternate members for the same term as
regular members of the Board of Review. Each alternate member shall be a property tax payer of the
city. Alternate members shall qualify by taking the constitutional Oath of Office within ten days after
appointment. The City Council may fill any vacancy that occurs in the alternate membership of the
Board of Review. A member of City Council is not eligible to serve as an alternate member or to fill any
vacancy. A spouse, mother, father, sister, brother, son or daughter (including adopted children), of the
Assessor is not eligible to serve as an alternate member or to fill any vacancy. An alternate member may
be called to perform the duties of a regular member of the Board of Review in the absence of a regular
member. An alternate member may also be called to perform the duties of a regular member of the
Board of Review for the purpose of reaching a decision in issues protested in which a regular member
has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest.
(Ord. 236, passed 2-5-07)
CHAPTER 33: BUDGET, FINANCE, AND TAXATION
Section
Public Improvements
33.01 Charter provisions unaffected
33.02 Authority of City Council; costs of improvements
33.03 Improvements within highway right-of-way
33.04 Notice and hearing on improvements and special assessments
33.05 Approval; preparation of special assessment roll
33.06 Notice and hearing on special assessment roll; approval
33.07 Special assessment payments and penalties
Cross-reference:
Contracts, see Charter §§ 5.27 et seq.
Budget, finance, and taxation, see Charter Ch. VI
Special assessments, see Charter Ch. VII
Borrowing powers, see Charter Ch. VIII
Statutory reference:
Special assessment hearings, additional state law requirements, see M.C.L.A. §§ 211.741 et seq.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 33.01 CHARTER PROVISIONS UNAFFECTED.
Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be deemed to supersede, amend, alter or otherwise
conflict with the provisions of the Charter as set forth regarding special assessments.
(Ord. 6, passed 6-1-64)
Cross-reference:
Special assessments, see Charter Ch. VII
§ 33.02 AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL; COSTS OF IMPROVEMENTS.
The City Council shall have the power to make any public improvements allowed by law to be
made within the city and to determine whether the whole or any part of the cost thereof shall be
defrayed by special assessment against the property especially benefited thereby. The cost of
engineering services, all expenses incident to the proceedings for the making of the improvement and
the financing thereof, not to exceed one year's interest on any bonds to be issued to defray the cost
thereof, shall be deemed to be a part of the cost of the improvement.
(Ord. 6, passed 6-1-64)
§ 33.03 IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN HIGHWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY.
No improvement shall be made within the right-of-way of a highway under the jurisdiction of
the State Highway Commission or the Board of County Road Commissioners without written approval of
the State Highway Commissioner or the Board of County Road Commissioners as the case may be.
(Ord. 6, passed 6-1-64)
§ 33.04 NOTICE AND HEARING ON IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
Whenever the City Council, by majority vote thereof, determines that a public improvement
should be made, it shall cause to be prepared by a registered engineer plans showing the improvement
and the location thereof and an estimated cost thereof. On receipt of such plans and estimate, the City
Council shall order the same to be filed with the City Clerk, and if it shall desire to proceed further with
the public improvement, it shall by resolution tentatively declare its intention to make such
improvement as a public necessity and tentatively designate the special assessment district against
which all or a part of the cost of said public improvement is to be assessed. The City Council shall then
fix a time and place when and where it will meet and hear any objection to the making of the public
improvement, and to the special assessment district to be assessed therefor, and shall cause notice of
such hearing to be given by publication thereof twice prior to such hearing in a newspaper having
general circulation in the city, the first publication to be at least ten days prior to the time of the
hearing. Such notice shall state that the plans and estimates are on file with the City Clerk for public
examination and shall contain a description of the proposed special assessment district. The City Council
shall also cause to be sent by ordinary mail, not later that ten days prior to said hearing, a copy of said
notice to all property owners, as shown on the current assessment rolls of the city, within the proposed
special assessment district. At the time of said hearing, or any adjournment thereof, which may be
without further notice, the City Council shall hear any objections to the proposed public improvement
and to the special assessment district, and may revise, correct, amend or change the plans, estimate of
costs and the special assessment district; provided, that no property shall be added to the district nor
any increase in the estimate of cost in excess of 10% of the original estimate of the cost shall be made
unless notice be given as above provided, or by personal service upon the owners of the property in the
entire proposed special assessment district and a hearing afforded to such owners.
(Ord. 6, passed 6-1-64)
§ 33.05 APPROVAL; PREPARATION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL.
After the hearing on the determination of the public necessity of making said public
improvement as set forth in the next preceding paragraph, if the City Council then desires to proceed
with the public improvement, it shall by resolution determine to make the same as a public necessity
and shall approve the plans, specifications and estimate of costs as originally presented or as revised,
corrected, amended or changed, and determine what part of the cost thereof shall be defrayed by
special assessment. The City Council shall thereupon direct the City Assessor to make a special
assessment roll, in which shall be entered and described all parcels of land to be assessed, with the
names of the respective owners therefor, if known, and the total amount to be assessed against each
parcel of land, which amount shall be such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all
parcels of land in the special assessment district as the benefits of each parcel of land bears to the total
benefit to all parcels of land in the special assessment district. When the assessor shall have completed
the assessment roll, he or she shall affix thereto his or her certificate stating that it was made pursuant
to a resolution of the City Council adopted on a specified date, and that in making such assessment roll
he or she has, according to his or her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions
contained in such resolution and the statutes of the state.
(Ord. 6, passed 6-1-64)
§ 33.06 NOTICE AND HEARING ON SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ROLL; APPROVAL.
When any special assessment roll shall have been reported by the City Assessor to the City
Council, the same shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. Before confirming such assessment roll,
the City Council shall appoint a time and place where it shall meet and revise the same and hear any
objections thereto, and shall cause notice of such hearing and the filing of such assessment roll to be
published twice prior to such hearing in a newspaper circulated in the city, the first publication to be at
least ten days before such hearing, and shall give further notice of such hearing by ordinary mail to all
property owners as shown on such special assessment roll. Such hearing may be adjourned from time to
time without further notice. Any person objecting to the assessment roll shall file his or her objection
thereto in writing with the City Clerk before the close of such hearing or within such further time as the
City Council may grant. After such hearing the City Council may confirm the special assessment roll as
reported to it by the City Assessor or as amended or corrected by it, or may refer it back to the City
Assessor for revision, or may annul it and direct a new roll to be made. When a special assessment roll
shall have been confirmed by the City Council, the City Clerk shall endorse thereon the date of
confirmation. After such confirmation, the special assessment roll and all assessments thereon shall be
final and conclusive unless attacked in a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days after the date of
confirmation.
(Ord. 6, passed 6-1-64)
§ 33.07 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PAYMENTS AND PENALTIES.
(A) Installments; due date. At the time of confirmation of the special assessment roll, the
City Council shall determine whether the special assessment will be payable in one or more annual
installments. The amount of each installment, if more than one, need not be extended upon the special
assessment roll until after confirmation. If the special assessment is made payable in installments, the
City Council shall determine whether the first installment shall be due upon confirmation of the special
assessment roll or upon the following July 1. Subsequent installments shall be due on July 1 of
succeeding years.
(B) Interest. Interest shall be computed on the entire unpaid principal balance of the special
assessment at the rate specified in the City Council resolution confirming the special assessment roll and
shall be paid in full on each installment due date. Interest shall commence on such date as shall be
specified in the City Council resolution confirming the special assessment roll. All interest shall be a lien
against the property to which the assessment applies, and shall be collectible in the same manner as the
assessment to which it is added.
(C) Prepayments. A future-due installment may be paid at any time in full, with interest
accrued on the installment through the last day of the month in which the installment is paid. No partial
payment of a future-due installment shall be accepted by the City Treasurer.
(D) Penalties. If an installment due July 1 plus all accrued interest (computed to July 1) is
unpaid by September 1, there shall be added to the amount of the installment plus accrued interest a
penalty of 3%. If an installment plus all accrued interest is unpaid by October 1, there shall be added to
the amount of the installment plus accrued interest an additional penalty of 1%. If an installment plus all
accrued interest is unpaid by November 1, there shall be added to the amount of the installment plus
accrued interest an additional penalty of 1%. If an installment plus all accrued interest is unpaid by
November 15, there shall be added to the amount of the installment plus accrued interest a penalty of
3%. All such penalty charges shall be in lieu of interest on the installment, shall be a lien against the
property to which the assessment applies, and shall be collectible in the same manner as the
assessment to which they are added.
(E) Transfer to December tax roll. No payment of an installment shall be accepted by the
City Treasurer from and after November 15, and the City Assessor shall transfer to the December tax roll
any installment which remains unpaid on November 15.
(F) Apportionment of assessment among parcel divisions. Should any parcel of land be
divided after special assessment thereon has been confirmed, and before the collection of each and
every installment thereof, the City Assessor shall apportion the uncollected amounts between the
several divisions thereof.
(Ord. 6, passed 6-1-64; Am. Ord. 74, passed 8-12-81)
Cross-reference:
Lien for payment of special assessment, see Charter § 7.8
CHAPTER 34: PURCHASES, SALES, AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section
34.01 Authority
34.02 Use of credit cards or credit accounts
34.03 Approval of City Council; when required
34.04 Written quotes, estimates, and offers; when required
34.05 Competitive bidding; when required
34.06 Competitive bidding; award of contracts and purchases
34.07 Split orders to avoid limitations
34.08 Emergency purchases
34.09 Procedures and authority may be varied by City Council
Cross-reference:
Contracts, competitive bidding, see Charter § 5.32
Budget, finance, and taxation, see Charter Ch. VI
§ 34.01 AUTHORITY.
(A) Except as limited by this chapter, the City Manager or designee shall have authority to
do the following:
(1) Purchase, lease, or sell personal property and execute contracts and
agreements therefor;
(2) Agree to the installation of public improvements and execute contracts and
agreements therefor; and
(3) Agree to the acquisition of contractual services, insurance, and professional
services and execute contracts and agreements therefor.
(B) The appointment of a designee by a City Manager shall be evidenced in writing and shall
be effective upon filing with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 207, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 237, passed 4-16-07)
§ 34.02 USE OF CREDIT CARDS OR CREDIT ACCOUNTS.
The use of credit cards and purchases made therewith shall be addressed in a resolution
adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 207, passed 10-20-03)
§ 34.03 APPROVAL OF CITY COUNCIL; WHEN REQUIRED.
Approval of the City Council shall be a condition to the following transactions:
(A) Agreements for the purchase, lease, or sale of personal property for consideration of
$10,000 or more per transaction;
(B) Agreements for the installation of public improvements for consideration of $10,000 or
more per transaction;
(C) Agreements for the acquisition of contractual services (but not professional services or
insurance) for consideration of $ 10,000 or more per transaction; and
(D) When required by the City Council.
(Ord. 207, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 237, passed 4-16-07)
§ 34.04 WRITTEN QUOTES, ESTIMATES, AND OFFERS; WHEN REQUIRED.
(A) Unless competitive bidding is required by this section, or by law, administrative rule or
as a condition of a contract or grant, the City Manager shall obtain not less than two written quotes,
estimates or offers for any of the following:
(1) Agreements for the purchase or sale of personal property for consideration of
more than $5,000 but less than $10,000 per transaction;
(2) Agreements for the installation of public improvements for consideration of
more than $5,000 but less than $10,000 per transaction;
(3) Agreements for the acquisition of contractual services (but not professional
services or insurance) for consideration of more than $5,000 but less than $10,000 per transaction; and
(4) When required by the City Council.
(B) Written quotes, estimates and offers shall be evidenced in writing and shall be filed with
the City Clerk no later than the business day following the date of a purchase or sale. When authorizing
a purchase, the City Manager, Interim City Manager or designee shall consider the factors set forth in §
34.06.
(Ord. 207, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 237, passed 4-16-07)
§ 34.05 COMPETITIVE BIDDING; WHEN REQUIRED.
An opportunity for competitive bidding shall be required in the following circumstances:
(A) Agreements for the purchase or sale of personal property for consideration of more
than $10,000 per transaction;
(B) Agreements for the installation of public improvements for consideration of more than
$10,000 per transaction;
(C) Agreements for the acquisition of contractual services (but not professional services or
insurance) for consideration of more than $10,000 per transaction and the execution of contracts and
agreements therefor;
(D) When competitive bidding is required by law, administrative rule or condition for a
contract or grant; and
(E) When required by the City Council.
(F) The City Council may waive requirement of competitive bidding in the event that
acceptable bids were not submitted in response to an invitation for bids or upon a determination of the
City Council that competitive bidding would not be of benefit to the city.
(G) A requirement for competitive bidding may be satisfied by an inquiry to the State of
Michigan, the federal government or a non-profit organization that extends competitive bids or
resulting contracts to municipalities.
(Ord. 207, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 237, passed 4-16-07)
Cross-reference:
Contracts, competitive bidding, see Charter § 5.32
§ 34.06 COMPETITIVE BIDDING; AWARD OF CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES.
Where an opportunity for competitive bidding is provided, contracts and purchases shall be
awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to
the price, the department head, purchasing coordinator or the City Council shall consider:
(A) The bidder's ability, capacity and skill to perform the contract or provide the supplies,
material, equipment or services required promptly, or within the specified time, without delay or
interference;
(B) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder;
(C) The bidder’s previous and existing compliance with laws and ordinances relating to
contracts, purchase orders or services;
(D) The sufficiency of the financial resources of the bidder to perform the contract or
provide the supplies, materials, equipment or services;
(E) The availability and adaptability of the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual
services to the particular use required;
(F) The bidder's ability to provide future maintenance and service to the extent required by
the contract;
(G) The number or scope of the conditions attached to the bid by the bidder;
(H) The brand, make or type of product being proposed by the bidder, and its compatibility
with other similar materials or equipment currently owned and operated by the city;
(I) If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being
equal, the contact shall be awarded to the local bidder, if any. In all other cases of tied bids, the contract
or purchase shall be awarded to one of the tied bidders by drawing lots in public;
(J) A bidder is a local bidder and the local bidder’s price is not greater than 5% above the
lowest responsible bid.
(K) The city reserves the right to reject any and all bids.
(Ord. 207, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 237, passed 4-16-07)
Cross-reference:
Contracts, competitive bidding, see Charter § 5.32
§ 34.07 SPLIT ORDERS TO AVOID LIMITATIONS.
No person shall split any order for the purchase of personal property, real property, public
improvements or contractual services to avoid the limitations contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 207, passed 10-20-03)
§ 34.08 EMERGENCY PURCHASES.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a person with authority as described in §
34.01 may purchase or authorize purchases of personal property when unforeseeable circumstances or
combination of circumstances makes immediate action necessary provided that such purchases are
made as competitively as is practical under the circumstances. A written statement of the basis for the
emergency purchase and for the selection of the particular vendor or contractor shall be filed with the
City Clerk within three days after the purchase is made.
(Ord. 207, passed 10-20-03)
§ 34.09 PROCEDURES AND AUTHORITY MAY BE VARIED BY CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council may by motion duly adopted provide procedures and authority that differ from
the procedures and authority set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 207, passed 10-20-03)
CHAPTER 50: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND BIKE PATHS
Section
General Provisions
50.01 Definitions
50.02 Street naming and renaming
50.03 Vacating streets and alleys
Use of Streets and Street Rights-of-Way
50.10 Title; purpose
50.11 Use of streets by public utilities and private facilities; compliance required
50.12 Construction, excavation, repair, and maintenance; permit requirements
50.13 Construction, repair, and maintenance standards
50.14 Duty to repair or relocate utilities and facilities
50.15 Street closings and overhead banners; permit required
50.16 Regulated activities
Sidewalks
50.25 Purpose
50.26 Sidewalks required by zoning and subdivision ordinances
50.27 Sidewalks required by Council as public improvements
50.28 Construction or repair permit; bond
50.29 Construction and maintenance standards
50.30 Duty of property owner to maintain and repair; enforcement
50.31 Excavation or closing of sidewalks; permit required
50.32 Regulated activities
Bike Paths
50.45 Purpose
50.46 Construction standards
50.47 Duty of city to maintain
50.48 Excavation or closing of bike path; permit required
50.49 Regulated activities
50.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Public utility - public ways, see Charter § 5.26
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BIKE PATH. A bituminous surface, usually from eight feet to ten feet wide, in and over a portion
of street right-of-way or in and over an easement across private property, which surface is physically
separated from the nearest vehicular travel lane of a street by an open and unpaved space usually at
least five feet wide, and which is established for the use of pedestrians and persons riding bicycles;
sometimes known as a NON-MOTORIZED PATH.
BIKE PATH CROSSING. That part of a street at an intersection that is included within the
connections of the lateral lines of bike paths on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs or
in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable street.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
PARKWAY. That portion of the public street right-of-way which is open and unpaved.
PRIVATE FACILITY. Any construction or installation operation which benefits adjacent private
property, including a curb cut, driveway, mailbox and post, newspaper box and post, or monitor well, or
seismic testing, soil boring and similar items and operations.
PUBLIC UTILITY. A cable television, electric, natural gas, sewer, stormwater, telephone, or water
system or any appurtenance thereof.
PUBLIC UTILITY BUSINESS. A cable television, electric, natural gas, sewer, stormwater,
telephone or water system business which has received permission to operate in the city and which
serves customers in the city.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land dedicated to the public for street purposes, consisting of vehicular traffic
lanes and open and unpaved parkways either side of vehicular travel lanes.
SIDEWALK. A concrete surface, usually five feet wide, in and over a portion of street right-ofway
or in and over an easement across private property, which surface is physically separated from the
nearest vehicular travel lane of a street by an open and unpaved space usually at least five feet wide,
and which is established for the use of pedestrians and persons riding bicycles.
SIDEWALK CROSSING. That part of a street at an intersection that is included within the
connections of the lateral lines of sidewalks on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs or
in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable street.
(Ord. 133, passed 11-8-93; Am. Ord. 134, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 135, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 188,
passed 3-4-02)
§ 50.02 STREET NAMING AND RENAMING.
(A) All streets and avenues within the city shall be named and numbered by the City
Council.
(B) The City Council may change the name of any street or avenue in the city in the event of
a conflict of names or if, for any other reason, it is deemed by the City Council to be reasonable and
proper to do so. The following procedure shall be followed changing the name of the street, after the
Council adopts a resolution proposing the change.
(1) A notice of the proposed name change shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city at least 10 days prior to a hearing on said proposal, which notice shall
give the time and place of the public hearing on said proposal before the City Council.
(2) The City Council shall hear any objections to the proposal and shall thereafter
pass a resolution, either adopting said name change or rejecting it, provided, however, that inaction
within 30 days after the hearing shall constitute rejection of the proposal.
(3) The name of the street shall become changed upon the adoption of a resolution
making said change by the City Council.
(Ord. 33, passed 5-23-73)
§ 50.03 VACATING STREETS AND ALLEYS.
(A) Streets and alleys and parts thereof which are under the jurisdiction or owned by the
city may be approved for vacation after the following procedure has been completed:
(1) Public hearing.
(a) A public hearing is held by the Planning Commission.
(b) Notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at
least ten days before the hearing.
(c) Service of notice of the time and place of the hearing is mailed by first
class mail to all owners of property assessed for taxes which adjoins the street or alley.
(2) Planning Commission recommendation. A recommendation from the Planning
Commission is provided to the City Council recommending approval or disapproval.
(3) City Council action. City Council action approves or disapproves vacation.
(B) The City shall inform those requesting the vacation by mail of the decision of the
Council.
(C) Should the City Council by a majority vote vacate any street or alley in accordance with
this section, a resolution may provide for reservation of an easement for public utility or other public
purposes within the right-of-way of such street, alley or other public land vacated.
(D) Those parties seeking the vacation shall submit the Council approval (if granted) to the
Circuit Court for completion of the order of vacation, pursuant to the requirements and proceedings
provided for vacation of streets in the Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§
560.101 - 560.293.
(Ord. 46, passed 6-8-77; Am. Ord. 89, passed 2-22-84)
Statutory reference:
Circuit Court and vacation procedures, see M.C.L.A. §§ 560.221 et seq.
USE OF STREETS AND STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 50.10 TITLE; PURPOSE.
This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Streets and Street Rights-of-Way
Ordinance.” The city has constructed or caused to be constructed numerous public streets within public
street rights-of-way throughout the city. The city has also constructed, caused to be constructed, or
permitted to be constructed other public improvements and private facilities within public street rightsof-
way throughout the city. The city has determined to regulate all construction, repair, and
maintenance operations in, on, under, and over public streets and public street rights-of-way in the city
to protect the public health, safety and welfare of city residents and visitors.
(Ord. 135, passed 12-6-93)
§ 50.11 USE OF STREETS BY PUBLIC UTILITIES AND PRIVATE FACILITIES; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
The city may permit public utilities to utilize public street rights-of-way to conduct a public utility
business in the city for the benefit of city residents, as provided by the City Charter. From time to time,
the city may permit a person or persons to utilize public street rights-of-way for private facilities. A
public utility or a person desiring to receive or having received a permit to utilize public street rights-ofway
shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 135, passed 12-6-93)
Cross-reference:
Public utilities, see Charter §§ 5.23 et seq.
§ 50.12 CONSTRUCTION, EXCAVATION, REPAIR, AND MAINTENANCE; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
(A) A person, including a public utility authorized to conduct a public utility business in the
city by terms of a franchise agreement granted according to provisions of the city Charter, desiring to
construct, install, excavate, repair or maintain facilities in public street rights-of-way, including either a
paved or unpaved portion of the street right-of-way, shall apply to the city for a permit for same, on
forms provided by the city. An applicant shall submit proof of insurance covering the applicant for the
proposed operation in the street right-of-way, and naming the city as an additional insured for the
proposed operation. The City Manager or his or her designee may require an applicant to submit a bond
or other acceptable security for the prompt repair of any damage that may be caused by the proposed
operation. An applicant shall submit to the city plans and specifications regarding the proposed
operation in the street rights-of-way, in sufficient detail as determined by the City Manager or his or her
designee.
(B) An applicant shall submit with each permit application a fee as determined by the City
Council. The City Manager or his or her designee may request additional information from a permit
applicant in order to determine whether or not a permit shall be issued. The City Manager or his or her
designee shall either issue a permit as applied for, or shall deny the permit as applied for and shall state
the reasons for the permit denial. Application for a permit under the provisions of this subchapter shall
be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, to observe all
laws and regulations applicable thereto, to promptly repair any and all damage done to a public street
or a public street right-of-way, and to protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at
law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the
operations done under or in connection with the permit. Any permit issued under this subchapter shall
be revocable by the City Manager or his or her designee for failure to comply with the terms of the
issued permit. No permit shall be required under this subchapter for any operation or work done by an
authorized city employee under the supervision of the City Public Works Director.
(C) The permit described in subsections (A) and (B) above shall not be required to be issued
in advance in the case of emergency repair operations by a public utility authorized to conduct business
in the city. As soon as possible after any such emergency operations, but no later than 5:00 p.m. on the
next business day following such emergency operations, a public utility responsible for said operations
shall apply for a permit in accordance with subsections (A) and (B) above.
(Ord. 135, passed 12-6-93) Penalty, see § 50.99
Cross-reference:
Public utilities, see Charter §§ 5.23 et seq.
§ 50.13 CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
Any and all construction, repair and maintenance activities in, on, over or under a public street
or a public street right-of-way shall be in accordance with standard industry practices for public utilities
and in accordance with requirements as approved by the City Council. Such requirements shall be in
writing and shall be available to the public. Such requirements shall include the following regulations:
(A) Prior notification to the MISS DIG underground reporting system;
(B) Provision and operation of barricades and traffic control measures when necessary for
public safety;
(C) Notification to adjacent property owners who may be inconvenienced by an activity;
(D) Provision of a contact person to handle complaints from property owners, when
appropriate;
(E) Notification to the City Public Works Director regarding the status of any activity
permitted.
(Ord. 135, passed 12-6-93) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.14 DUTY TO REPAIR OR RELOCATE UTILITIES AND FACILITIES.
(A) Upon notice by the City Manager or his or her designee, a public utility or the owner of a
private facility shall repair its utilities or facilities which are located in, on, under, or over a public street
or a public street right-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the city.
(B) Upon notice by the City Manager or his or her designee, a public utility or the owner of a
private facility shall relocate its utilities or facilities which are located in, on, under, or over a public
street or a public street right-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the city.
(Ord. 135, passed 12-6-93) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.15 STREET CLOSINGS AND OVERHEAD BANNERS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
Any person desiring to close a portion of a public street or to display a banner over a public
street shall apply to the city for a permit for same, on forms provided by the city. The City Manager or
his or her designee shall follow, at his or her sole discretion, as many of the provisions of § 50.12(A)-(B)
above as may be appropriate for the activity for which a permit is being sought. The City Manager shall
either issue the permit as applied for, or shall deny the permit as applied for and shall state the reasons
for the permit denial.
(Ord. 135, passed 12-6-93) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.16 REGULATED ACTIVITIES.
(A) A person shall not trim a tree or shrub located on a public street right-of-way without a
permit for same as described in § 50.12(A)-(B).
(B) A person shall not cut a tree or shrub located on a public street right-of-way without a
permit for same as described in § 50.12(A)-(B) above.
(C) A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle, including any item trailered or towed by
a vehicle, including a delivery vehicle, on any public street right-of-way, except as otherwise provided by
law.
(D) A person shall not place any grass, grass clippings, leaves, brush, or branches on any
public street right-of-way, except immediately prior to a scheduled pick up of same by a public or private
hauler.
(E) A person shall not place any rubbish or trash or any other material, in or out of
containers, on any public street right-of-way, except immediately prior to a scheduled pick up of same
by a public or private hauler.
(F) A person shall not place any fence or sign on any public street right-of-way, except an
authorized city employee under the supervision of the City Public Works Director.
(G) A person shall not deposit ice and snow from private property onto any public street or
onto any public street right-of-way.
(H) A person shall not place trash containers, yard waste or other items or materials on or
intruding into a paved portion of a road right-of-way, including bicycle and pedestrian lanes.
(Ord. 135, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-3-05) Penalty, see § 50.99
Cross-reference:
Yard wastes, see § 93.01
Solid waste; container requirements, placement, time restrictions, see § 93.17
Parking regulations, see Ch. 72
SIDEWALKS
§ 50.25 PURPOSE.
This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Sidewalk Ordinance.” The city has
determined it to be in the public interest to have constructed one or more public sidewalks in public
street rights-of-way and in easements on and over private property to provide city residents and visitors
opportunities for safe and convenient non-motorized travel through the city. The city has determined to
regulate the construction, maintenance, operation and use of public sidewalks to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of city residents and visitors.
(Ord. 134, passed 12-6-93)
§ 50.26 SIDEWALKS REQUIRED BY ZONING AND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCES.
Whenever sidewalks are required to be constructed by provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of
the city, as amended, or by provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance of the city, as amended, this
subchapter shall govern the construction, maintenance, operation and use of said sidewalks.
(Ord. 134, passed 12-6-93)
§ 50.27 SIDEWALKS REQUIRED BY COUNCIL AS PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
The City Council may, by resolution, require the owners of lots and premises to construct
sidewalks in the public street right-of-way adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises as a
public improvement. In determining the construction of a sidewalk to be a public improvement, the City
Council shall follow the procedures set forth in the City Charter Ch. VII. This subchapter shall govern the
construction, maintenance, operation and use of said sidewalks.
(Ord. 134, passed 12-6-93)
§ 50.28 CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR PERMIT; BOND.
Before any person engages in the construction or repair of any sidewalk in the city, he or she
shall apply to the city for a sidewalk construction or repair permit on forms provided by the city. The
application shall be accompanied by a bond or deposit in such amount as determined by the City
Manager or his or her designee, conditioned on the faithful observance of all rules, regulations and
ordinances imposed by the city relating to sidewalk construction or repair, and shall hold the city free
from any loss, injury or damage by reason of the construction or repair of any sidewalk in the city. When
used in this subchapter, the term PERSON shall apply to individuals, partnerships, joint ventures,
associations and corporations.
(Ord. 134, passed 12-6-93) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.29 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
(A) A sidewalk may be installed along either side of any public street within the city, except
along either side of those public streets identified in § 50.46(A).
(B) All public sidewalks constructed in the city shall be constructed in accordance with
standard industry practices and in accordance with the specifications as established from time to time
by the City Council. Such rules and regulations shall be in writing and shall be available to the public.
(C) All maintenance and repairs to public sidewalks shall conform to standard industry
practices and to rules and regulations established from time to time by the City Council. Such rules and
regulations shall be in writing and shall be available to the public.
(Ord. 134, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 188, passed 3-4-02) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.30 DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER TO MAINTAIN AND REPAIR; ENFORCEMENT.
(A) The city will be responsible to maintain and repair all sidewalks within public rights-ofway
except that an adjacent property owner will be responsible to repair damage caused by the act of
negligence of the adjacent owner or guest or invitee. The city is not responsible for maintenance or
repair of sidewalks within private rights-of-way. Sidewalks within a public right-of-way for which private
owners have a responsibility of maintenance and repair pursuant to an agreement, a planned unit
development, or as stated in a master deed are to be maintained by the private owners or their
association.
(B) In the event that a sidewalk is damaged by the act or negligence of an adjacent owner
or guest or invitee and is not repaired then the City Manager or designee shall serve written notice upon
the owner or occupant. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
You will please take notice that, pursuant to City Code § 50.30, you are required to
repair and pay for the repair of the sidewalk abutting on the side of your property located at
____________ in the City of Ferrysburg and legally described as (insert legal description).
Said sidewalk shall be repaired in all respects in conformity with the provisions of the
Ferrysburg Sidewalk Ordinance, and the repairs shall be completed within 45 days of receipt of this
notice. If you fail to comply with this notice in the manner and time as required, the city will repair the
sidewalk and will charge you for the repairs and will collect the charges from you as provided by the
Ferrysburg Sidewalk Ordinance.
(C) The notice described in (B) above shall be served by first class mail to the property
owner listed on the latest tax roll.
(D) If any lot or premises in front of or adjacent to which any sidewalk is ordered to be
repaired is unoccupied by the owner, the occupant thereof cannot be found in the city, or the owner
thereof is unknown, then the City Manager or his or her designee shall serve notice by posting same in a
conspicuous manner on such lots or premises.
(E) Any person notified to repair a sidewalk shall do so within the time specified in the
notice and in the manner specified in the notice. In case any sidewalk is not repaired within the time
specified in the notice and in the manner specified, the City Manager or his or her designee shall arrange
for repair of same, and shall keep an accurate record of the costs and expenses of repairing the same.
The amount of such expenses, properly itemized, shall be sent to the owner or occupant of the property
on which or abutting upon which the sidewalk was repaired. If the owner or occupant of any such lot or
premises fails to pay the cost of such repair of the sidewalk within 30 days after notice from the city, the
costs and expenses plus 10% shall be reported to the City Assessor to be levied by him or her as a special
assessment upon the lots and premises adjoining and abutting such sidewalk. Such special assessment
shall be subject to review after proper notice is given as in all other cases of special assessments
prescribed by the City Charter, and such special assessment when confirmed shall be a lien upon the lots
and premises and shall be collected in the same manner as other city taxes, or the city may collect the
amount with the penalty aforesaid from the owner or occupants of the premises in an action in
assumpsit, together with costs of suit.
(Ord. 134, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 277, passed 6-17-13) Penalty, see § 50.99
Cross-reference:
City taxes, see Charter §§ 6.9 et seq.
Special assessments, see Charter Ch. VII
Public improvements; special assessment provisions, see §§ 33.01 et seq.
§ 50.31 EXCAVATION OR CLOSING OF SIDEWALKS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
Any person desiring to make any excavation in, on, under, or within two feet of a public
sidewalk, and any person desiring to close temporarily a public sidewalk, shall apply to the city for a
permit for same, on forms provided by the city. The City Manager or his or her designee may request
additional information from the permit applicant in order to determine whether or not a permit shall be
issued. The City Manager or his or her designee may request a permit applicant to submit proof of
insurance covering the applicant and the city, and to submit a bond or other acceptable security for the
prompt repair of any damage to a public sidewalk that may be caused by excavating in, on, under, or
within two feet of a public sidewalk. The City Manager or his or her designee shall either issue a permit
as applied for, or shall deny the permit as applied for and shall state the reasons for the permit denial.
Any permit issued under this subchapter shall be revocable by the City Manager or his or her designee
for failure to comply with the terms of the issued permit. The intent of this section is to keep at the
absolute minimum duration any disruption in the public's use of any public sidewalk.
(Ord. 134, passed 12-6-93) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.32 REGULATED ACTIVITIES.
(A) A person shall not operate a motor vehicle, including a moped, on or across a sidewalk
except to enter or to leave adjacent property, and except for authorized maintenance vehicles and
authorized emergency vehicles.
(B) A person shall not operate a snowmobile on or across a sidewalk except to cross a
sidewalk to enter or to leave a place where a snowmobile is otherwise permitted.
(C) A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle, including any item trailered or towed by
a vehicle, and including a delivery vehicle, on a sidewalk or on a sidewalk crossing, except to stop a
vehicle preparatory to entering an adjacent street and except for authorized emergency vehicles.
(D) A person using a public sidewalk shall yield to vehicles at sidewalk crossings at street
intersections.
(E) The driver of a vehicle shall yield to persons using a public sidewalk crossing the street
within a sidewalk crossing when a person is on the half of the street on which the vehicle is traveling or
when a person is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the street as to be in danger.
(F) The driver of a vehicle that is emerging from a driveway or parking area shall stop such
vehicle immediately before driving onto a public sidewalk which crosses a driveway or parking area and
shall yield to persons using a public sidewalk as may be necessary to avoid a collision. The driver of a
vehicle entering a driveway or parking area across which is located a public sidewalk shall yield to
persons using the sidewalk as may be necessary to avoid a collision.
(G) A bicyclist, skateboarder, or rollerblader using a public sidewalk shall yield to any
pedestrian using the sidewalk and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such
pedestrian.
(H) A person shall not ride or walk a horse or any other large animal on a public sidewalk.
For purposes of this section, a dog shall not be considered a large animal.
(I) A person walking a dog on a public sidewalk shall maintain control of the dog at all times
and shall, in the event that the dog deposits any fecal matter on the sidewalk, immediately and
completely remove such matter from the sidewalk.
(J) No person shall place any grass, grass clippings, leaves, brush, or branches on any public
sidewalk.
(K) No person shall place any rubbish or trash or any other material, in or out of containers,
on any public sidewalk.
(L) No person shall deposit any ice or snow on any public sidewalk, except for the incidental
placement of ice or snow by city street maintenance personnel in the course of plowing ice and snow
from streets adjacent to a public sidewalk.
(M) No person shall make any excavation in, on, under, or within two feet of a public sidewalk,
or cause any damage to any public sidewalk, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted
in this subchapter.
(N) No person shall cause any public sidewalk to be closed to public use, except under the
conditions and in the manner permitted in this subchapter.
(O) No person shall in any way interfere with the public's authorized use of any public
sidewalk.
(P) No person shall place or cause to be placed a mailbox and mailbox post or a newspaper
box and newspaper box post adjacent to a public sidewalk in such a manner that any portion of the
mailbox or newspaper box would overhang the sidewalk or present a danger to anyone using the
sidewalk in an authorized way.
(Q) No person shall place or cause to be placed a tree, bush, or shrub adjacent to a public
sidewalk in such a manner that any portion of the tree, bush, or shrub would overhang the sidewalk or
present a danger to anyone using the sidewalk in an authorized way.
(R) No person shall place or caused to be placed a fence, sign, or any other movable or nonmovable
object adjacent to a public sidewalk in such a manner that any portion of the fence, sign, or
other movable or non-movable object would overhang the sidewalk or present a danger to anyone using
the sidewalk in an authorized way.
(S) No person shall water sprinkle a lawn area adjacent to a public sidewalk in such a
manner that causes such sprinkling water to fall onto or to flow across a sidewalk at any time.
(T) No person shall willfully or maliciously, or wantonly and without cause, destroy, injure,
mutilate, deface, paint on, write on, alter, remove or otherwise damage or carry away any portion of a
public sidewalk or any sign relating to a public sidewalk.
(Ord. 134, passed 12-6-93) Penalty, see § 50.99
Cross-reference:
Animals; excrement control, see § 90.01
Dog control, see §§ 90.10 et seq.
Yard wastes, see § 93.01
Solid waste; container requirements, placement, time restrictions, see § 93.17
BIKE PATHS
§ 50.45 PURPOSE.
This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Bike Path Ordinance.” The city has
determined it to be in the public interest to construct one or more public bike paths in public rights-ofway
and in easements on and over private property to provide city residents and visitors opportunities
for safe and convenient non-motorized travel through the city. The city has determined to regulate the
construction, maintenance, operation and use of public bike paths to protect the public health, safety
and welfare of city residents and visitors.
(Ord. 133, passed 11-8-93)
§ 50.46 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
(A) A bike path may be installed only along either side of the following public streets within
the city:
(1) West Spring Lake Road: Lakeview Avenue to north city limits.
(2) Third Street: Oak Street to 174th Avenue.
(3) 174th Avenue: Third Street to Dogwood Drive.
(4) 174th Avenue: Dogwood Drive to VanWagoner Road.
(5) Dogwood Drive: Mohawk Drive to north city limits.
(6) VanWagoner Road: 174th Avenue to 168th Avenue.
(7) North Shore Road: 174th Avenue to North Shore Estates Road.
(8) North Shore Drive: North Shore Estates Road to south city limits.
(B) A bike path may not be installed along either side of any public street within the city
which is not described in subsection (A) above.
(C) Except for sidewalks already installed on the effective date of this section, a sidewalk
may not be installed along either side of the public streets within the city described in subsection (A)
above.
(D) All public bike paths constructed in the city shall be constructed in accordance with the
specifications for the construction of public bike paths as approved by the City Council. Such
specifications may include federal, state, and local design criteria, or any combination thereof, at the
sole discretion of the City Council. Such specifications shall be in writing and shall be available to the
public.
(Ord. 133, passed 11-8-93; Am. Ord. 188, passed 3-4-02) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.47 DUTY OF CITY TO MAINTAIN.
Public bike paths constructed in the city shall be maintained by the city in a reasonably safe
condition for authorized use by the public. The city shall take such reasonable actions as it deems
necessary and prudent to keep public bike paths open and accessible to public use, but the city does not
warrant that all bike paths will be open and accessible for public use at all times. Within the constraints
of the city's annual operating budget, the city shall keep bike path surfaces free of debris and
deleterious material; keep areas over and adjacent to bike paths free of obstructions and overhanging
impediments; and replace and restore directional, informational, and regulatory bike path signage.
(Ord. 133, passed 11-8-93)
§ 50.48 EXCAVATION OR CLOSING OF BIKE PATH; PERMIT REQUIRED.
Any person desiring to make any excavation in, on, under, or within two feet of a public bike
path, and any person desiring to close temporarily a public bike path, shall apply to the city for a permit
for same, on forms provided by the city. The City Manager or his or her designee may request additional
information from the permit applicant in order to determine whether or not a permit shall be issued.
The City Manager or his or her designee may request a permit applicant to submit proof of insurance
covering the applicant and the city, and to submit a bond or other acceptable security for the prompt
repair of any damage to a public bike path that may be caused by excavating in, on, under, or within two
feet of a public bike path. The City Manager or his or her designee shall either issue a permit as applied
for, or shall deny the permit as applied for and shall state the reasons for the permit denial. Any permit
issued under this subchapter shall be revocable by the City Manager or his or her designee for failure to
comply with the terms of the issued permit. The intent of this section is to keep at the absolute
minimum duration any disruption in the public's use of any public bike path.
(Ord. 133, passed 11-8-93) Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.49 REGULATED ACTIVITIES.
(A) A person shall not operate a motor vehicle, including a moped, on or across a bike path
except to enter or to leave adjacent property, and except for authorized maintenance vehicles and
authorized emergency vehicles.
(B) A person shall not operate a snowmobile on or across a bike path except to cross a bike
path to enter or to leave a place where a snowmobile is otherwise permitted.
(C) A person shall not stop, stand, or park a vehicle, including any item trailered or towed by
a vehicle, and including a delivery vehicle, on a bike path or on a bike path crossing, except to stop a
vehicle preparatory to entering an adjacent street and except for authorized emergency vehicles.
(D) A person using a public bike path shall observe posted bike path stop signs and shall
yield to vehicles at bike path crossings at street intersections.
(E) The driver of a vehicle shall yield to persons using a public bike path crossing the street
within a bike path crossing when a person is on the half of the street on which the vehicle is traveling or
when a person is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the street as to be in danger.
(F) The driver of a vehicle that is emerging from a driveway or parking area shall stop such
vehicle immediately before driving onto a public bike path which crosses a driveway or parking area and
shall yield to persons using a public bike path as may be necessary to avoid a collision. The driver of a
vehicle entering a driveway or parking area across which is located a public bike path shall yield to
persons using the public bike path as may be necessary to avoid a collision.
(G) A bicyclist, skateboarder, or rollerblader using a public bike path shall yield to any
pedestrian using the public bike path and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such
pedestrian.
(H) A person shall not ride or walk a horse or any other large animal on a public bike path.
For purposes of this section, a dog shall not be considered a large animal.
(I) A person walking a dog on a public bike path shall maintain control of the dog at all
times and shall, in the event that the dog deposits any fecal matter on a public bike path, immediately
and completely remove such matter from the public bike path.
(J) No person shall place any grass, grass clippings, leaves, brush, or branches on any public
bike path.
(K) No person shall place any rubbish or trash or any other material, in or out of containers,
on any public bike path.
(L) No person shall deposit any ice or snow on any public bike path, except for the
incidental placement of ice or snow by city street maintenance personnel in the course of plowing ice
and snow from streets adjacent to a public bike path.
(M) No person shall make any excavation in, on, under, or within two feet of a public bike
path, or cause any damage to any public bike path, except under the conditions and in the manner
permitted in this subchapter.
(N) No person shall cause any public bike path to be closed to public use, except under the
conditions and in the manner permitted in this subchapter.
(O) No person shall in any way interfere with the public's authorized use of any public bike
path.
(P) No person shall place or cause to be placed a mailbox and mailbox post or a newspaper
box and newspaper box post closer than two feet to the lateral edge of any public bike path.
(Q) No person shall place or cause to be placed a tree, bush, or shrub closer than two feet to
the lateral edge of any public bike path.
(R) No person shall place or cause to be placed a fence, sign, or any other movable or nonmovable
object closer than two feet to the lateral edge of any public bike path.
(S) No person shall water sprinkle a lawn area adjacent to a public bike path in such a
manner that causes such sprinkling water to fall onto or to flow across a public bike path at any time.
(T) No person shall willfully or maliciously, or wantonly and without cause, destroy, injure,
mutilate, deface, paint on, write on, alter, remove or otherwise damage or carry away any portion of a
public bike path or any sign relating to a public bike path.
(Ord. 133, passed 11-8-93) Penalty, see § 50.99
Cross-reference:
Animals; excrement control, see § 90.01
Dog control, see §§ 90.10 et seq.
Yard wastes, see § 93.01
Solid waste; container requirements, placement, time restrictions, see § 93.17
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, or the requirements of a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished as provided in § 10.99. The city may also seek such injunctive relief as may be appropriate.
Any activity in violation of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance per se.
(Ord. 133, passed 11-8-93; Am. Ord. 134, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 135, passed 12-6-93; Am. Ord. 184,
passed 8-20-01)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
51.01 Title
51.02 Definitions
51.03 Purpose and policy
51.04 Discharge of waste and wastewater
51.05 Private sewage disposal
51.06 Protection from damage
51.07 Falsification of information
51.08 Installation requirements
Connections to Public Sewer
51.20 Connections regulated
51.21 Permit, authorization, and inspection requirements
51.22 Cost of installation and maintenance
51.23 Application for connection permit; fees
51.24 Sanitary sewer service lines
51.25 Design and construction requirements
51.26 Inspection of work; connection to sewer
51.27 Excavations; restoration of property
51.28 City and administrative liability
Use of Public Sewers
51.40 Unpolluted and other restricted discharges
51.41 Permitted discharges regulated
51.42 Dilution of discharge
51.43 Nondomestic-user disclosure requirements
51.44 Preliminary treatment facilities
51.45 Grease, oil, and sand interceptors
51.46 Sampling facilities
51.47 Industrial surveillance; charges
51.48 Surcharge for nondomestic users
51.49 Pretreatment standards; compliance reporting
51.50 Spill prevention and notice; containment facilities
51.51 Publication of list of noncomplying users
Sewer Rates and Billing
51.65 Title
51.66 Definition
51.67 Connection to system
51.68 Sewer connection fees and charges
51.69 Sewer use rates
51.70 Billing procedures; discontinuing service
51.71 Fiscal year
51.72 Records and reports
51.73 City and administrative liability
Administration and Enforcement
51.85 Right of entry
51.86 Legal action
51.87 Suspension of service
51.88 Violations and public nuisance; user liability
51.89 Conflicts
51.90 Regulatory authority
51.91 Administrative liability
51.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Municipal powers - utility powers, see Charter § 2.3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Sewer Usage and Administration
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTHORITY. The Grand Haven-Spring Lake Sewer Authority.
BOD5 (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C expressed in parts
per million by weight or in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drain system which receives
discharge from drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to and is connected with the
building sewer. The BUILDING DRAIN shall be deemed to end five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER. The extension of the building drain which begins five feet outside the inner
face of the building wall and continues to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation
of organic and inorganic matter under standard laboratory procedure at 20°C, expressed in parts per
million by weight or in milligrams per liter.
COMBINED SEWER. A public sewer receiving both storm, surface and groundwaters and
wastewater.
EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Liquid waste from industrial processes.
NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch or other body of surface or
groundwater.
NORMAL SANITARY SEWAGE. Wastewater having a strength which is less than 200 parts per
million of biochemical oxygen demand or 250 parts per million by weight of suspended solids.
PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer owned or controlled by the city as well as the portion of any sewer
owned or controlled by any other public body corporate which is located within the city boundaries.
SANITARY SEWER. A public sewer which carries wastewater and in which storm, surface and
groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER. A pipe or conduit carrying wastewater and/or storm, surface and groundwater.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A public sewer which carries storm, surface and groundwaters
but excludes wastewater.
UNCONTAMINATED INDUSTRIAL PROCESS WATER. Wastewater which does not come into
contact with any substance used in or incidental to industrial processing operations and to which no
chemical or other substance has been added.
USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into a
public sewer.
WASTEWATER. Water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, industrial
establishments and/or other premises together with such infiltration as may be present.
WASTEWATER SYSTEM. The wastewater treatment plant, all facilities of the Authority and the
city for collecting, sampling, monitoring and pumping wastewater, and all facilities for collecting,
sampling, monitoring or pumping wastewater that are owned or controlled by any other public body
corporate whose wastewater is treated by the wastewater treatment plant.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. The Authority Wastewater Treatment Plant, 1525
Washington Street, Grand Haven, Michigan.
WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.03 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
(A) This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater system and
enables the city and the Authority to protect public health in conformity with all applicable local, state
and federal laws relating thereto.
(B) The objectives of this chapter are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will
interfere with its normal operation or contaminate the resulting municipal sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which do
not receive adequate treatment in the wastewater treatment plant, and which will pass through the
wastewater system into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the
wastewater system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from
the wastewater system; and
(4) To meet the requirements of the EPA and the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.04 DISCHARGE OF WASTE AND WASTEWATER.
The discharge or depositing of waste and wastewater shall be restricted and regulated as
follows:
(A) No person shall place, deposit or discharge any waste or wastewater upon any public or
private property in the city.
(B) No person shall discharge to any natural outlet in the city any wastes or wastewater
unless such discharge is specifically permitted and approved in writing by the state, county, or other
governmental agency having jurisdiction.
(C) No person shall construct, maintain or use any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater unless the same is specifically permitted
and approved in writing by the state, county or other governmental agency having jurisdiction.
(D) For reasons of public health, any structure in which wastewater originates lying within
the city shall be connected to any available sanitary sewer or combined sewer within 18 months after (1)
written notice is given to the owner by certified mail by the city of availability of a sanitary sewer or
combined sewer and (2) compliance with any notice or other requirements specified by state law. For
purposes of this subsection, a sanitary sewer or combined sewer shall be considered to be available
when it is located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins, or
abuts upon the property in question and passes not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from a
structure in which wastewater originates. For purposes of this subsection, the phrase STRUCTURE IN
WHICH WASTEWATER ORIGINATES shall mean a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or
other facilities that generate wastewater are used or are available for use for household, commercial,
industrial or other purposes. If the structure in which wastewater originates has not been connected to
an available sanitary sewer or combined sewer within such 18-month period, then the city shall proceed
in accordance with applicable state law to require connection to be made forthwith. In so proceeding,
the city shall have the rights and remedies provided in the applicable state law, as well as all rights and
remedies provided by this chapter.
(E) All discharges of waste or wastewater and actions by or against a user in relation
thereto shall be subject to the requirements and provisions of the Authority's rules and regulations, as
well as the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.05 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
Private sewage disposal shall be restricted and regulated as follows:
(A) If a house, building or other premises used for human occupancy, employment,
recreation or other purposes is not connected to a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer, then the
building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system permitted and approved by
the county health department and, where appropriate, the State Health Department and/or the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(B) At such time as connection is made to a sanitary sewer or a combined sewer, all septic
tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be disconnected and abandoned.
(C) All persons shall operate and maintain private wastewater disposal facilities in a safe
and sanitary manner at all times at no cost to the city.
(D) This section shall not be construed to preclude additional requirements that may be
imposed by the Authority, or state or county government, or to excuse compliance with such
requirements.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.06 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
No unauthorized person shall enter or maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, equipment or other part of the
wastewater system.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.07 FALSIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
Any person who knowingly makes any false representation, statements or certification in any
application, report, record, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring or sampling
device shall be punished as set forth in § 51.99.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.08 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) All public sewer mains shall be installed in a public right-of-way or easement and shall
be constructed and installed in accordance with the written requirements of the Director of the
Department of Public Works. Unless waived in writing by the Director of the Department of Public
Works, all sewer mains shall run the entire distance along which the parcel that benefits from the sewer
main adjoins the public right-of-way or easement.
(B) No parcel may be serviced by the public sanitary sewer system unless the parcel abuts
the public right-of-way or easement in which the sewer main lies.
(Ord. 226, passed --)
CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWER
§ 51.20 CONNECTIONS REGULATED.
All building sewers, building drains and connections to the public sewer shall be restricted and
regulated as set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.21 PERMIT, AUTHORIZATION, AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.
No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the city. No
connection shall be made to a public sewer which will result in the discharge of industrial waste without
the prior written approval of the Authority. No building sewer shall be covered until after it has been
inspected and approved by the city as being adequate and having acceptable construction, size and
location.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.22 COST OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
The owner shall be responsible, at his or her cost and expense, for the installation, connection
and maintenance of the building sewer to its connection with the public sewer.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.23 APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION PERMIT; FEES.
Application for a permit to connect to the public sewer shall be made on appropriate forms
provided by the city. The application shall be supplemented by such plans, specifications or other
information as the city shall reasonably require. The City Council shall establish permit and inspection
fees by resolution. Such permit and inspection fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed. The
city may refuse to grant a permit to connect if the city shall determine the public sewer system, the
wastewater treatment facilities or the treatment plant do not have adequate capacity or capability to
accommodate the proposed connection.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.24 SANITARY SEWER SERVICE LINES.
(A) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each building or
premises, provided that where one building or premises stands at the rear of another on an interior lot
and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building or premises through an
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to
the rear buildings or premises.
(B) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings and premises only
when they are found on inspection by the city to be of adequate construction, size and location.
(C) For purposes of this section, the term PREMISES refers to every building or area of a
building that is capable of single-family or single-business use.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93; Am. Ord. 240, passed 9-4-07) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.25 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of buildings or premises, and the
methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall
conform to the requirements of the city building and plumbing codes.
(B) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to a building at an elevation
below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by a building drain shall be lifted by a pump or other suitable
device provided by the city and discharged to the building sewer. The cost of such pump or other
suitable device shall be paid by the sewer customer. Such pump or other suitable device shall be
maintained in good condition and repair by the sewer customer and the sewer customer shall pay all
charges and expenses for the operation of the pump or other suitable device.
(C) The connection of the building sewer into the sanitary sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the city building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city, and the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and
Materials and the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, all as amended from
time to time. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from these
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation.
(D) The basement floor level of all new structures from which it is anticipated that
wastewater or industrial wastes shall emanate shall be at such level that such wastewater and wastes
can flow by gravity to any sanitary sewer in the adjoining street connected with an invert eight feet
below the centerline of the street. In the alternative, a pump or other suitable device shall be installed
and maintained as provided in subsection (B) of this section to lift the wastewater or industrial wastes to
the level of the sanitary sewer. An acceptable wastewater outlet facing the street where a sanitary
sewer is available, or is proposed to be made available, shall be provided in all new structures.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
Cross-reference:
Building and plumbing codes, see Ch. 150
§ 51.26 INSPECTION OF WORK; CONNECTION TO SEWER.
The applicant for a sewer construction permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the city. No backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved by
the city.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.27 EXCAVATIONS; RESTORATION OF PROPERTY.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to their prior condition.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.28 CITY AND ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.
The owner shall indemnify and hold the city and its employees, agents and representatives free
and harmless from any and all liability or responsibility for all injury, loss or damage that may result
directly or indirectly from the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 51.40 UNPOLLUTED AND OTHER RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
(A) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary sewer any storm
water, surface water, or groundwater. If an industry makes adequate provision for the disposal of its
industrial wastes other than by discharging such wastes into the public sewer, and if such disposal is
approved by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, the Authority and all other governmental
agencies having jurisdiction, then the city may, by resolution, excuse such industry from depositing its
industrial wastes into the public sewer.
(B) Storm water, groundwater, surface water, and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged only to combined sewers, storm sewers, dry wells or natural outlets. The discharge of cooling
water or uncontaminated industrial process water to a natural outlet shall only be permitted when
permitted and approved in writing by the state, county or other governmental agency having
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.41 PERMITTED DISCHARGES REGULATED.
(A) No person who is required by the Authority, pursuant to its rules and regulations, as
amended, to have a discharge permit shall discharge or cause to be discharged any wastewater or
waste unless such permit is currently in force and the discharge is in full compliance with all conditions
or restrictions which are contained in such permit. In addition, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any wastewater or waste which: prevents effective operation of the wastewater system; will
pass through the wastewater treatment plant or otherwise be incompatible with the wastewater
treatment plant; is prohibited by any federal or state law, rule, regulation, permit requirement or
standard which is applicable to the Authority or the wastewater system; or is prohibited by the
Authority's rules and regulations. With respect to such wastewater or waste, the city and/or the
Authority shall have the option to:
(1) Reject the waste or wastewater;
(2) Require satisfactory pretreatment as provided in the Authority's rules and
regulations; and/or
(3) Require, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or the Authority's rules
and regulations, the payment of extra charges to the city and/or the Authority to pay for the added
costs of handling and treating the waste or wastewater.
(B) The city shall have the right, at any time, by resolution to exclude from the wastewater
treatment plant all or a portion of the industrial waste or wastewater of city customers, provided,
however, that no such action shall be taken by the city until it shall have first determined that such
action is necessary in order to permit non-industrial waste or wastewater in the city to be treated by the
wastewater treatment plant.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.42 DILUTION OF DISCHARGE.
Except as expressly authorized under applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
promulgated by the EPA, no user shall increase the use of potable or process water nor mix separate
waste streams for the purpose of diluting a discharge, or otherwise dilute a discharge in any way, as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set
forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.43 NONDOMESTIC-USER DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.
All nondomestic users proposing to connect to or to contribute wastewater or waste to the
wastewater system shall submit such information as the city and/or the Authority shall reasonably
request on their processes and wastewater before connecting to or contributing to the wastewater
system. All existing nondomestic users connected to or contributing to the wastewater system shall
promptly submit such information on their processes and wastewater as the city and/or the Authority
shall reasonably request. The information submitted shall be sufficient for the city and the Authority to
determine the impact of the user's discharge on the wastewater system and the need for pretreatment
and shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing disclosure requirements, the information which may be required pursuant to this section may
include any or all of the information required pursuant to the Authority's rules and regulations, or to
applicable state or federal law.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.44 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES.
(A) Where the waste or wastewater is required to be pretreated by the provisions of this
chapter and/or the Authority's rules and regulations, the user shall provide, at his or her expense, such
preliminary treatment as required pursuant to the Authority's rules and regulations and/or as shall be
necessary to reduce the objectionable characteristics or constituents of the waste or wastewater or
control the quantities and rates of discharge of the waste or wastewater so that the wastewater system
can operate effectively and in conformance with all federal and/or state laws, rules, regulations, permit
requirements or standards which are applicable to the wastewater system. Plans, specifications, and
other pertinent information relating to the proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be prepared
and submitted by a registered engineer for approval by the city and the Authority, and no construction
of such facilities shall be commenced until approval is given in writing by both the city and the Authority.
Review of the submitted plans, specifications and other information shall be completed within a
reasonable time. Where preliminary treatment is required by this section, and the user is already
discharging waste or wastewater into the wastewater system, then the user shall, at the request of the
city and/or the Authority, agree to a compliance schedule which shall specify by date those items which
are to be accomplished by the user to complete all necessary preliminary treatment facilities and to
bring the waste and wastewater being discharged into compliance with all requirements of this chapter
and the Authority's rules and regulations.
(B) Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any wastewater or waste, such
facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the user at his or her
cost. The person operating and maintaining such facilities shall, at the request of the Authority and/or
the city, submit to the requesting party records or true copies thereof of the samplings taken from
wastewater and waste discharged and such other reports and information as shall be necessary to
assess and assure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.45 GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Authority or the
city's engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Authority and/or the city and shall be located so as to be
readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. Such
interceptors shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers
which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall
be maintained by the owner, at the owner's expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
Nothing contained in this section shall limit the effect or excuse full compliance with other provisions of
this chapter or of the Authority's rules and regulations, including, without limitation, any limitation on or
prohibition against introduction of wastes into the wastewater system, any pretreatment requirements
and/or any permitting requirements.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.46 SAMPLING FACILITIES.
When required by the city and/or the Authority to assure adequate monitoring and control of
the waste or wastewater discharge, the user of any building or premises served by a building sewer shall
install a suitable control vault or station in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the waste or wastewater being discharged. Such control vault or station shall be
equipped by the user with a suitable composite sampler and continuous flow recorder. Such vault or
station shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved in writing by the Authority. Such vault or station shall be installed by the user at his or her cost
and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The person operating
and maintaining such facilities shall, at the request of the Authority or the city, submit to the requesting
party records or true copies thereof of the wastewater or waste discharged and such other reports and
information as shall be necessary to assess and assure compliance with this chapter and with the
Authority's rules and regulations.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.47 INDUSTRIAL SURVEILLANCE; CHARGES.
(A) With respect to all users that are required to maintain preliminary treatment facilities or
sampling facilities pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or the Authority's rules and
regulations, the city, acting itself or through the Authority, shall institute a program pursuant to which
the city or Authority personnel, as the case may be, periodically check and assess, through the taking of
their own samplings, the accuracy and completeness of the sampling records and other reports and
information provided to the city and the Authority. The cost and expense incurred by the city in
conducting this program of periodic review or having the Authority conduct the program on its behalf
shall be recovered from an industrial surveillance charge to be established by the city or the Authority
from time to time by resolution. The amount of this charge shall be determined for each sewer
customer or class of sewer customers to which it applies and shall be billed by the city as part of each
affected sewer customer's periodic sewer billing.
(B) If, based upon such review, the city or the Authority determines that the sampling
records or other reports and information provided to it/them by a user are not substantially accurate,
the city and/or the Authority may institute such sampling, laboratory analysis and other procedures as
are determined necessary to accurately sample and measure the waste and wastewater being
discharged. All expenses and charges incurred by the city itself or by the Authority for such sampling,
review and analysis shall be charged by the city or the Authority to the affected sewer customer.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.48 SURCHARGE FOR NONDOMESTIC USERS.
(A) All nondomestic users of the public sewers shall pay a surcharge for the discharge of
wastewater or waste containing more BOD5, COD, phosphorus or suspended solids than the threshold
amount, with the exception that a surcharge can be made for either BOD5 or COD, whichever is the
greater dollar cost, but not for both.
(B) The threshold for and amount of such surcharge shall be established periodically by the
Authority. The surcharge shall be calculated and billed quarterly by the city as part of the affected sewer
customer's periodic sewer billing.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.49 PRETREATMENT STANDARDS; COMPLIANCE REPORTING.
(A) Pretreatment standards. Upon the promulgation of any final federal or state
pretreatment standards or discharge limits for a particular industrial category or subcategory, such
standards or limits, if more stringent than the requirements of this chapter or the Authority's rules and
regulations, shall be automatically incorporated as part of this chapter, shall be considered to supersede
the requirements thereof, and shall become effective when specified by the promulgating agency. The
Authority, on behalf of the city, shall notify all affected users of the applicable standards or limits.
(B) Pretreatment compliance reporting. Users shall submit reports to the Authority as
required by or pursuant to its rules and regulations. Upon request by the city, a user shall provide a copy
of any such report to the city.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.50 SPILL PREVENTION AND NOTICE; CONTAINMENT FACILITIES.
(A) When required by the city and/or the Authority to assure adequate protection for the
wastewater system from accidental spills of critical or hazardous materials, the user shall develop and
submit to the city and the Authority an adequate spill prevention plan as required by and subject to the
provisions of the Authority's rules and regulations. The adequacy of such plan shall be determined by
the Authority. The city and/or the Authority may require, as part of such plan, that the user provide, at
his or her expense, suitable containment facilities within a time period specified by the city and/or the
Authority. Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to the proposed containment
facilities shall be prepared and submitted for approval by the Authority, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until approval by the Authority is given in writing. Such containment
facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory condition by the user at his or her cost.
(B) In the case of an accidental spill, the user shall give such notice and take such other
actions as required by the Authority's rules and regulations.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93) Penalty, see § 51.99
§ 51.51 PUBLICATION OF LIST OF NONCOMPLYING USERS.
The city or the Authority shall annually publish in the Grand Haven Tribune a list of the users
which significantly violated any National Categorical Pretreatment Standard promulgated by the EPA or
which otherwise has been determined by the Authority to be in significant noncompliance during the 12
previous months. This notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user
during the same 12 months. In addition, a list of all industrial users which were the subject of
enforcement proceedings pursuant to this chapter and/or the Authority's rules and regulations during
the 12 previous months shall be published annually by the city and/or by the Authority in the Grand
Haven Tribune. This notification shall summarize the enforcement actions taken against those users
which during the previous 12 months had violations that remained uncorrected 45 or more days after
notification of noncompliance; or which have exhibited a pattern of noncompliance over that 12-month
period, or which involve failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
SEWER RATES AND BILLING
§ 51.65 TITLE.
This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Sewer Rate Ordinance.”
(Ord. 65, passed 1-23-80)
§ 51.66 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
SYSTEM. All sewer lines, lift stations, pumping facilities, sewer collection facilities and their
appurtenances which the city has or shall have possession of and operating responsibility for (whether
owned by the city or not), either now in existence in the city or hereafter acquired or constructed in the
city, together with all works, plants, instrumentalities and properties used or useful in connection
therewith in collecting sewage and transmitting and conveying such collected sewage to sewage
disposal facilities, and all extensions, enlargements and improvements thereto in the city.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-23-80)
§ 51.67 CONNECTION TO SYSTEM.
Connection to the system, directly or indirectly, and the discharge of sewage into the system,
shall only be in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-23-80)
§ 51.68 SEWER CONNECTION FEES AND CHARGES.
(A) Connection fee. The city shall charge a connection fee for each connection to the sewer
system. Connection fees shall be established and modified by resolution of the City Council. The
connection fee will be based on the size of the water meter serving the premises and upon any
subsequent enlargements of water meter size. Residential premises that are served by the public sewer
system but not by the public water system will pay a connection fee based on a 3/4 inch meter. Nonresidential
uses that are served by the public sewer system but not by the public water system will pay a
connection fee as established by resolution of the City Council. Sewer connection fees paid for a
connection will not be refunded in the event of a subsequent reduction in water meter size or
disconnection from the system. A sewer connection fee is to be paid at the time a building permit or
construction permit is issued.
(B) Frontage charge. Those premises adjacent to a system sewer line which either (1) have
not been included in a special assessment district to pay the cost of such line; or (2) have been included
in a special assessment district but have not been assessed for the sewer main which will provide sewer
service, shall pay a frontage charge to connect to the system. No frontage charge shall be made where
the system main adjacent to the connecting premises was constructed as part of a development or
project in which the premises are located and when a private party or the city on behalf of and at the
expense of a private party has constructed such main. Frontage charges shall be established and
modified by resolution of the City Council. A frontage charge is to be paid at the time a building permit
or construction permit is issued.
(C) Lateral charge. A sewer lateral charge shall be assessed for each installation of a sewer
lateral from the sewer main to the property line. The sewer lateral charges shall be established by
resolution of the City Council and shall be paid when a building permit or construction permit is issued.
In the event that the installation is completed by a private contractor at the expense of the owner, then
the city may charge for inspection of the work at a rate established and modified from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. Such charge shall be paid at the time a building permit or construction
permit is issued.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-23-80; Am. Ord. 240, passed 9-4-07)
Cross-reference:
Public improvements; special assessments, see §§ 33.01 et seq.
Water connection charges, see § 52.35
§ 51.69 SEWER USE RATES.
Rates for sewer service for each premises connected to the system shall be established and
adjusted from time to time by City Council resolution. No free service shall be furnished by the system to
the city or to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or
instrumentality. The city shall pay for sewer service supplied to it or any of its departments or agencies
at the rates established pursuant to this section from time to time.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-23-80)
Cross-reference:
Water rates, see § 52.37
§ 51.70 BILLING PROCEDURES; DISCONTINUING SERVICE.
Charges for sewer service shall be billed, mailed and shall come due in accordance with a
resolution by the City Council. Bills not paid on or before a due date shall be subject to a quarterly
charge equal to 6% of the unpaid amount. Customers whose bills are not paid within five days after the
due date shall be mailed a reminder bill. If the reminder bill is not paid within ten days after the date of
mailing of such reminder bill, then if the premises are served by public water, a 72-hour shut-off notice
shall be mailed. If the bill is not paid within 72 hours after the date of mailing of such shut-off notice, the
customer’s public sewer service may be turned off immediately without further notice. A charge
established by resolution of the City Council shall then be charged to the customer and shall be paid
together with all unpaid charges before the service is restored. Sewer use and service charges,
connection fees, frontage charges and lateral charges shall constitute a lien on the property served. On
or before May 1 of each year, the City Treasurer shall deliver to the City Clerk a certified statement of all
sewer use and service charges, connection fees, frontage and lateral charges and interest charges
thereon six months or more past due and unpaid. The City Clerk shall then place charges on the next
general tax roll and the same shall be collected and said lien shall be enforced as provided for general
city taxes.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-23-80; Am. Ord. 194, passed 7-15-02; Am. Ord. 240, passed 9-4-07)
Cross-reference:
Similar provisions regarding water service, see § 52.38
Statutory reference:
Delinquent charges as a lien; enforcement and exceptions regarding service to tenants, see
M.C.L.A. § 141.121
§ 51.71 FISCAL YEAR.
The system shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year beginning July 1 of each year and
ending June 30 of the next year.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-23-80)
Cross-reference:
Similar provision regarding water system, see § 52.39
§ 51.72 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
The city shall cause to be maintained and kept proper books of record and account in which
shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the operation of the system. Not less
than six months after the close of each fiscal year of the system, the city shall cause to be prepared a
statement in reasonable detail showing the cash income and disbursements of the system at the
beginning and the close of the operating year and such other information as shall be necessary to enable
any taxpayer of the city, user or beneficiary of the service provided by the system to be fully informed as
to all matters pertaining to the financial operation of the system during such fiscal year. Such annual
statement shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk where it shall be open to public inspection. These
books of record and account shall be audited annually by a certified public accountant to be designated
by the City Council and a certified copy of this audit shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such audit may be a
part of the general city audit.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-23-80)
Cross-reference:
Similar provision regarding water system, see § 52.40
§ 51.73 CITY AND ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.
(A) The city shall not be liable for any failure or deficiency in the operation of the system
whether occasioned by maintenance or repair of the system or any other cause.
(B) No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself or herself as personally
liable for any damages that may accrue to any person as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her duties under and in the enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 65, passed 1-23-80)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.85 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The city and its employees and agents, and the Authority and its employees and agents, when
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted, with or without advance notice, to
enter in and upon buildings and premises as may be necessary for the purposes of inspection,
surveillance, measurement, sampling and testing to determine compliance with this chapter, or to take
any actions reasonably necessary to protect the wastewater system or the health, safety and welfare of
employees of the waste water treatment plant or the public.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.86 LEGAL ACTION.
If any person discharges wastewater or waste into the wastewater system contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the city, or the Authority on its behalf, may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.87 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Authority and/or the city may, for good
cause shown, suspend the wastewater treatment service to a user when it appears to the Authority
and/or the city, as the case may be, that an actual or threatened discharge presents or threatens an
imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, or a substantial danger to the
environment, interferes with the operation of the wastewater system, or violates any pretreatment
limits imposed by this chapter. Any user notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment service shall,
within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Authority and/or the city, whichever has given
the notice, cease all discharges. In the event of failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order within the specified time, the city, or the Authority on its behalf, may commence
judicial proceedings immediately thereafter to compel the user's compliance with such order. The city
and the Authority shall reinstate the wastewater treatment service and terminate judicial proceedings
upon proof by the user of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the
threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth above.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.88 VIOLATIONS AND PUBLIC NUISANCE; USER LIABILITY.
(A) Public nuisance. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
per se. Accordingly, the court shall, by injunction, order such nuisance abated and the user shall be
adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se.
(B) Recovery of costs. Any user violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the
wastewater system, shall be liable to the city and/or the Authority for any expense, loss, or damage
caused by such violation or discharge. The city and/or the Authority shall bill the user for the costs
incurred by the city and/or the Authority, as the case may be, for any cleaning, repair, or replacement
work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation
of this chapter, enforceable as provided herein and also by appropriate legal action.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.89 CONFLICTS.
Where provisions of any state or Authority law, rule or regulation, or any other provision of this
code impose greater restrictions or higher standards than contained in this chapter, then the provisions
of such law, rule, or regulation shall control.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.90 REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
The city may, from time to time, adopt by resolution rules and regulations governing
operational, maintenance and technical matters relating to the public sewer system. Violation of any
such rule or regulation shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties
and other remedies prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.91 ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.
No officer, agent or employee of the city or the Authority or member of the City Council or the
Authority Board shall render himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to any
person as a result of any acts, decisions or other consequences or occurrences arising out of the
discharge of their duties and responsibilities pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
Violation of any provision of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in § 10.99. The owner, tenant or
any other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains any violation of this chapter may
each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city or any other public official or private citizen from taking such lawful
action as is necessary to restrain or prevent any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 130, passed 4-5-93)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
52.01 Definition
52.02 Compliance
52.03 Application for connection
52.04 Installation requirements
Regulations
52.15 Cross connection regulations
52.16 Work in right-of-way
52.17 Meters
52.18 Water service lines
52.19 Repair of meters and the like
52.20 Damage to facilities
52.21 Hydrant use
52.22 Emergency conservation rules
52.23 City liability
Rates and Charges
52.35 Water connection fees and charges
52.36 [Reserved]
52.37 Water rates
52.38 Billing procedures; discontinuing service
52.39 Fiscal year
52.40 Records and reports
52.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Municipal powers - utility powers, see Charter § 2.3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
SYSTEM. All water mains, water supply facilities and their appurtenances which the city has or
shall have possession of and operating responsibility for (whether owned by the city or not), either now
in existence in the city or hereafter acquired or constructed in the city, together with all works, plants,
instrumentalities and properties used or useful in connection therewith in the obtaining of a water
supply or in the treatment or distribution of water, including the Northwest Ottawa County Water
System in the city, and all extensions, enlargements and improvements thereto in the city.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77)
§ 52.02 COMPLIANCE.
Connection to the system, directly or indirectly, and the use of water therefrom for all purposes
shall only be in compliance with this chapter, as amended, and in compliance with all standards and
regulations of the city and county applicable thereto, as amended.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.03 APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION.
No connection shall be made to the system without obtaining a permit therefor. Application for
such permit shall be made by the premises title holder or land contract purchaser and filed with the City
Manager or his or her representative. The City Manager or his or her representative shall issue such
permit when all prescribed conditions have been met. Such permit shall be issued subject to such
regulations as may be established and amended by the City Council from time to time.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.04 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) All public water mains shall be installed in a public right-of-way or easement and shall
be constructed and installed in accordance with the written requirements of the Director of the
Department of Public Works. Unless waived in writing by the Director of the Department of Public
Works, all sewer mains shall run the entire distance along which the parcel that benefits from the water
main adjoins the public right-of-way or easement.
(B) No parcel may be serviced by the public water system unless the parcel abuts the public
right-of-way or easement in which the water main lies.
(Ord. 227, passed --)
REGULATIONS
§ 52.15 CROSS CONNECTION REGULATIONS.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for and regulate the public health,
safety, and general welfare by regulating and controlling connections to the public water supply in order
to prevent entry into the public water supply of water of questionable quality, or water which is
contaminated with waste or other contaminants.
(B) Legal authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by § 5.9 of the
City Charter.
(C) Rules applying to text. The following rules of construction apply to the text of this
section:
(1) The particular shall control the general;
(2) The headings which title various paragraphs of this section are for convenience
only and are not to be considered in any construction or interpretation of the section or as enlarging or
restricting the terms and provisions of the section in any respect;
(3) The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is
permissive;
(4) Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in the
singular number shall include the plural, and words used in the plural number shall include the singular,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary;
(5) The word "person" includes a firm, association, partnership, joint venture,
corporation, limited liability company, trust, municipal or public entity or any other legal entity, or a
combination of any of them, as well as a natural person;
(6) Any word or phrase not defined in subsection (C)(4) or (C)(5) of this section shall
be considered to be defined in accordance with its common or standard definition.
(D) Definitions. The following listed words and phrases are defined for the purpose of their use
in this section. These definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section unless
otherwise specifically stated.
BACKFLOW. Water of questionable quality, or which is contaminated with wastes or
other contaminants, which enters a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.
CROSS CONNECTION. A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through
which a backflow could occur.
PROGRAM. The cross connection control program referred to in subsection (H) of this
section.
SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY. A water supply system maintained in addition to a public
water supply, including, but not limited to, (i) water systems supplied from ground or surface sources
not meeting the requirements of M.C.L.A. §§ 325.1001 to 325.1023, or the requirements of any similar
successor Michigan statute, or (ii) water from a public water supply which in any way has been treated,
processed, or exposed to any possible contaminant or which has been stored in other than an approved
storage facility. A private water storage tank supplied from the system shall be deemed a SECONDARY
WATER SUPPLY unless it is designated as and is approved by the water utility for potable water storage
and usage.
SUBMERGED INLET. A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply
terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture, container, or appliance which may contain water of questionable
quality, or water contaminated by waste or other contaminants, and which is not protected against
backflow.
SYSTEM. The city water supply and distribution system.
WATER UTILITY. The City Water Department.
(E) Prohibitions. The following cross connections are prohibited:
(1) A cross connection between the system and a secondary water supply.
(2) A cross connection with a submerged inlet.
(3) A cross connection between the system and piping immersed in a tank or vessel
which may contain a contaminant.
(4) A cross connection between the system and piping which may contain sanitary
waste, a chemical contaminant, or any other type contaminant including, but without limitation, a cross
connection between the system and a lawn sprinkler system or a fire sprinkler system.
(F) Piping identification. When a secondary water supply is used in addition to the system,
exposed public water and secondary water supply piping shall be identified by distinguishing colors or
tags and so maintained so that each pipe may be readily traced in its entirety. If piping is installed in a
manner so that it is impossible to trace in its entirety, the system shall be protected at the service
connection in a manner acceptable to the water utility.
(G) Water outlet labeling. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic
purposes and which is not supplied by the system shall be labeled in a conspicuous manner as:
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING
(H) Cross connection program. The water utility is hereby authorized and directed to
prepare a comprehensive cross connection control program for the elimination and prevention of cross
connections including, but not limited to, provisions pertaining to the installation, maintenance, testing,
reporting, and inspecting of backflow prevention devices, piping labeling, and water outlet labeling. The
program shall also provide for discontinuation of water service from the system pursuant to the
provisions of subsection (L) of this section. The program shall be administered by the water utility. The
provisions of the program, and all amendments thereto, shall be approved by resolution of the City
Council. The program shall meet with the approval of the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality Drinking Water and Radiologic Protection Division. Any violation of the program shall be deemed
a violation of this section.
(I) Inspection. The program shall include procedures and arrangements for the water
utility, or its authorized inspection agent, to complete cross connection inspections and re-inspections.
The frequency of the inspections and re-inspections shall be provided for in the program and shall be
based on the potential health hazard which exists.
(J) Entry, information, and presumption. The water utility, or its authorized inspection
agent, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any premises served with a public water
supply by a connection to the system for the purpose of cross connection inspections and reinspections.
On request, the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the
water utility or its authorized inspection agent any pertinent information regarding the water piping
system or systems on the property. The refusal of such information or the refusal of access, when
requested, shall be deemed to be evidence of the presence of a cross connection.
(K) Protective devices. A user of the system shall, as is provided in the program, provide an
appropriate means to protect against the hazards of each and every cross connection on the user's
premises.
(L) Termination of water service. The water utility is hereby authorized and directed to
terminate water service from the system, after following those procedures provided for in the program,
to any premises which is in violation of this section or the program. The water utility is also authorized
to take such other precautionary measures as the water utility deems necessary to eliminate any danger
of contamination of the system. If the water utility determines that there is an actual threat to the
public health, through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste,
the water service may be terminated immediately as is provided in the program.
(M) Owner responsibilities. The owner(s) and occupant(s) of any premises connected to the
system, at their sole expense, shall have all of the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) To eliminate all cross connections on the premises,
(2) To install, maintain, test, or have tested, all backflow prevention devices on the
premises.
(3) To correct any malfunction of a backflow prevention device revealed by testing.
(4) To inform the water utility in writing of any proposed or modified cross
connection and also of any existing cross connection which has not been previously disclosed to the
water utility in writing.
(5) To refrain from installing a bypass around any backflow prevention device
unless there is a suitable backflow prevention device on the bypass. If it is not possible to shut down
operations in order to test a backflow prevention device, additional devices shall be provided as
necessary to allow testing the backflow prevention device.
(N) Backflow prevention devices. All backflow prevention devices shall be approved and
installed as is provided in the program. All backflow prevention devices shall be tested as is provided in
the program.
(O) Program fees. The City Council may by resolution establish fees to be charged to
customers of the system that are reasonably related to the cost of the services provided to the customer
in connection with the administration and enforcement of this section and the program for the
elimination and prevention of cross connections.
(P) Administrative liability. No water utility officer, agent, or employee, or any officer,
agent, or employee of the city, shall render himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may
accrue to any person, firm, association, corporation, partnership, joint venture, or combination of any of
them as the result of any act, decision or other consequence or occurrence arising out of the discharge
of his or her duties and responsibilities pursuant to this section or the program or both.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77; Am. Ord. 189, passed 3-18-02) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.16 WORK IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
All work in the street right-of-way or on public easements, including service lines to the property
line, shall be constructed and performed by the city or its agents or contractors.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.17 METERS.
(A) Meter reading. The City Manager or his or her representative shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any premises connected to the system for the purpose of reading the
water meter or otherwise inspecting the piping system or systems connected to the system.
(B) Meter failure. If any meter shall fail to register properly, the department shall estimate
the consumption on the basis of former consumption and bill accordingly.
(C) Inaccurate meters. A consumer may require that the meter be tested. If the meter is
found accurate, a charge of $5 will be made. If the meter is found defective, a new meter will be
installed and no charge will be made.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77)
§ 52.18 WATER SERVICE LINES.
(A) The owner of each premises served by water shall maintain the service line from the
street right-of-way to the building, structure or other improvement served with city (municipal, public)
water in good condition with no leaks, breaks or other malfunction.
(B) Each water service line shall serve not more than one premises, although a single
premises may be served with more than one service line.
(C) Each water service line shall be separately metered. Water service lines connecting the
city system only to a fire suppression system need not be metered.
(D) For purposes of this section, the term PREMISES refers to every building or area of a
building that is capable of single-family or single-business use.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77; Am. Ord. 241, passed 9-4-07) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.19 REPAIR OF METERS AND THE LIKE.
If the meter, remote reading device, meter horn or angle valve is damaged for any reason, all
required repair and replacement shall be at the expense of the premises owner. If the meter, meter
horn or angle valve malfunctions or is defective, repair or replacement shall be at the expense of the
city.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77)
§ 52.20 DAMAGE TO FACILITIES.
No person, except an employee of the city or its authorized representative in the performance
of his or her duties, shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the Northwest Ottawa Water System in the city.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.21 HYDRANT USE.
No person, except an employee of the city or its authorized representative in the performance
of his or her duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant except in case of emergency, without first
securing written permission from the City Manager and paying such charges as may be prescribed.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.22 EMERGENCY CONSERVATION RULES.
(A) Generally. When weather or other extraordinary conditions place unusual water use
demand upon the system or when the system water supply or capacity is reduced due to mechanical
failure, catastrophe or other physical limitations, and low pressure or reduced volumes threaten the
public health, safety or welfare, the City Manager or his or her designee is hereby empowered to make
all rules necessary to conserve and protect the public health, safety, and welfare and the integrity of the
system. Such rules may restrict or prohibit less essential water uses to the extent deemed necessary to
assure an adequate supply for essential domestic and commercial needs and for firefighting.
(B) Effective date of rules. Rules promulgated under this section shall become effective
immediately and shall remain in effect until modified or rescinded by further order of the City Manager
or his or her designee or by resolution of the City Council.
(C) Notice. Notification of rules promulgated under this section shall become effective
immediately and shall remain in effect until modified or rescinded by further order of the City Manager
or his or her designee or by resolution of the City Council.
(D) Exceptions. The City Manager or his or her designee may grant exceptions to these
rules in cases where outdoor irrigation is necessary to preserve nursery stock or newly established
landscaping which is required by city codes or the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or where
necessary to prevent imminent financial loss to the water customer.
(E) Penalty. Any person who violates any rule made pursuant to this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished as prescribed in § 52.99.
(F) Termination of service. The City Manager or his or her designee shall have the power
and authority to shut off and discontinue the water service provided to any water customer who
violates any rule made pursuant to this section. Water service shall only be restored at such time as the
City Manager or his or her designee is reasonably satisfied that future violations or rules promulgated
pursuant to this section will not occur and when the water customer has paid a turn-on charge to the
city in an amount to be established and adjusted from time to time by City Council resolution.
(G) Injunction. The enforcement of any rules promulgated under this section may be by
injunctive action. The imposition of civil liability herein prescribed shall not preclude the city from
instituting an appropriate action to prevent violation of any rules promulgated under this section.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77; Am. Ord. 179, passed 3-6-00; Am. Ord. 203, passed 8-4-03)
§ 52.23 CITY LIABILITY.
The city shall not be liable for any failure or deficiency in the supply of water to consumers
whether occasioned by shutting off the water to make necessary repairs or connections or for any other
cause.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.35 WATER CONNECTION FEES AND CHARGES.
(A) Connection fee. The city shall charge a connection fee for each connection to the water
system. Connection fees shall be established and modified by resolution of the City Council. The
connection fee will be based on the size of the meter serving the premises and upon any subsequent
enlargements of water meter size. Water connection fees paid for a connection will not be refunded in
the event of a subsequent reduction in water meter size or disconnection from the system. A water
connection fee is to be paid at the time a building permit or construction permit is issued.
(B) Frontage charge. Those premises adjacent to a system main which either (1) have not
been included in a special assessment district to pay any part of the cost of such main; or (2) have been
included in a special assessment district but have not been assessed for the water main which will
provide the water service, shall pay a frontage charge to connect to the system. No frontage charge shall
be made where the system main adjacent to the connecting premises was constructed as part of a
development in which the premises are located when a private party or the city on behalf of and at the
expense of a private party has constructed such a main. Frontage charges shall be established and
modified by resolution of the City Council. A frontage charge is to be paid at the time a building permit
or construction permit is issued.
(C) Water service charge. The city shall charge a water service charge based upon the
diameter of a water service line. The water service charge covers the live tap to the water main, stop
box, the water main line to the property line and the water meter. Water service charges shall be
established by resolution of the City Council. A water service charge shall be paid at the time a building
permit or construction permit is issued.
(D) Fire protection charge. Unmetered water service lines connecting the system to only a
fire suppression system will not pay a connection fee, frontage charge or service charge but will pay a
fire protection charge as established by resolution of the City Council.
(E) Meter removal and re-installation fee. If a customer desires that a water meter be
removed and re-installed, the customer shall pay a fee in an amount established by resolution of the
City Council. Such fee shall be paid prior to the time that a water meter is re-installed.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77; Am. Ord. 49, passed 1-25-78; Am. Ord. 241, passed 9-4-07)
Cross-reference:
Sewer connection charges, see § 51.68
§ 52.36 [RESERVED.]
§ 52.37 WATER RATES.
Rates for water supplied to each premises connected to the system, for the readiness to serve
charge, and for standby fire line connections, shall be determined by the City Council and shall be
established by a resolution adopted and amended from time to time by the City Council. No free service
shall be furnished by the system to the city or to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to
any public agency or instrumentality. The city shall pay for water supplied to it or any of its departments
or agencies at the rates established pursuant to this section from time to time. In addition, the city shall
pay for water used through fire hydrants for fire protection and other purposes at the rates established
pursuant to this section from time to time.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77; Am. Ord. 49, passed 1-25-78)
Cross-reference:
Sewer use rates, see § 51.69
§ 52.38 BILLING PROCEDURES; DISCONTINUING SERVICE.
Charges for water service shall be billed, mailed and shall come due in accordance with a
resolution by the City Council. Bills not paid on or before a due date shall be subject to a quarterly
charge equal to 6% of the unpaid amount. Customers whose bills are not paid within five days after the
due date shall be mailed a reminder bill. If the bill is not paid within ten days after the date of mailing of
such reminder bill, a 72-hour shut-off notice will be mailed. If the bill is not paid within 72 hours after
the date of mailing such shut-off notice, the customer’s water service may be turned off immediately
without further notice. A charge established by resolution of the City Council shall then be charged to
the customer and shall be paid together with all unpaid charges before the service is restored. Water
use and service charges, connection fees, frontage charges and fire protection charges shall constitute a
lien on the property served. On or before May 1 of each year, the City Treasurer shall deliver to the City
Clerk a certified statement of all water use and service charges, connection fees, frontage charges, fire
protection charges and interest charges thereon six months or more past due and unpaid. The City Clerk
shall then place charges on the next general tax roll and the same shall be collected and said lien shall be
enforced as provided for general city taxes.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77; Am. Ord. 195, passed 7-15-02; Am. Ord. 241, passed 9-4-07)
Cross-reference:
Similar provision regarding sewer service, see § 51.70
Statutory reference:
Delinquent charges as a lien; enforcement and exceptions regarding service to tenants, see
M.C.L.A. § 141.121
§ 52.39 FISCAL YEAR.
The system shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year beginning July 1 of each year and
ending on June 30 of the next year.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77)
§ 52.40 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
The city should cause to be maintained and kept proper books of record and account in which
shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the operation of the system. Not less
than six months after the close of each fiscal year of the system, the city shall cause to be prepared a
statement in reasonable detail showing the cash income and disbursements of the system at the
beginning and close of the operating year and such other information as may be necessary to enable any
taxpayer of the city, user or beneficiary of the service provided by the system to be fully informed as to
all matter pertaining to the financial operation of the system during such fiscal year. Such annual
statement shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk where it will be open to public inspection. Such
books of record and account shall be audited annually by a certified accountant to be designated by the
City Council and a certified copy of such audit shall be filed with the City Clerk. Such audit may be a part
of the general city audit.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
other than § 52.22, or any regulations or rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in § 10.99. The city may in
addition to the penalties herein set forth maintain any proper action for the abatement of any condition
allowed to exist in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Any person or customer violating § 52.22 or any regulations or rules adopted pursuant
thereto shall be responsible for a civil infraction subject to a fine. Increased civil fines will be imposed
for repeated violations that occur within a six- month period. The civil fine for a first offense is $50. The
civil fine for the first repeat offense is $250. The civil fine for the second repeat offense is $500. The city
shall also be entitled to equitable relief to abate the violations and to such other relief as may be
available to the city pursuant to M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8301 et seq. and §§ 600.8701 et seq., being Chapters 83
and 87 of the Michigan Revised Judicature Act, as amended at the present time or in the future.
(C) The City Manager, employees of the city designated in writing by the City Manager, and
police officers of the city are authorized officials to issue civil infraction citations for violations of §
52.22.
(Ord. 48, passed 8-10-77; Am. Ord. 203, passed 8-4-03)
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
70.01 [Reserved]
70.02 [Reserved]
Vehicle Code
70.05 Michigan Vehicle Code adopted
70.06 Definitions
70.07 Penalties
Uniform Traffic Code
70.10 Michigan Uniform Traffic Code adopted
70.11 Definitions
70.12 Penalties
70.13 Administrative liability
Cross-reference:
Bike paths; regulated activities; driving of vehicles, see § 50.49
Parks and recreation; vehicles, see § 50.05
Streets and sidewalks; regulated activities; driving of vehicles, see § 50.32
§ 70.01 [RESERVED].
§ 70.02 [RESERVED].
VEHICLE CODE
§ 70.05 MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED.
The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 through 257.923, is
adopted by reference.
(Ord. 196, passed 10-7-02)
§ 70.06 DEFINITIONS.
References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Ferrysburg.
(Ord. 196, passed 10-7-02)
§ 70.07 PENALTIES.
The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided,
however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the
maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days.
(Ord. 196, passed 10-7-02)
UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
§ 70.10 MICHIGAN UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED.
The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as promulgated by the Director of
the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public
Act 306 of 1969, being M.C.L.A. §§ 24.201 through 24.328, and made effective October 30, 2002, and all
future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective
in this state, are incorporated and adopted by reference.
(Ord. 200, passed 2-3-03)
§ 70.11 DEFINITIONS.
References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to a "governmental
unit" shall mean the City of Ferrysburg, Ottawa County, Michigan.
(Ord. 200, passed 2-3-03)
§ 70.12 PENALTIES.
The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages are hereby
adopted by reference.
(Ord. 200, passed 2-3-03)
§ 70.13 ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.
No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damages the city may
accrue to any person as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties under and in
the enforcement of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages.
(Ord. 200, passed 2-3-03)
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
90.01 Excrement control
Dog Control
90.10 Definitions
90.11 Prohibitions and restrictions
90.12 Impoundment; notice of impoundment
90.13 Disposition of impounded dogs
90.14 Redemption of dogs
90.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Sidewalks; regulations regarding animals, see § 50.32
Bike paths; regulations regarding animals, see § 50.49
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 EXCREMENT CONTROL.
(A) Every person having any dog, cat or horse under his or her ownership, custody,
supervision or control shall promptly and thoroughly remove all excrement left by the animal upon any
private or public property. Provided, however, a person may fail to remove such excrement from private
property which that person owns or in which he or she has a lawful possessory interest or on which he
or she is an invitee with permission of the owner or lawful possessor to not remove animal excrement.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any person to appear with any dog, cat or horse on any private or
public property unless that person has then in his or her possession an appropriate device for the
immediate and thorough removal of any excrement left by that animal. Provided, however, a person
may fail to have in his or her possession an appropriate device for the immediate and thorough removal
of animal excrement from private property which that person owns or in which he or she has a lawful
possessory interest or on which he or she is an invitee with permission of the owner or lawful possessor
to not have such a device.
(C) All police officers of the Spring Lake-Ferrysburg Police Department, all Ferrysburg Public
Service Department technicians, and the Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator of the city are
authorized to issue civil infraction citations pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 168, passed 1-19-98) Penalty, see § 90.99
DOG CONTROL
§ 90.10 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
OWNER, CUSTODIAN. When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, cat, or any pet, the terms
OWNER and CUSTODIAN shall include every person having a right of property in such animal, and every
person who keeps or harbors such animal or has it in his or her care, and every person who permits such
an animal to remain in or about any premises occupied by him or her.
REASONABLE CONTROL. Keeping a dog on a suitable leash or under the verbal or other control
of the owner or custodian.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-21-67; Am. Ord. 253, passed 6-1-09)
§ 90.11 PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
(A) No owner or custodian shall permit a dog which is vicious or which appears vicious to
remain outside of a secure building, fence, structure or vehicle unless the dog is restrained by a leash or
tether adequate to prevent escape, is muzzled with a full muzzle and is more than 25 feet from a public
right-of-way. A dog is deemed vicious if it has bitten a person or domestic animal without provocation.
A dog is deemed to appear vicious if by its size, actions, location, appearance or combination of such
circumstances places a reasonable person in fear of imminent harm notwithstanding the fact that the
dog may be restrained.
(B) No owner or custodian shall permit or allow a female dog to go beyond the premises of
the owner or custodian when said dog is in heat.
(C) No owner or custodian of a dog shall permit the dog to be unconfined at any time unless
licensed as required by law and unless wearing its license tag and evidence of rabies immunization.
(D) No owner or custodian shall permit or suffer a dog four months of age or older, a cat, or
any pet to trespass or run at large upon the private property of another without the permission of the
owner or occupant of the premises.
(E) No owner or custodian shall permit or suffer a dog to be present upon public property
unless the animal is under the reasonable control of the owner or custodian.
(F) No owner or custodian shall permit or suffer any dog, cat or any pet, to make loud,
frequent, or habitual noise resulting in annoyance to people, to damage the property of another, or to
attack or injure a pet of another.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-21-67; Am. Ord. 216, passed 10-18-04; Am. Ord. 253, passed 6-1-09) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 IMPOUNDMENT; NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
(A) Impoundment. Any dog found at large in the city which is doing any of the acts
enumerated in § 90.11 may be seized and impounded by the Dog Warden or any police officer of the
city.
(B) Notice of impoundment. It shall be the duty of the Police Department to notify the
owner of every dog which shall be impounded, if the owner of such dog can be ascertained, as soon as
possible after said dog has been impounded.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-21-67)
§ 90.13 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS.
(A) All dogs so impounded shall be held in a place designated by the City Council of the city
for a period of ten days, at the expiration of which, if said dog or dogs are not claimed by the owner
thereof, the same may be sold by the city to recover the costs of impounding of said dog and the funds
so received shall be credited to the general fund of the city.
(B) If said dog or dogs shall not be sold within 20 days after expiration of the ten-day period
provided in division (A), the city shall cause the dog to be destroyed.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-21-67)
§ 90.14 REDEMPTION OF DOGS.
No dog shall be released from the pound unless the owner or person entitled to claim the same
shall pay to the city the sum of $10 together with the costs of boarding said dog during its period of
impounding. Such payment shall be made to the City Clerk and upon proof of such payment, the place
where the dog is impounded shall release said dog to the owner.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-21-67)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
A violation of Chapter 90 is a civil infraction subject to a fine. Increased civil fines will be
imposed for repeated violations that occur within a six-month period. The civil fine for the first offense
is $50. The civil fine for the first repeat offense is $250. The civil fine for the second repeat offense is
$500.
(Ord. 15, passed 8-21-67; Am. Ord. 253, passed 6-1-09)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
91.01 Definitions
91.02 Storage and accumulation of materials and vehicles
91.03 Vegetation
91.04 Litter
91.05 Fireworks
Noise
91.15 Title
91.16 Definitions
91.17 Prohibited noises
91.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Special assessments - removal of nuisance or hazard, see Charter § 7.10
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
calls for or indicates a different meaning.
DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which any part or parts have been
removed or are missing and which are required by law for operation on the public roads, which are
necessary for the safe operation of the vehicle or which were intended by the manufacturer as an
integral and material part of the vehicle.
GARBAGE. Biological and food waste.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which may not be legally operated on the
public roads by reason of its physical condition or by reason of the lack of parts required by law.
JUNK. Any castoff parts, parts that are not capable of performing a function, waste materials,
scrap and/or discards.
LITTER. Rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris
or other foreign substance.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any wheeled vehicle which is self-propelled or intended to be self-propelled
and is of a type that would be required by the Michigan Vehicle Code to display a registration plate if
driven on the public roads.
PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or business entity.
REFUSE. Materials other than junk and garbage that are typically the subject of disposal and
materials that are ready for disposal.
(Ord. 231, passed 7-17-06)
§ 91.02 STORAGE AND ACCUMULATION OF MATERIALS AND VEHICLES.
(A) Garbage, refuse and junk. It shall be unlawful for any person, owning or occupying any
lot, parcel, or premises in the city to permit the accumulation of garbage, refuse or junk except to the
extent that the storage or accumulation is in compliance with § 93.17 regarding containers and the
placement of materials for collection.
(B) Equipment and supplies. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep items of workable
equipment and supplies out of doors when not in use for an ongoing project except to the extent that
storage is in compliance with the Ferrysburg Zoning Ordinance.
(C) Motor vehicles. No person shall park, store, or allow to be parked or stored, any
dismantled motor vehicle, inoperable motor vehicle or unlicensed motor vehicle upon any lot or
premises within the city outside of an enclosed structure except to the extent that the activity is be
permitted pursuant to the Ferrysburg Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 231, passed 7-17-06) Penalty, see § 91.99
Cross-reference:
Garbage, trash, and recyclable material; collection and licensing, see §§ 93.15 et seq.
§ 91.03 VEGETATION.
(A) Grass and weeds. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep weeds and grass, with the
exception of dune grass, more than ten inches in height.
(B) Dead and diseased vegetation. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep dead bushes,
dead trees, stumps, bushes and trees infested with insects or infectious disease and any other
vegetation likely to cause fire or injury to persons or property.
(C) Cutting by city, fees. In addition to the penalties otherwise prescribed, the Zoning
Administrator may give written notice, mailed by first class mail to the address last shown on the
assessment records of the city, stating that the city will enter the premises after ten days from the date
of mailing such notice and mow grass and otherwise abate the violation. The city shall have a lien
against the premises described in the notice in the minimum amount of $100 plus actual costs which
shall be levied and collected against the property in the same manner as ad valorem property taxes.
(Ord. 231, passed 7-17-06; Am. Ord. 234, passed 10-2-06) Penalty, see § 91.99
§ 91.04 LITTER.
A person shall not knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of
public property or the owner of private property, dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or cause or
permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of, litter on public or private property or
water.
(Ord. 231, passed 7-17-06)
§ 91.05 FIREWORKS.
(A) Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. That term as defined in section 1d of the Michigan Vehicle Code,
1949 PA 300, M.C.L.A. 257.1d, as amended.
APA STANDARD 87-1. The 2001 APA standard 87-1, standard for construction and
approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical pyrotechnics, as published by the
American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, Maryland.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects
by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling
regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 C.F.R.
Parts 1500 and 1507, as amended, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1: 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS does not include low-impact fireworks.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. That term as defined in section 8b of the Michigan Vehicle
Code, 1949 PA 300, M.C.L.A. 257.8b, as amended.
FIREWORKS. Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a
flare, designed for the purpose of producing visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation.
LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS. Ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is
defined in APA Standard 87-1: 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5.
MINOR. An individual who is less than 18 years of age.
HOLIDAY. Means any of the following:
(a) New Years' Day, January 1.
(b) Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in January.
(c) President's Day, the third Monday in February.
(d) Memorial Day, the last Monday in May.
(e) Independence Day, July 4.
(f) Labor Day, the first Monday in September.
(g) Columbus Day, the second Monday in October.
(h) Veteran's Day, November 11.
(i) Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November.
(j) Christmas Day, December 25.
(B) Ignition, discharge and use of fireworks.
(1) Except on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a holiday, in
accordance with state and Federal laws and applicable city ordinances, and except on the first Saturday
in August each year (Coast Guard Festival), a person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks.
(2) A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on any day the
state, through the Department of Natural Resources or any successor agency, has determined that an
"Extreme Fire Danger" exists, including the day preceding, the day of, or the day after, a holiday.
(3) In accordance with state and Federal laws and applicable city ordinances, except
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., EST, a person may ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks on the first Saturday in August each year (Coast Guard Festival), and on the day preceding, the
day of, or the day after a holiday.
(C) Possession of consumer fireworks by a minor. A minor shall not possess, ignite,
discharge, or use consumer fireworks.
(D) Prohibited conduct.
(1) A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on public
property, school property, church property, or the property of any another person without that person's
express permission to use those consumer fireworks on those premises.
(2) A person shall not use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under
the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination thereof.
(E) Local, state, and federal requirements. Nothing contained within this section shall be
construed to relieve a person of any duties and obligations imposed under any local, state or federal
laws, rules, regulations, licenses, or permit requirements.
(Ord. 280, passed 10-7-13)
NOISE
§ 91.15 TITLE.
This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Anti-Noise and Public Nuisance Ordinance.”
(Ord. 125, passed 2-3-92)
§ 91.16 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DECIBEL. A unit used to express the magnitude of sound pressure and sound intensity. The
difference in decibels between two sound pressures is 20 times the common logarithm of their ratio. In
sound pressure measurements, the sound pressure level of a given sound is defined to be 20 times the
common logarithm of the ratio of the sound pressure to a reference pressure of 2 x 10-5N/m2 (Newtons
per meter squared). As an example of the effect of this formula, a 3-decibel change in the sound
pressure level corresponds to a doubling or halving of the sound intensity, and a 10-decibel change
corresponds to a 10-fold increase or decrease to 1/10th the former intensity.
dB(A). The sound pressure level in decibels measured on the “A” scale of a standard sound level
meter having characteristics defined by the American National Standards Institute. dB(lin) means the
sound pressure level in decibels measured on the “linear” or “flat” scale of a standard sound level meter
having characteristics defined by the American National Standards Institute.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled whether or not licensed or intended for
use upon public roads.
(Ord. 125, passed 2-3-92)
§ 91.17 PROHIBITED NOISES.
(A) General regulation. No person, firm or corporation shall cause or create any
unreasonable or unnecessarily loud noise or disturbance, injurious to the health, peace or quiet of the
residents and property owners of the city.
(B) Specific violations. The following noises and disturbances are hereby declared to be a
violation of this subchapter; provided, however, that the specification of the same is not thereby to be
construed to exclude other violations of this subchapter not specifically enumerated:
(1) The playing of any radio, phonograph, television, or other electronic or
mechanical sound- producing device, including any musical instrument in such a manner or with such
volume as to unreasonably upset or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons;
(2) Yelling, shouting, or singing on the public streets between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00a.m., or at any time or place so as to unreasonably upset or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of any persons in the vicinity;
(3) The emission or creating of any excessive noise which unreasonably interferes
with the operation of any school, church, hospital or court;
(4) The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which emanates frequent or extended
noise which shall unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity, such as
allowing or permitting any dog to bark repeatedly in an area where such barking can be clearly heard
from nearby residential property;
(5) The operation of a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle or moped, unless at all
times equipped with a muffler in good working order and in a constant operation to prevent excessive
or unusual noise;
(6) The sounding of any horn or other device on any motor vehicle unless necessary
to operate said vehicle safely or as required by the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code;
(7) The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or
premises in any part of the city, and including the streets and highways, in such a manner as to emanate
noise or disturbance unreasonably annoying to other persons, other than between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and sundown on any day, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety; in such case, a permit shall be obtained from the Building Inspector or Ordinance Enforcement
Officer of the city, which permit shall limit the periods that the activity may continue;
(8) The creation of a loud or excessive noise unreasonably disturbing to other
persons in the vicinity in connection with the operation, loading or unloading of any vehicle, trailer,
railroad car, dumpster or other carrier or in connection with the repairing of any such vehicle in or near
residential areas;
(9) The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose
of attracting attention to any performance, show, sale, display or other purpose which, by the creation
of such noise, shall be unreasonably disturbing to other persons in the vicinity;
(10) The operation of any sound-amplifying device upon or within any vehicle in a
manner that will unreasonably upset or disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity;
(11) The operation of any machinery, equipment or mechanical device so as to emit
unreasonably loud noise which is disturbing to the quiet, comfort or repose of any person;
(12) The operation of any race track, proving ground, testing area or obstacle course
for motor vehicles, motorcycles, boats, racers, automobiles or vehicles of any kind or nature in any area
of the city where the noise emanating therefrom would be unreasonably disturbing and upsetting to
other persons in the vicinity; under no circumstances shall any race track, proving ground, testing area
or obstacle course operate after 11:00 p.m. on any evening.
(C) Exceptions. None of the prohibitions hereinbefore enumerated shall apply to the
following:
(1) Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine or emergency vehicle while engaged
in necessary emergency activities;
(2) Warning devices emitting sound for warning purposes as authorized by law;
(3) The daily testing of civil defense sirens;
(4) Parades and church bells or chimes;
(5) The sounding of the fire station siren at noon each Saturday.
(Ord. 125, passed 2-3-92; Am. Ord. 231, passed 7-17-06)
Cross-reference:
Snowmobiles; noise, see § 71.07
Unlicensed motor vehicles; noise, see § 71.32
Sand mining; noise, see § 152.36
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
(A) Civil infraction. A violation of Ch. 91 shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine. Increased
civil fines will be imposed for repeated violations that occur within a 60-month period. The civil fine for a
first offense is $50. The civil fine for the first repeat offense is $250. The civil fine for the second repeat
offense is $500. The city shall also be entitled to equitable relief to abate the violation and to such other
relief as may be available to the city pursuant to Chapters 83 and 87 of the Michigan Revised Judicature
Act, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8301 et seq. and 600.8701 et seq. Each day on which any
violation of those sections occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this section shall restrict
other remedies available to the city.
(B) Nuisance. A violation of Ch. 91 is declared to be a nuisance per se.
(C) Enforcement. The Building Inspector, Zoning Administrator and all police officers of the
city are authorized to issue civil infraction citations pursuant to this subchapter.
CHAPTER 92: BURNING
Section
92.01 Burning prohibited
92.02 Requirements for permitted burning
92.03 Administration and enforcement
92.04 Administrative liability
92.05 Violations; civil fines
Cross-reference:
Parks and recreation; fires; cooking, see § 94.11
§ 92.01 BURNING PROHIBITED.
No person shall ignite or otherwise cause to burn any garbage, trash, leaves, yard wastes, grass
clippings, grass, weeds, brush, trees, tree branches, tree limbs, tree stumps, debris or refuse, whether
animal, vegetable, mineral, wood or synthetic materials, in any open fire or in a receptacle upon any
lands within the municipal boundaries of the city. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the
burning of wood in a fireplace or stove for the purpose of cooking or providing heat and shall not
prohibit the burning of firewood in a bonfire or campfire in accordance with § 92.02.
(Ord. 110, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 118, passed 11-28-90; Am. Ord. 170, passed 5-18-98) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
§ 92.02 REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTED BURNING.
An owner of property, or a person authorized by the owner of property, may burn firewood in a
bonfire or campfire on his or her property, provided that such shall meet the following requirements:
(1) A person 18 years of age or older shall remain in constant attendance during the
time the fire is burning or smoldering.
(2) The person or persons tending the fire shall remain in complete control over the
fire at all times and shall ensure that the fire does not threaten surrounding properties or create a
nuisance.
(3) The amount of firewood to be burned shall not exceed an amount which can
reasonably be anticipated to be controlled.
(4) Before abandoning the site of the fire or disposing of its remains, the person or
persons tending the fire shall take all steps necessary to extinguish any materials still burning, smoking
or smoldering.
(5) At no time shall any bonfire or campfire occur on or within ten feet of the
surface of any public street, public sidewalk, or public bike path in the city.
(6) At no time shall any bonfire or campfire occur within 20 feet of a building.
(Ord. 110, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 118, passed 11-28-90; Am. Ord. 170, passed 5-18-98) Penalty, see
§ 10.99
Statutory reference:
Air pollution control standards generally, see M.C.L.A. §§ 324.5501 et seq.
§ 92.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief of the city or his designee to investigate fires which are in
violation of the terms of this subchapter, and to cause them to be extinguished, and to actively
endeavor with the cooperation of the Spring Lake-Ferrysburg Police Department to secure the
conviction of all persons violating this subchapter.
(Ord. 110, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 118, passed 11-28-90; Am. Ord. 170, passed 5-18-98)
§ 92.04 ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.
No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall render himself or herself liable for any damage
that may accrue to any person as the result of any act, decision or other consequence or occurrence
arising out of the discharge of his or her duties and responsibilities pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 110, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 118, passed 11-28-90; Am. Ord. 170, passed 5-18-98)
§ 92.05 VIOLATIONS; CIVIL FINES.
A violation of this chapter is a civil infraction subject to a fine. Increased civil fines will be
imposed for repeated violations that occur within a six month period. The civil fine for a first offense is
$50. The civil fine for the first repeat offense is $250. The civil fine for a second repeat offense is $500.
(Ord. 170, passed 5-18-98)
CHAPTER 93: SOLID WASTE
Section
General Provisions
93.01 Yard wastes
Garbage, Trash, and Recyclable Material
93.15 Title
93.16 Definitions
93.17 Container requirements; placement; time restrictions
93.18 Scavenging prohibited
93.19 License for garbage, trash, or recyclable materials collection
93.20 Application for license
93.21 Requirements for issuance of license
93.22 License fee
93.23 License issuance
93.24 License revocation
93.25 Operations requirements for collection businesses
93.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 YARD WASTES.
(A) Landfilling of leaves and yard wastes prohibited. Commencing September 1, 1991, and
thereafter, no person within the municipal boundaries of the city shall be permitted to place leaves and
yard wastes in any receptacle, or to cause leaves and yard wastes to be picked up by any person or
disposal service, for delivery to a Type II sanitary landfill. All leaves and yard wastes in the city shall be
disposed of by utilization on the premises from which the leaves and yard wastes originated or were
gathered, or otherwise in conformity with this section. Provided, such leaves and yard wastes may be
placed in or delivered to, in accordance with provisions adopted by the City Council regarding the
manner, time, place, and fees for so doing, an alternative solid waste composting disposal area licensed
and maintained on behalf of the city in conformity with Public Act 328 of 1988, as amended, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 324.19101 et seq., and the Solid Waste Alternative Program Administrative Rules
promulgated thereunder.
(B) Violations. Any disposal of leaves or yard wastes in violation of the terms of this section
shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 93.99.
(C) Administrative responsibility. It shall be the duty of the Police Chief of the Spring Lake-
Ferrysburg Police Department to investigate any violation of this section, and to endeavor to secure the
conviction of any person violating this section.
(D) Administrative liability. No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall render himself or
herself liable for any damage that may accrue to any person as a result of any act, decision or other
consequence or occurrence arising out of the discharge of his or her duties and responsibilities pursuant
to this section.
(Ord. 117, passed 11-28-90) Penalty, see § 93.99
Cross-reference:
Placing yard wastes on street rights-of-way, see § 50.16
Placing yard wastes on sidewalks, see § 50.32
Placing yard wastes on bike paths, see § 50.49
GARBAGE, TRASH, AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL
§ 93.15 TITLE.
This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Garbage, Trash, and Recyclable Material
Disposal and Collection Ordinance.”
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92)
§ 93.16 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
GARBAGE. Food wastes including waste accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used
or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish,
fowl, fruit, or vegetables.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Material which is separated from trash prior to the collection of trash
and delivered to a material recovery facility. RECYCLABLE MATERIAL shall include but not be limited to:
(1) PLASTICS. Colorless or colored plastic which is high density polyethylene (HDPE)
or polyethylene terephthalate (PETE), including plastic milk jugs and other plastic containers of HDPE or
PETE materials.
(2) GLASS. Bottles or jars made of silica, sand, soda, ash, and limestone, being
transparent or translucent, and used for the packaging or bottling of various materials. This definition
does not include plastics or glass products such as window glass, blue glass, flat glass, mirrors, plate
glass, safety glass, light bulbs, ceramics, or pieces of broken glass.
(3) TIN CANS AND ALUMINUM MATERIAL. Steel and tin-coated cans and aluminum
cans, foil, and such other household aluminum products used in the kitchen.
(4) NEWSPAPERS. Newspaper-grade paper, the common, inexpensive, machinefinished
paper made chiefly from wood pulp, which is printed and distributed. This definition does not
include magazines, slick paper, and telephone books.
TRASH. Nonputrescible solid waste, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste,
including paper, cardboard, metal, plastic, ashes, wood, glass, fabric, crockery, waste building materials,
or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health or safety.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92)
§ 93.17 CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS; PLACEMENT; TIME RESTRICTIONS.
The occupant of a residential building or structure having garbage, trash, and/or recyclable
material pick-up service provided by a person licensed to render such service pursuant to this
subchapter shall put all garbage in a closed, watertight bag or container, shall put all trash in a
watertight bag or other appropriate container suitable for storing and carrying trash, and shall put all
recyclable material in a watertight bag or other appropriate bin or box. Prior to the collection of
garbage, trash, and/or recyclable material by a pick-up service, all bags, containers, bins, or boxes shall
be placed in a location where they are readily accessible for pick-up. An occupant shall not place any
garbage, trash, and/or recyclable material bags, containers, bins or boxes in any front yard or in the
nontraveled portion of any street right-of-way prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day before the scheduled
collection day established by the collector. An occupant shall not permit any garbage, trash, and/or
recyclable material bags, containers, bins or boxes to remain in any front yard or in the nontraveled
portion of any street right-of-way after 7:00 p.m. on the scheduled collection day established by the
collector.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92) Penalty, see § 93.99
Cross-reference:
Blight; disposal of garbage, trash, and the like, see § 91.01
Placing rubbish or other material on street rights-of-way, see § 50.16
Placing rubbish or other material on sidewalks, see § 50.32
Placing rubbish or other material on bike paths, see § 50.49
§ 93.18 SCAVENGING PROHIBITED.
No person, other than the owner, tenant or occupant of the premises for which garbage, trash,
and/or recycling bags, containers, bins or boxes have been placed in a front yard or in the nontraveled
portion of a street right-of-way for collection, shall disturb, pick over, remove, strew, or scatter any item
from any bags, containers, bins or boxes which have been placed in a front yard or in the nontraveled
portion of a street right-of-way for collection.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.19 LICENSE FOR GARBAGE, TRASH, OR RECYCLABLE MATERIALS COLLECTION.
No person shall engage in the business of picking up, collecting, or hauling garbage, trash, or
recyclable material within the city unless such person shall first have obtained a license therefor. The
word PERSON as used in this section shall refer to a corporation, partnership, association or similar
entity, or a natural person.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.20 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
Any person desiring to engage in the business of picking up, collecting, or hauling garbage, trash,
or recyclable material within the city shall make application to the City Manager on a form provided by
the city.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92)
§ 93.21 REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
No license shall be issued to any person to engage in the business of picking up, collecting, or
hauling garbage, trash, or recyclable material within the city unless the applicant has filed with the City
Manager a complete application form demonstrating the applicant's ability to comply with the following
requirements:
(A) To offer garbage, trash, and recyclable material pick-up services at least once each week
to any person in the city desiring such service;
(B) To offer 90-gallon containers for garbage and trash collection to any person in the city
desiring such containers;
(C) To offer 18-gallon containers for recyclable material collection to any person in the city
desiring such containers;
(D) To offer garbage and trash bags on a fee-per-bag basis to any person in the city who
desires such bags, and to charge for such service on a fee-per-bag basis;
(E) To offer recyclable material bags on a fee-per-bag basis to any person in the city who
desires such bags, and to charge for such service on a fee-per-bag basis;
(F) To provide enclosed trucks, constructed so they cannot leak or spill any collected
material, as shall be necessary for the efficient collection of garbage, trash and recyclable material in the
city;
(G) To provide to all customers in the city, once prior to commencement of service to each
customer and at least once each year thereafter, a brochure describing any rules, regulations,
procedures, schedules, and rates for garbage, trash, and recyclable material collection services offered;
(H) To offer roll-off container or dumpster service to any person or business in the city who
desires such service, provided said service complies with the requirements of the city's zoning
ordinance, as amended, regarding dumpsters;
(I) To deliver all garbage and trash picked up to a facility licensed to receive such material;
(J) To deliver all recyclable material picked up to a material recovery center where
collected materials shall be recycled to the fullest extent possible;
(K) To file with the City Manager on or before January 1 of each year, and at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of any rate increase, a schedule of rates for any and all services offered to
customers in the city, and a schedule of established pick-up dates for customers in the city;
(L) To file with the City Manager on an annual basis a record of the number of garbage,
trash, and recyclable material pick-up customers, by category, in the city, and a record of the number of
tons of garbage and trash picked up, and a record of the number of tons of recyclable material picked
up;
(M) To obtain and to maintain any state licenses required to conduct a garbage, trash, and
recyclable material pickup business;
(N) To insure each truck or piece of equipment to be used in the conduct of the business in
the city for property damage in an amount not less than $100,000 and for personal injury or death in an
amount not less than $1,000,000 for a single accident and $3,000,000 combined limits, and to file
certificates of such insurance coverages with the City Manager.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92)
§ 93.22 LICENSE FEE.
The annual fee for a license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be established by resolution
adopted by the City Council from time to time. Renewal of licenses, including remittance of the annual
fee, shall be applied for no later than December 1 each year for the succeeding calendar year.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92)
§ 93.23 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
The City Manager, after review of an application for a license to pick up, collect, and haul
garbage, trash, and recyclable material, and upon payment of the annual license fee, and upon
determination that the applicant meets the requirements for a license described in § 93.21 above, shall
issue a license to the applicant.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92)
§ 93.24 LICENSE REVOCATION.
(A) Upon receiving notice of an alleged violation of or non-compliance with any
requirement for a license described in this subchapter, the City Manager or his or her agent shall
investigate the allegation and determine whether or not a violation has occurred.
(B) If the City Manager or his or her agent determines that no violation has occurred, then a
written report of that determination shall be filed with the notice of alleged violation.
(C) If the City Manager or his or her agent determines that the alleged violation has
occurred, the City Manager shall determine whether or not the violation will cause an immediate threat
to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city.
(D) If the City Manager determines that the violation will not cause an immediate threat to
the health, safety, and welfare of the residents, the City Manager shall give notice of the violation to the
licensee and request that the violation be corrected forthwith. All notices of violation and licensee's
responses thereto shall be considered in the renewal process of any license. If more than three notices
of violation are given to a licensee during the term of any license, the City Manager shall revoke the
license of such licensee, shall notify the licensee of the license revocation, and shall notify the licensee
of the opportunity to request a City Council hearing on the license revocation. If the licensee requests in
writing a City Council hearing, the City Council shall hold the hearing at its next regular meeting. After
the hearing, the City Council shall decide whether to uphold the license revocation or to reinstate the
license. The decision of City Council shall be final.
(E) If the City Manager determines that the violation will cause an immediate threat to the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents, the City Manager shall immediately revoke the license of
the licensee, shall immediately notify the licensee of the license revocation, and shall notify the licensee
of the opportunity to request a City Council hearing on the license revocation. If the licensee requests in
writing a City Council hearing, the City Council shall hold the hearing at its next regular meeting. After
the hearing, the City Council shall decide whether to uphold the license revocation or to reinstate the
license. The decision of City Council shall be final.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92)
§ 93.25 OPERATIONS REQUIREMENTS FOR COLLECTION BUSINESSES.
All persons licensed to pick up, collect, and haul garbage, trash, and recyclable material in the
city pursuant to this subchapter shall:
(A) Comply with the license requirements set forth in § 93.21(A)-(N) of this subchapter;
(B) Comply with all applicable federal, state, and county laws and regulations concerning
the operations of picking up, collecting, and hauling garbage, trash, and recyclable material;
(C) Identify on any motorized equipment utilized to pick up, collect, and haul garbage,
trash, and recyclable material in the city the name of the licensee and a telephone number where a
customer or other person may contact the licensee;
(D) Maintain any motorized equipment utilized in operations in a clean and sanitary
condition, as free from offensive odors as possible, and not park any such motorized equipment upon
any street, alley or public place in the city nor upon any private premises longer than is reasonably
necessary to collect garbage, trash, and recyclable material from the premises of customers;
(E) Pick up, collect, and haul garbage, trash, and recyclable material from residential,
commercial, and industrial customers only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92) Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any disposal of leaves or yard wastes in violation of the terms of § 93.01 shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by fine not exceeding $100 and by jail not exceeding 30 days.
(Ord. 117, passed 11-28-90)
(B) A person who violates §§ 93.15 et seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine not to exceed $500 plus court costs, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed
90 days, or both. In addition, any violation shall also authorize license revocation proceedings with
respect to the license issued pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 129, passed 12-7-92)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
94.01 Name
94.02 Parks defined
94.03 Authority
94.04 Hours of operation
94.05 Operation of vehicles
94.06 Snowmobiles prohibited
94.07 Speed limit
94.08 Storage of vehicles and equipment prohibited
94.09 Use of park facilities
94.10 Picnics
94.11 Fires
94.12 Restroom facilities
94.13 Nudity prohibited
94.14 Pets; leash required
94.15 Horses, large animals prohibited
94.16 Excessive noise, disturbance, nuisance prohibited
94.17 Obscene language or gesture prohibited
94.18 Electronic sound-producing devices
94.19 Alcoholic beverages and controlled substances prohibited
94.20 Firearms and weapons prohibited
94.21 Hunting prohibited
94.22 Littering prohibited in parks
94.23 Discarding imported trash prohibited
94.24 Injuring or destroying trees and plants prohibited
94.25 Damaging park property prohibited
94.26 Camping and overnight sleeping prohibited
94.27 Amusement rides and attractions prohibited
94.28 Commercial activities prohibited
94.29 Advertising prohibited
94.30 Structures prohibited
94.31 Tennis court surface uses prohibited
94.32 Hot air balloons, parachutes, hang gliders prohibited
94.33 Launching or landing motorized watercraft prohibited
94.34 Other regulations
94.35 Public events, reolution of City Council
94.36 Use of motorized model airplane, car, boat, drone prohibited
94.99 Enforcement and penalties
Cross-reference:
Bike paths, see §§ 50.45 et seq.
Sale of parks and cemeteries by Council, see Charter §§ 5.11, 5.31
§ 94.01 NAME.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the City Park Rules and Regulations Chapter.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01)
§ 94.02 PARKS DEFINED.
Parks subject to these rules and regulations are (Parcel numbers are the numbers assigned as of
2010. Maps of park locations may be obtained at City Hall):
(A) Coast Guard Park, approximately 80 acres located at 18161 North Shore Road, Parcel
Nos. 70-03-17-100-004 and 70-03-17-200-041.
(B) Fire Barn Park, approximately five acres located at 17411 North Shore Road, Parcel No.
70-03-16-100-041.
(C) William Ferry Park, approximately 1.8 acres located at 110 Pine Street, Parcel No. 70-03-
16-451-001.
(D) Kitchel-Lindquist-Hartger Dunes Preserve, approximately 113 acres at 20001 Berwyck
Street, Grand Haven.
(E) Ferrysburg Nature Preserve, approximately 40 acres, Parcel No. 70-03-08-400-062.
(F) Mike Herman Memorial Field, approximately 1.75 acres, located in Spring Lake
Township, Parcel Nos. 70-03-08-350-009, 70-03-08-350-012, and 70-03-08-350-016.
(G) Sunnyside Park, approximately .5 acres at 17200 Valley City, Parcel No. 70-03-15-104-
002.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01; Am. Ord. 192, passed 6-3-02; Am. Ord. 264, passed 5-17-10; Am. Ord. 275,
passed 6-4-12)
§ 94.03 AUTHORITY.
The parks defined in § 94.02 shall be under the administrative authority of the City Manager and
his or her designees.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01)
§ 94.04 HOURS OF OPERATION.
Parks shall be open from 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. No person may be in, occupy, or use any
portion of any park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.05 OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
(A) No person may operate or park a vehicle in any park except on designated driveways
and parking areas. This section shall not apply to authorized maintenance vehicles or to law
enforcement vehicles.
(B) As used in this chapter, the term VEHICLE means any automobile, truck, motorcycle,
recreational vehicle, mini-bike, moped, or other self-propelled instrument of conveyance. The term
VEHICLE does not include a snowmobile.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.06 SNOWMOBILES PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall operate a snowmobile in a park.
(B) As used in this chapter, the term SNOWMOBILE means any motor driven device
designed for travel primarily on snow or ice of a type that utilizes sled-type runners or skis, an endless
belt tread or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it
is operated.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.07 SPEED LIMIT.
No person shall operate a vehicle on any park driveway or parking area at a speed in excess of
15 miles per hour.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.08 STORAGE OF VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.
No person shall store or leave a vehicle in a park, except to park a vehicle in a designated
parking area while using facilities at a park during open hours. No person shall store any equipment at
any park. Any vehicle or equipment found in a park in violation of this section may be impounded by the
Police Department. This section shall not apply to law enforcement vehicles or to vehicles or equipment
authorized by the City Manager or his designee. This section also shall not apply to passenger vehicles
parked in the "park and ride" parking lot at William Ferry Park.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.09 USE OF PARK FACILITIES.
The use of park facilities shall be on a first come, first served basis, except for the use of soccer
fields and balls fields scheduled for organized leagues by the Northwest Ottawa Recreation Program.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01)
§ 94.10 PICNICS.
No person shall use any part of a park for a picnic, except in areas specifically designated for
picnics. No picnics are permitted at the Kitchel Lindquist Dunes Preserve.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.11 FIRES.
No person may build or start a fire at any park, except a cooking fire within a grill intended and
designated for that purpose. No person may leave a cooking fire unattended. All cooking fires within
grills shall be completely extinguished by the person who built or started the cooking fire before the
person leaves the immediate vicinity of the cooking fire. This section shall not apply to the annual
December carol sing bonfire at William Ferry Park. No fires of any kind may be built or started at the
Kitchel-Lindquist Dunes Preserve.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.12 RESTROOM FACILITIES.
No person may urinate or defecate in any park except in a restroom facility provided for that
purpose.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.13 NUDITY PROHIBITED.
No person may appear in the nude in any park. At a minimum, a person shall wear opaque
clothing which covers the genitals and, for a female, the breasts.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.14 PETS; LEASH REQUIRED.
No person may allow a pet (such as a dog, cat, or other domesticated animal) to run loose and
not be under the immediate control of a competent person in a park. Pets must be on a leash of six feet
or less. No running of pets off a leash is permitted. A person with a pet in a park shall clean up the pet's
droppings and properly dispose of them.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.15 HORSES, LARGE ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
Horses and other large animals are prohibited in any park.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.16 EXCESSIVE NOISE, DISTURBANCE, NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
No person in a park may make any unreasonable or excessive noise or disturbance, or create a
breach of the peace or a nuisance.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.17 OBSCENE LANGUAGE OR GESTURE PROHIBITED.
No person in a park may use obscene language or make an obscene gesture.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.18 ELECTRONIC SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES.
No person in a park may at any time permit or engage in the playing of any electronic soundproducing
device (such as a radio, phonograph, stereo, television set, amplified musical instrument, loud
speakers, public address system, tape or cassette or compact disc player, or any similar device) in such a
manner or with such volume which is unreasonably loud, raucous, or a nuisance to other persons in the
park or to persons immediately adjacent to the park.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.19 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.
No person may transport, possess, use or consume any alcoholic beverage or controlled
substance in a park. The City Council may authorize an exception to this section to allow alcoholic
beverages to be served at a special event in a park.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.20 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS PROHIBITED.
(A) No person may bring into, possess, discharge, set off, or use any firearm or weapon in a
park. This section shall not apply to a police officer or other duly appointed law enforcement officer
while carrying out official duties.
(B) For purposes of this chapter, a FIREARM is a revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle, air gun,
pellet gun, starting pistol, b-b gun, or other gun which discharges a projectile by explosive substance, air,
or any other force. For purposes of this chapter, a WEAPON is a device or article which is intended to be
used for fighting or hunting, including but not limited to a crossbow, bow and arrows, slingshot, disk,
dagger, stiletto, brass knuckles, or a knife except a knife intended to be used exclusively for meal
preparation or service.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.21 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
No person may hunt, trap, catch, wound, or kill any bird or animal in a park. No person may
molest or rob any bird nest or any animal lair, den or burrow.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.22 LITTERING PROHIBITED IN PARKS.
(A) Litter defined. Rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper, glass, cans,
bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substance.
(B) Littering prohibited. A person shall not knowingly, without the consent of the public
authority having supervision of a park, dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or cause or permit the
dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter in a park except in a container designated and
set aside for disposal.
(Ord. 231, passed 7-17-06) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.23 DISCARDING IMPORTED TRASH PROHIBITED.
No person may deposit or discard in a park, either in the open or in a designated trash
receptacle, any trash, garbage or waste which is not generated by lawful activities in a park.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.24 INJURING OR DESTROYING TREES AND PLANTS PROHIBITED.
No person may injure, cut, deface, destroy, disturb or remove any tree, sapling, seedling, brush,
or shrub in a park. No person may chip, blaze, box, trim or otherwise deface or injure any tree or shrub.
No person may pick, gather, uproot, remove or destroy any flower or plant. This section shall not apply
to maintenance activities of city crews authorized by the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.25 DAMAGING PARK PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
No person may deface, injure, destroy or remove any building, equipment, sign, groundcover,
landscaping, sand, gravel, asphalt, concrete, or other improvement in a park. This section shall not apply
to maintenance activities of maintenance workers authorized by the City Manager or his or her
designee.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.26 CAMPING AND OVERNIGHT SLEEPING PROHIBITED.
No person may establish or maintain any camp or other temporary lodging place in a park.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.27 AMUSEMENT RIDES AND ATTRACTIONS PROHIBITED.
No person shall bring an amusement ride or attraction into any park, unless permission has
been applied for and obtained from the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.28 COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
No person may conduct a commercial business, peddle, or solicit business of any nature in a
park. If permission has been applied for and obtained from the City Manager or his or her designee, a
person may offer food and non-alcoholic beverages for sale to participants and spectators of scheduled
or organized special events.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.29 ADVERTISING PROHIBITED.
No person may post any advertising signs or advertisements, or distribute handbills or flyers or
other advertising media in any park.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.30 STRUCTURES PROHIBITED.
No person may erect, place, or maintain a structure (such as a lean-to, blind, shed, treehouse, or
other construction) in a park. Any structure found in a park may be removed by city-authorized
personnel. This section shall not apply to structures authorized by the City Council.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.31 TENNIS COURT SURFACE USES PROHIBITED.
No person may use in-line skates, roller skates, scooters or skateboards on tennis court surfaces.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.32 HOT AIR BALLOONS, PARACHUTES, HANG GLIDERS PROHIBITED.
No person shall launch, land, or use a hot air balloon, parachute, or hang glider in a park.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.33 LAUNCHING OR LANDING MOTORIZED WATERCRAFT PROHIBITED.
No person shall launch a motorized watercraft from any park, land a motorized watercraft on a
park or secure a motorized watercraft to a park. This section shall not apply to authorized law
enforcement personnel or to authorized maintenance crews.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.34 OTHER REGULATIONS.
Other regulations may be established by the City Manager to regulate the use of specific park
facilities, such as the use of soccer fields, ball diamonds, basketball courts, sand volleyball courts, ice
skating rinks, play structures, and other improvements. Such regulations shall be posted in a park. A
violation of a posted regulation will constitute a violation of this chapter and is subject to the provisions
of City Code § 94.99.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01) Penalty, see § 94.99
§ 94.35 PUBLIC EVENTS, RESOLUTION OF CITY COUNCIL.
The foregoing rules and regulations may be modified by resolution of the City Council for the
purpose of facilitating the use of parks in connection with public events.
(Ord. 252, passed 6-5-09)
§ 94.36 USE OF MOTORIZED MODEL AIRPLANE, CAR, BOAT, DRONE PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall use or operate any motorized model airplane, car, boat, drone or similar
device in a park or on city property located at 17290 Roosevelt Road and 408 Fifth Street.
(B) Permitting. Use of a drone may be allowed for commercial uses and amateur hobby
clubs, and formed groups under certain circumstances. On forms provided by the city, a permit
application shall be submitted to the City Manager. The City Manager shall either issue the permit as
applied for, or shall deny the permit as applied for and shall state the reasons for the permit denial.
(Ord. 286, passed 6-1-15)
§ 94.99 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
(A) Any person in Coast Guard Park, Fire Barn Park, William Ferry Park, or Sunnyside Park
who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a fine of
up to $500 and costs of prosecution or a jail sentence of up to 90 days, or both. A person who violates
any provision of this chapter may also be evicted from the park where the violation occurred. In
addition, any person convicted of an act of vandalism or property destruction shall reimburse the city
for the total amount of damages as determined by the court plus costs of prosecution.
(B) The city may recover damages from the parents or parent of an un-emancipated minor,
living with his or her parents or parent, who has maliciously or willfully destroyed real or personal
property in a park.
(C) Any person in Kitchel-Lindquist-Hartger Dunes Preserve or Mike Herman Memorial Field
who violates any provision of this chapter is trespassing.
(D) Violations of this chapter may also be enforced by civil actions at law or at equity.
Violations of this chapter are nuisances per se.
(E) Parking violations arising from the parking of a vehicle in a park are subject to the
parking regulations of the City Code, as amended.
(Ord. 182, passed 5-7-01; Am. Ord. 286, passed 6-1-15)
CHAPTER 95: MARINE SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
95.01 Title
95.02 Definitions
Regulations and Prohibitions
95.10 Age of operator
95.11 Rules of operation
95.12 Speed
95.13 Operation while intoxicated
95.14 Blood alcohol testing
95.15 Operation while visibly impaired
95.16 Submission and consent to chemical tests
95.17 Negligent or reckless operation and conduct
95.18 Operation in open areas; distance to be kept from docks, bathing areas, and the like
95.19 Restricted areas
95.20 Skiing and the like
95.21 Onboard safety
95.22 Diving and submerged swimming
95.23 Sanctioned boat races
95.24 No-wake zones
Administration and Enforcement
95.30 Duty to obey peace officer; arrest without warrant authorized
95.31 Procedures following arrest
95.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Marine Safety Ordinance.”
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANCHORED RAFTS. All types of non-powered rafts used for recreational purposes which are
anchored seasonally on waters of the city.
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT. A system, part, or component of a boat as originally manufactured,
or a similar part or component manufactured or sold for replacement, repair or improvement of the
system, part, or component; an accessory or equipment for, or appurtenance to, a boat; or a marine
safety article, accessory, or equipment intended for use by a person on board a boat. It does not include
radio equipment.
BOAT. A vessel which is manufactured or used primarily for noncommercial use; leased, rented
or chartered to another for the latter's noncommercial use; or engaged in the carrying of not more than
six passengers.
BOAT LIVERY. A business which holds a vessel for renting, leasing, or chartering.
BOATING SAFETY CERTIFICATE. A certificate issued by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources evidencing that the holder has successfully completed a state-approved course of
instruction in boating safety.
HIGH SPEED BOATING. A speed at or above which a motorboat reaches a planing condition.
LIFEBOAT. A small boat designated and used solely for lifesaving purposes, and does not include
dinghies, tenders, speedboats, or other types of craft carried aboard vessels and used for other than
lifesaving purposes.
MANUFACTURER. A person engaged in the manufacture, construction, or assembly of boats or
associated equipment; the manufacture or construction of components for boats and associated
equipment to be sold for subsequent assembly; or the importation of a boat or associated equipment
into the state for sale.
MOTORBOAT. A vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not machinery is the principal
source of propulsion.
OPERATE. To navigate or otherwise use a vessel.
OPERATOR. The person who is in control or in charge of a vessel while it is in use.
OWNER. A person who claims lawful possession of a vessel by virtue of legal title or equitable
interest therein which entitles him or her to the possession.
PASSENGER. A person carried on board a vessel other than the owner or his or her
representative; the operator; bona fide members of the crew engaged in the business of the vessel who
have not contributed consideration for their carriage and who are paid for their services; or a guest on
board a vessel which is being used exclusively for pleasure purposes who has not contributed
consideration, directly or indirectly, for his or her carriage.
PORT. Left, and reference is to the port side of a vessel or to the left side of the vessel.
REGATTA, BOAT RACE, MARINE PARADE, TOURNAMENT, or EXHIBITIONS. An organized water
event of limited duration which is conducted according to a prearranged schedule.
SLOW-NO WAKE SPEED. A very slow speed whereby the wake or wash created by the vessel
would be minimal.
STARBOARD. Right, and reference is to the starboard side of a vessel or to the right side of the
vessel.
UNDOCUMENTED VESSEL. A vessel which does not have, and is not required to have, a valid
marine document issued by the United States Coast Guard or federal agency successor thereto.
USE. Operate, navigate, or employ.
VESSEL. Every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of
being used as a means of transportation on water.
WATERS OF THE CITY. Any waters within the territorial limits of the city.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90)
REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS
§ 95.10 AGE OF OPERATOR.
Children less than 12 years of age may be permitted to operate motorboats on the waters of the
city only when accompanied by at least one person 16 years of age or older. Children between the ages
of 12 and 16 may be permitted to operate motorboats on the waters of the city only when accompanied
by a least one person 16 years of age or older, or without such adult supervision when in possession of a
boating safety certificate issued subsequent to satisfactorily completing a course in boating safety
approved by the State Department of Natural Resources. When so operating, the boating safety
certificate shall be in the possession of the minor operator and shall be presented upon demand of any
peace officer. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any motorboat powered by less
than 6-horsepower motors.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.11 RULES OF OPERATION.
(A) When vessels are being operated in such a manner so as to make collision imminent or
likely, the following rules shall apply:
(1) When two vessels are approaching each other head-on, or nearly so, the
operator of each shall cause his or her vessel to pass on the port side of the other.
(2) When overtaking a vessel proceeding in the same direction, the operator of the
overtaking vessel, unless it is not feasible to do so, shall pass on the port side of the vessel ahead.
(3) When two vessels are approaching each other at right angles or obliquely so as
to involve risk of collision, other than when one vessel is overtaking another, the operator of the vessel
which has the other on his or her own port side shall hold his or her course and speed, and the operator
of the vessel which has the other on his or her own starboard side shall give way to the other by
directing his or her course to starboard so as to cross the stern of the other vessel or, if necessary to do
so, shall slacken his or her speed, stop or reverse.
(4) When a motorboat and a vessel under sail are proceeding in such a manner so
as to involve risk of collision, the operator of the motorboat shall give way to the vessel under sail.
(5) When a motorboat and a vessel not propelled by sail or mechanical means are
proceeding in such manner as to involve risk of collision, the operator of the motorboat shall give way to
the other vessel.
(6) When, by any of the rules provided in this section, the operator of a vessel is
required to give way to the other, the operator of the other vessel shall maintain his or her direction and
speed.
(B) Nothing in this section shall relieve the operator of a vessel otherwise privileged by the
provisions of this section from the duty to operate with due regard for the safety of all persons using the
waters of the city.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.12 SPEED.
(A) On waters of the city for which a motorboat speed limit is not established under Public
Act 303 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. § 281.1072a(1), or on any waters of the city that are not subject to an
unlimited motorboat speed limit established pursuant to M.C.L.A. § 281.1072a(1), or on any waters of
the city for which stricter speed restrictions are not established pursuant to an act of the state, or on
any waters of the city for which stricter speed restrictions are not established pursuant to a special local
ordinance under Public Act 303 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. § 281.1016, a maximum speed limit of 55 miles
per hour is established, except in an emergency and except for authorized peace and conservation
officers when engaged in official duties. The maximum speed limit of 55 miles per hour shall apply to
Lake Michigan.
(B) A person shall not operate a motorboat on the waters of the city at a speed greater than
slow-no wake speed or the minimum speed necessary for the motorboat to maintain forward
movement when within 200 feet of the shoreline where the water depth is less than 3 feet, as
determined by vertical measurement, except in navigable channels not otherwise posted.
(C) A person operating a motorboat in violation of this section is guilty of reckless operation
of a motorboat punishable as provided in § 95.99.
(D) This section may be waived for marine events authorized by the State Department of
Natural Resources under § 95.19.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.13 OPERATION WHILE INTOXICATED.
(A) A person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, as
defined by Section 7104 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §
333.7104, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, shall not operate, propel,
or be in actual physical control of a vessel upon the waters of the city. The owner of a vessel, or a person
having charge of or in control of a vessel, shall not knowingly authorize or knowingly permit the vessel
to be propelled or operated by a person who is under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or a
controlled substance, or a combination of an intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. A violation
of this division (A) is punishable as provided in divisions (C) and (D) of this section.
(B) A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant when the peace officer has
reasonable cause to believe that the person was, at the time of an accident, the driver of a vessel
involved in the accident and was operating the vessel upon the waters of the city while under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination of an intoxicating liquor and
a controlled substance or was operating a vessel on the waters of the city while the person's ability to
operate a vessel was visibly impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor or a controlled
substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance.
(C) A person who is convicted of a violation of division (A) is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$500, or both, together with costs of the prosecution.
(D) Upon conviction of a person under this section, the court, in addition to the penalty
imposed under division (C) and as part of the sentence, may order that the person not operate a vessel
upon the waters of the city for a period of not more than two years. The court may also order the
person to participate in an alcohol training program.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.14 BLOOD ALCOHOL TESTING.
(A) In a criminal prosecution for operating a vessel while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor, or for operating a vessel while visibly impaired, the amount of alcohol in the operator's blood at
the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, or breath shall be
admissible into evidence. If a test is given, the results of the test shall be made available to the person
charged or the person's attorney upon written request to the prosecution, with a copy of the request
filed with the court. The prosecution shall furnish the report at least two days before the day of the trial
and the results shall be offered as evidence by the prosecution in a criminal proceeding. Failure to fully
comply with the request shall bar the admission of the results into evidence by the prosecution. The
amount of alcohol in the operator's blood a the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the
person' blood, urine, or breath shall give rise to the following presumptions:
(1) If there was at the time 0.07% or less by weight of alcohol in the defendant's
blood, it shall be presumed that the defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(2) If there was at the time in excess of 0.07% but less than 0.10% by weight of
alcohol in the defendant's blood, it shall be presumed that the defendant's ability to operate a vessel
was impaired within the provisions of Section 1073b due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor.
(3) If there was at the time 0.10% or more by weight of alcohol in the defendant's
blood, it shall be presumed that the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(B) A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and collected in a reasonable
manner. Only a licensed physician, or a licensed nurse or medical technician under the direction of a
licensed physician and qualified to withdraw blood acting in a medical environment, at the request of a
peace officer, may withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content of the blood
under this chapter. Liability for a crime or civil damages predicated on the act of withdrawing blood and
related procedures shall not attach to a qualified person who withdraws blood or assists in the
withdrawal in accordance with this chapter unless the withdrawal is performed in a negligent manner.
(C) A person charged with a crime enumerated in division (A) who takes a chemical test
administered at the request of a peace officer, as provided in divisions (A) and (B), shall be informed that
the person will be given a reasonable opportunity to have a person of his or her own choosing
administer one of the chemical tests, as provided in this section, within a reasonable time after his or
her detention, and the results of the test shall be admissible and shall be considered with other
competent evidence in determining the innocence or guilt of the defendant. A person charged with a
crime enumerated in division (A) who is requested by the peace officer to take a chemical test as
provided in divisions (A) and (B) shall be informed that he or she has the right to demand that one of the
tests provided for in division (A) shall be given him or her, and the results of the test shall be admissible
and shall be considered with other competent evidence in determining the innocence or guilt of the
defendant.
(D) The person charged shall be advised that the person may refuse to take a test as
provided in this section and, except as provided in § 95.16(B), that the refusal is admissible in evidence
as provided in division (G) of this section.
(E) This section shall not be construed as limiting the introduction of any other competent
evidence bearing upon the question of whether or not the defendant was under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.
(F) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a person requested to take a test shall
be advised that he or she has the option to demand that only a breath test shall be given, in which case
his or her refusal to submit to another test shall not constitute a refusal.
(G) If a jury instruction regarding a defendant's refusal to submit to a chemical test under
this section is requested by the prosecution or the defendant, the jury instruction shall be given as
follows:
“Evidence was admitted in this case which, if believed by the jury, could prove that the
defendant had exercised his or her right to refuse a chemical test. You are instructed that such a refusal
is within the statutory rights of the defendant and is not evidence of the defendant's guilt. You are not
to consider such a refusal in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.”
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.15 OPERATION WHILE VISIBLY IMPAIRED.
(A) A person shall not operate a vessel upon the waters of the city when, due to the
consumption of an intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of an intoxicating liquor
and a controlled substance, the person has visibly impaired his or her ability to operate the vessel. If a
person is charged with violating § 95.13, a finding of guilty is permissible under this section.
(B) A person convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $300, or both, together with
costs of the prosecution.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.16 SUBMISSION AND CONSENT TO CHEMICAL TESTS.
(A) A person who operates a vessel upon the water of the city may be requested by a peace
officer to submit to chemical tests of his or her blood, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining
the alcoholic content of his or her blood if:
(1) The person is arrested for a violation of §§ 95.13 or 95.15.
(2) The person is arrested for manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vessel
and the peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person was operating the vessel while
under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or while his or her ability to operate the vessel was impaired
due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor.
(B) A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes, or a condition requiring the use of
an anticoagulant under the direction of a physician and who refuses a chemical test shall not be
considered to have refused a chemical test if the test requires the withdrawal of blood. This refusal is
not admissible in evidence under § 95.14.
(C) A person who is requested pursuant to division (A) of this section to take a chemical test
shall be advised of the right to refuse to submit to chemical tests; and if the person refuses the request
of a peace officer to submit to chemical tests, a test shall not be given without a court order.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.17 NEGLIGENT OR RECKLESS OPERATION AND CONDUCT.
(A) A person operating or propelling a vessel upon the waters of the city shall operate it in a
careful and prudent manner and at such a rate of speed so as not to endanger unreasonably the life or
property of any person. A person shall not operate any vessel at a rate of speed greater than will permit
him or her, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the vessel to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead. A person shall not operate a vessel in a manner so as to interfere unreasonably with the
lawful use of others of any waters of the city.
(B) A person who operates any vessel upon any of the waters of the city carelessly and
heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or without due caution and circumspection and
at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, is guilty of
reckless operation of a vessel and shall be punished as provided in § 95.99. A person who navigates,
steers, or controls himself or herself while being towed on water skis, a water sled, a surfboard or
similar contrivances upon any of the waters of the city carelessly and heedlessly in disregard of the
rights or safety of others, or without due caution and circumspection and in a manner so as to endanger
or be likely to endanger any person or property is guilty of reckless operation of water skis, water sleds,
surfboards or similar contrivances.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.18 OPERATION IN OPEN AREAS; DISTANCE TO BE KEPT FROM DOCKS, BATHING AREAS, AND THE
LIKE.
Persons operating vessels on the waters of the city in areas not marked by well-defined
channels, canals, rivers or stream courses shall operate in a counterclockwise fashion insofar as it is
reasonably possible. These persons and persons being towed on water skis, water sleds, kites,
surfboards or similar contrivances shall maintain a distance of 100 feet from any dock, raft, buoyed or
occupied bathing area, or vessel moored or at anchor, except when the vessel is proceeding at a slow-no
wake speed or when water skiers are being picked up or dropped off, if such operation is otherwise
conducted with due regard to the safety of persons and property and in accordance with the Marine
Safety Ordinance and the laws of the state.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.19 RESTRICTED AREAS.
A person shall not operate a vessel on any of the waters of the city within a lawfully authorized
restricted area clearly marked by buoys, beacons or other distinguishing devices as being prohibited to
vessels.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.20 SKIING AND THE LIKE.
(A) Prohibition against nighttime skiing. An operator of any vessel shall not have in tow or
otherwise be assisting in the propulsion of a person on water skis, a water sled, a surfboard or other
similar contrivance during the period of one hour after sunset to one hour prior to sunrise. Any person
permitting himself or herself to be towed on water skis, a water sled, a surfboard or a similar
contrivance in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(B) Additional rules of operation.
(1) (a) A person shall not operate on the waters of the city a vessel having in
tow or otherwise assisting a person on water skis, a water sled, an aquaplane, a surfboard or other
similar contrivance, unless there is in the vessel, in addition to the operator, at least one competent
person in a position to observe the progress of the person being towed. An observer shall be considered
competent if he or she can, in fact, render assistance if necessary.
(b) All motorboats engaged in the propulsion of a person on water skis, a
water sled, an aquaplane, a surfboard or a similar contrivance shall be equipped with a 170° wide-angle
rear view mirror affixed in a manner as will permit the operator to observe the progress of the person
being towed.
(2) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to vessels used by duly
constituted ski schools in the giving of instructions, or to vessels used in sanctioned ski tournaments,
competitions, expositions or trials therefor, or to motorboats less than 16 feet in length actually
operated by the person being towed and so constructed as to be incapable of carrying the operator in or
on the motorboat.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.21 ONBOARD SAFETY.
Any occupant or operator of any vessel underway on the waters of the city shall not sit, stand or
walk upon any portion of the vessel not specifically designed for such purpose, except when
immediately necessary for the safe and reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.22 DIVING AND SUBMERGED SWIMMING.
Any person diving or submerging in any of the waters of the city with the aid of a diving suit or
other mechanical diving device shall place a buoy or boat in the water at or near the point of
submergence. The buoy or boat shall bear a red flag not less than 14 inches by 16 inches with a 3½-inch
white strip running from one upper corner to a diagonal lower corner. The flag shall be in place only
while actual diving operations are in progress. A vessel shall not be operated within 100 feet of a buoyed
diver's flag unless it is involved in tendering the diving operation. A person diving shall stay within a
surface area of 100 feet of the diver's flag.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.23 SANCTIONED BOAT RACES.
The holding of regattas, motorboat or other boat races, marine parades, tournaments,
exhibitions or trials therefor on any waters of the city shall be conducted pursuant to State Department
of Natural Resources authorization given under Public Act 303 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. § 281.1151.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90) Penalty, see § 95.99
§ 95.24 NO-WAKE ZONES.
(A) (1) All words and phrases used in this subsection shall be construed and have the
same meanings as those words and phrases defined in Public Act 303 of 1967, as amended, M.S.A.
18.1287(8).
(2) R281.770.9 Spring Lake; slow-no wake speed.
RULE 9. On the waters of Spring Lake adjacent to the City of Ferrysburg, Village of Spring Lake,
Spring Lake Township, Ottawa County, it is unlawful for:
a. The operator of a vessel less than 26 feet in length to exceed a slow-no
wake speed when within 200 feet of any shore, dock, or pierhead.
b. The operator of a vessel 26 feet or more in length to exceed a slow-no
wake speed.
(See R281.761.7 covering that portion of Spring Lake which lies in Muskegon
County.)
(3) R281.770.10 Spring Lake and connected waters; slow-no wake speed.
RULE 10. It is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow-no wake speed on the
following described waters in the City of Ferrysburg, Village of Spring Lake, Spring Lake Township,
Ottawa County:
a. Smith Bayou: On the waters of Smith Bayou, Section 9, 15 and 16, T8N,
R16W, City of Ferrysburg, Ottawa County, northwesterly of a line beginning where the centerline of
Reenders Street, as extended, intersects the water's edge and thence southwesterly to the nearest
opposite shore.
b. The south end of Spring Lake described as: from the M-104 bridge,
northeasterly 2500 feet and from the Ferrysburg shore to the center of Spring Lake.
(Ord. 34, passed 5-22-74; Am. Ord. 34A, passed 4-28-76; Am. Ord. 52, passed 5-24-78; Am. Ord. 70,
passed 2-25-81)
(B) R 281.770.27 Spring Lake; slow-no wake speed zone.
RULE 27. On that portion of the waters of Spring Lake located within Section 16, T8N, R16W City
of Ferrysburg, Ottawa County, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow-no wake
speed.
(Ord. 73, passed 7-22-81)
(C) Watercraft Control 70-96-001 Grand River; slow-no wake speed.
On the waters of the Grand River, sections 16 and 17, Town 8 North, range 16 west, City of
Ferrysburg, Ottawa County, State of Michigan, commencing on the South line of section 17 at the
shoreline of the Grand River, thence easterly on the South line of section 17 to the center of the Grand
River, thence northeasterly along the centerline of the Grand River to a point 3,200 feet downstream
from the Grand Trunk (now CSX) railway bridge, thence Northerly to the shoreline of the Grand River,
thence westerly along the shoreline of the Grand River to the South line of section 17, it is unlawful for
the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow-no wake speed.
The boundaries of the area described immediately above shall be marked with signs and with
buoys. All buoys must be placed as provided in a permit issued by the Department of Natural Resources
and be in conformance with the State Uniform Waterway Marking System.
(Ord. 160, passed 6-17-96) Penalty, see § 95.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 95.30 DUTY TO OBEY PEACE OFFICER; ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT AUTHORIZED.
(A) The operator or person in charge of any vessel being used or operated on the waters of
the city, upon being hailed by any peace officer empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
shall immediately bring the vessel to a stop or maneuver it in such manner as will permit the officer to
come alongside. The operator or person in charge of the vessel and any other person on board shall give
his or her correct name and address, exhibit the certificate of number awarded for the vessel, submit to
a reasonable inspection of the vessel and to a reasonable inspection and test of the equipment of the
vessel.
(B) A peace officer who observes any violation by any person of any of the provisions of this
chapter may forthwith arrest the person without a warrant.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90)
§ 95.31 PROCEDURES FOLLOWING ARREST.
(A) Appearance before court officer; when required.
(1) Whenever a person is arrested without a warrant for any violation of this chapter,
the arrested person shall be taken, without unreasonable delay, before a magistrate or a district court
judge within the county in which the offense charged is alleged to have been committed and who has
jurisdiction of the offense and is nearest or most accessible with reference to the place where the arrest
is made, in any of the following cases:
(a) when the person is arrested under Section 1073 or Section 1073b;
(b) when a person is arrested under § 95.13(B).
(2) When in the existing circumstances it does not appear that releasing the person
pending the issuance of a warrant will constitute a public menace, the arresting officer may proceed in
such cases as provided by subsection (B) below.
(B) Notice to appear in court in lieu of being taken before court officer; when permitted;
procedure.
(1) When a person is arrested without a warrant for any violation of this chapter,
under conditions not referred to in subsection (A), the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a
written notice to appear in court containing the name and address of the person, the offense charged,
and the time and place when and where the person shall appear in court. If the arrested person so
demands, he or she shall be taken before a magistrate or a district court judge as provided in subsection
(A) in lieu of being given the notice.
(2) The time specified in the notice to appear shall be within a reasonable time
after the arrest unless the person arrested demands an earlier hearing.
(3) The place specified in the notice to appear shall be before a magistrate or a
district court judge within the county in which the offense charged is alleged to have been committed
and who has jurisdiction of the offense.
(4) Appearance may be made in person, by representation, or by mail. When
appearance is made by representation, or mail, the magistrate or the district court judge may accept the
plea of guilty or not guilty for purposes of arraignment, with the same effect as though the person
personally appeared before him or her. The magistrate or the district court judge, by giving notice five
days prior to the date of appearance, may require appearance in person at the time and place
designated in the notice.
(C) Nonresidents.
(1) When a person not a resident of the state is arrested without a warrant for any
violation of this chapter under conditions not referred to under subsection (A) above, the officer making
the arrest, upon demand of the arrested person, shall forthwith take the person before a magistrate or a
district court judge in the vicinity to answer to the complaint made against him or her. If a magistrate or
a district court judge is not available or an immediate trial cannot be had, the person arrested may
recognize to such officer for his or her appearance by leaving with him or her a sum of money not to
exceed $25.
(2) In all cases the officer making the arrest shall give a receipt to the person
arrested for the money so deposited with him or her together with a written summons as provided in
subsection (B) above.
(3) If the offender fails to appear as required, the deposit shall be forfeited as in
other cases of default in bail, in addition to any other penalty provided in this chapter.
(4) Every officer taking a deposit under this section within 48 hours thereafter shall
deposit it with the magistrate or the district court judge named in the notice to appear, together with a
report stating the facts relating to the arrest. Failure to make the report and deposit the money is
embezzlement of public money.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter (except where expressly set forth otherwise)
is a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in § 10.99.
(Ord. 116, passed 7-25-90)
CHAPTER 96: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
96.01 Definitions
96.02 Licensed required
96.03 Sales to minors
96.04 Purchases by minors
96.05 Possession in motor vehicle
96.06 Consumption in public
96.07 Open receptacle
96.08 Minors prohibited in public place after alcohol consumption
96.09 Special licenses
96.10 Public and private events, resolution of City Council
96.99 Penalty
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
The meaning of ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR and LICENSE when used in this chapter shall be as defined
in Public Act 8 of 1933 (Extra Session), being M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1 et seq.
(Ord. 13, passed - - 67)
§ 96.02 LICENSED REQUIRED.
No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed on the public streets, parks, or in any other public places,
including any store or establishment doing business with the public not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises; nor shall any one who owns, operates or controls any such public
establishment or store permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor therein.
(Ord. 13, passed - - 67) Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.03 SALES TO MINORS.
No person, either directly or indirectly, by himself, clerk, agent, servant, or employee, shall at
any time sell, furnish give, or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person unless such person shall have
attained the age of 21 years; nor shall any person, either directly or indirectly by himself, clerk, agent,
servant or employee, at any time, sell, furnish, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person who is
so intoxicated as not to be in control of all his faculties; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquor to a minor upon authority of and pursuant to a
prescription of a daily licensed physician.
(Ord. 13, passed - - 67) Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.04 PURCHASES BY MINORS.
No person under the age of 21 years shall at any time purchase, offer or attempt to purchase,
obtain consume, or bring into any premises within the city, for which a license has been issued to sell
intoxication liquor on the premises, any alcoholic liquor as defined by this chapter. Nor shall any person
in order to procure the sale and furnishing of alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years,
make any false representations as to the age of the person for whom said alcoholic liquor is desired. Nor
shall any person under the age of 21 years furnish any false information regarding his or her age or
make any false representations as to his or her age to any law enforcement office, or to any person in
charge of or employed in a place of business where alcoholic liquor is sold, for the purpose of obtaining
a sale of any alcoholic liquor to himself or herself; provided, however, that nothing herein contained
shall prohibit the purchase of alcoholic liquor by a minor under authority of and pursuant to a
prescription or a duly licensed physician.
(Ord. 13, passed - - 67) Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.05 POSSESSION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase or knowingly possess, transport or have
under his control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor unless said person is employed by a licensee
of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission and is under his control during regular working hours and in
the course of his employment. This section shall not apply to alcoholic liquor possessed by a minor
under authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician.
(Ord. 13, passed - - 67) Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.06 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC.
Any person who shall be found consuming any alcoholic beverage in any motor vehicle, or on
any public street, park, or other public place in the city shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this code
and be punished as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 13, passed - - 67) Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.07 OPEN RECEPTACLE.
Any person who shall be found in any motor vehicle, or upon any public street, park or other
public place, having in his possession an open receptacle or container containing any alcoholic beverage
shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this code and punished as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 13, passed - - 67) Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.08 MINORS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES AFTER ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION.
No minor shall be found in any public place after having consumed alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 13, passed - - 67) Penalty, see § 96.99
§ 96.09 SPECIAL LICENSES.
The City Council may, by resolution, allow the sale, possession, and consumption of alcoholic
beverages in parks or other public places in accordance with the provisions of a special liquor license
granted by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
(Ord. 115, passed 7-11-90)
§ 96.10 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE EVENTS, RESOLUTION OF CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council may, by resolution, allow the possession and consumption of alcoholic
beverages in public buildings and public spaces in connection with private social events.
(Ord. 257, passed 7-29-09)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
Any person convicted of violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$100 and costs of prosecution or be imprisoned for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 13, passed - - 67)
CHAPTER 97: COST RECOVERY AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP
Section
97.01 Definitions
97.02 Duty to remove
97.03 Failure to remove
97.04 Liability for cost recovery
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
FACILITY. An area, place or property as defined in Part 201 of the Michigan Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.20101 et seq.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any materials which pose a substantial present or potential hazard to
human life, health and safety, or the environment, including but not limited to hazardous substances as
defined in Part 201 of the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, being M.C.L.A.
§§ 324.20101 et seq., as amended, and any other substances that have been classified by the local, state
or federal government or any of their departments or agencies to be hazardous or toxic.
HAZMAT UNIT. The vehicle provided by Ottawa County pursuant to an agreement with the city,
equipped with apparatus designed to provide emergency service in situations involving the suspected or
actual release, accident or other similar occurrence involving hazardous materials.
OPERATOR. A person or entity as defined in Part 201 of the Michigan Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.20101 et seq.
RELEASE. Any unpermitted spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging,
injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any individual, firm corporation, association, partnership, commercial
entity, consortium, joint venture, government entity or any other legal entity who, through the
negligent or intentional actions of the person or of an employee or agent, is the proximate cause of a
release, or is the operator of a facility at which a release occurred.
(Ord. 204, passed 8-4-03)
§ 97.02 DUTY TO REMOVE.
It shall be the duty of any responsible party to remove immediately hazardous materials
released and undertake and complete a total cleanup of the area of the release in such a manner as to
ensure that the hazardous materials are fully removed and the area is fully restored to its condition prior
to the release of such hazardous materials, or to conditions or standards established by Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality pursuant to the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 324.20101 et seq., as amended, or other applicable law or regulation.
(Ord. 204, passed 8-4-03)
§ 97.03 FAILURE TO REMOVE.
(A) Any responsible party who fails to comply completely with § 97.02 shall be liable to the
city, its agents, contractors and employees for any costs incurred in the removal and cleanup of any and
all hazardous materials and the restoration of the affected property.
(B) In the event that any responsible party fails to remove immediately such hazardous
material, the city shall have the right to enter on to the property involved with the release and remove
and conduct a cleanup of all such hazardous materials, either by city employees or by contractors and
agents of the city.
(C) Where the HazMat Unit is used for any aspect of the removal, cleanup, control or
monitoring of any release or other incident involving hazardous materials, the responsible party shall be
liable to the city for costs incurred in using the HazMat Unit.
(Ord. 204, passed 8-4-03)
§ 97.04 LIABILITY FOR COST RECOVERY.
(A) All costs incurred by the city under § 97.03 shall be the responsibility of the responsible
party or, jointly, the responsibility of all responsible parties.
(B) In the event that said costs are not paid, the city may take whatever collection steps
may be deemed appropriate, including the placement of all such charges on the tax roll for said property
and to levy and collect such costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real
property taxes against such property.
(C) The city may pursue any other remedy, or may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect costs for which liability is imposed under this
chapter.
(D) The recovery of charges composed under this chapter does not limit or modify liability
of parties under local ordinance, state or federal law, rule or regulation.
(Ord. 204, passed 8-4-03)
CHAPTER 98: PHOSPHOROUS-FREE FERTILIZER
Section
98.01 Title
98.02 Intent and purpose
98.03 Definitions
98.04 Phosphorous fertilizers in the city prohibited
98.05 Exceptions
98.06 Commercial and institutional applicator of manufactured fertilizer licensure
requirements and procedure
98.07 Violation; enforcement
98.08 Appeals
98.99 Penalty
§ 98.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the “City of Ferrysburg Phosphorus-Free Fertilizer
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 228, passed 2-20-06)
§ 98.02 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
(A) Based upon scientific studies and general knowledge, the City Council has determined
that phosphorus, which is contained in most manufactured fertilizers, when used within the city, enters
into the city’s water resources, resulting in excessive and accelerated growth of algae and aquatic
plants. The City Council has therefore determined that it is necessary and in the public interest to
regulate the application of manufactured fertilizers containing phosphorous within the city.
(B) It is also the purpose and intent of this chapter to require licensure of commercial and
institutional applicators of manufactured fertilizers within the city.
(Ord. 228, passed 2-20-06)
§ 98.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
calls for or indicates a different meaning.
COMMERCIAL APPLICATOR. Any individual or entity that applies manufactured fertilizer in the
city in exchange for money or other valuable consideration.
INSTITUTIONAL APPLICATOR. Any individual or entity that applies manufactured fertilizers for
the purpose of maintaining turf areas. Institutional applicators shall include, but are not limited to,
owners of lands, schools, parks, religious institutions, utilities, industrial or business properties and
residential properties maintained in condominium and/or common ownership. However, an institutional
applicator shall not include an owner of individual parcels of land used for a single family dwelling or
agricultural purposes in any agricultural or residential district under the terms of the City of Ferrysburg
Zoning Ordinance.
MANUFACTURED FERTILIZER. A commercially manufactured substance which enriches the soil
and contains elements desirable for turf growth.
TURF. A covering of grass vegetation which has both aesthetic and functional benefits
maintained at a given level of management.
(Ord. 228, passed 2-20-06)
§ 98.04 PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZERS IN THE CITY PROHIBITED.
No manufactured fertilizer containing any amount of an hydric phosphoric acid shall be applied
on lawns or other turf areas within the city. However, this section shall not apply to the application of
fertilizer for the purpose of improving the yield of crops or for other purposes pertaining to agricultural
production on a farm.
(Ord. 228, passed 2-20-06)
§ 98.05 EXCEPTIONS.
(A) The prohibition of phosphorus fertilizers shall not apply to any lots or parcels of land for
which the Michigan Department of Agriculture has determined, based on tests and soil samples, that
anhydric phosphoric acid is required to maintain turf in a healthy condition. Any commercial or
institutional applicator or homeowner who claims this exception shall submit a copy of the
determination made by the Department of Agriculture to the City Clerk.
(B) Regardless of any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, a homeowner, or a
commercial applicator working for a homeowner, may obtain approval to use phosphorous fertilizer on
the homeowner’s property, provided the homeowner or applicator submits to the City Clerk, and the
City Clerk approves, a laboratory analysis of the soil on the property indicating that the soil requires
phosphorous fertilizer in order to be usable for turf-growing purposes.
(1) Lab analysis conducted for this purpose shall be performed by an independent
source, such as, but not limited to, the Michigan State University Extension Service.
(2) If the use of phosphorous fertilizer is approved under this section, the resulting
application of the phosphorous fertilizer shall be conducted so as to use only that amount of
phosphorous fertilizer indicated in the lab analysis as being sufficient to render the soil usable for turfgrowing
purposes.
(C) Approvals granted under this section shall be valid for one growing season only.
(Ord. 228, passed 2-20-06)
§ 98.06 COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL APPLICATOR OF MANUFACTURED FERTILIZER LICENSURE
REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURE.
(A) All commercial and institutional applicators shall be licensed in good standing by the city
before they apply manufactured fertilizers on any lands in the city.
(B) A license issued under this chapter shall be valid until expiration, suspension or
revocation. Licenses shall expire two years from the date of issuance but may be renewed for additional
two-year periods.
(C) To secure a license, a commercial or institutional applicator shall complete and submit
to the City Clerk a license application. The license application shall include the following:
(1) Legal and business name, address, telephone number and contact person of
applicant;
(2) Name, address and description of institutional applicator property, if applicable,
including the use, area and dimensions of the property; and
(3) A copy of the applicant’s material safety data sheet (MSDS).
(D) The applicant shall sign the application where indicated, and the signature shall serve as
an attestation that the applicant has read this chapter in its entirety and agrees to comply with all of its
provisions.
(E) Upon submission of an application, the applicant shall pay any fee established by the
City Council.
(F) The City Clerk shall review the completed application and determine whether the
manufactured fertilizers to be used comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(G) If the application is complete, and if the proposed use of manufactured fertilizer would
comply with the terms of this chapter, a numbered license shall be issued. The license shall expire two
years from the date of issuance.
(H) The City Clerk shall maintain a list of all currently-licensed commercial and institutional
applicators.
(Ord. 228, passed 2-20-06)
§ 98.07 VIOLATION; ENFORCEMENT.
If a commercial or industrial applicator is found in violation of this chapter, the City Council,
following notice and an opportunity of the licensee to be heard, may revoke the applicator’s license for
a period of time determined by the Board. If a commercial or institutional applicator is found to be in
violation of this chapter on more than one occasion in any one calendar year, the City Council shall
revoke the license of the applicator for a period of not less than one calendar year, and for such greater
period of time as the City Council may determine.
(Ord. 228, passed 2-20-06)
§ 98.08 APPEALS.
Any homeowner or applicator of manufactured fertilizer aggrieved by a decision made by the
City Clerk under this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Council.
(A) The appeal shall be commenced by filing with the City Council a written statement
containing the specific reasons for the appeal within 30 days following the date of the decision being
appealed. The timely filing of an appeal shall have the effect of staying any license issued under this
chapter pending the outcome of the appeal.
(B) The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting. The City Council shall
affirm, affirm with conditions or reverse the decision or determination being appealed, consistent with
the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 228, passed 2-20-06)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
(A) A violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction, for which the fine shall be not
less than $250 nor more than $500 for the first offense, and not less than $500 nor more than $1,000
for a subsequent offense, in the discretion of the Court, and in addition to all other costs, damages,
expenses and actual attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in enforcing the chapter or remedying the
violation of the chapter. For purposes of this section, “subsequent offense” refers to a violation of this
chapter committed with respect to a separate incident by the same person within 12 months after a
previous violation of the chapter for which the person admitted responsibility or was adjudicated to be
responsible. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) A violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se. In addition to other
penalties and remedies, the city may seek injunctive relief against the violator, in addition to other relief
provided by law.
(Ord. 228, passed 2-20-06)
CHAPTER 110: BED AND BREAKFASTS
Section
110.01 License required; fee; transferability
110.02 Dwelling unit and operator requirements
110.03 Guest register
110.04 Length of stay
110.05 Public nuisance violations
110.06 Application review
110.07 Appeals
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; TRANSFERABILITY.
(A) License required; fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bed and breakfast
facility, as defined and as permitted in the city Zoning Ordinance, without first having obtained a license.
A license shall be issued for one year with subsequent license renewal required each year thereafter.
The annual fees for such license shall be set by the City Council by resolution from time to time and shall
be published in the office of the City Clerk, who, upon receipt of approval of an application for a bed and
breakfast facility by the Planning Commission in the first instance and by the Building Inspector in
subsequent instances, shall issue a license in January of each year. This section shall not apply to hotels,
motels or motor lodges.
(B) Transferability. The bed and breakfast license is not transferable.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-8-89) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.02 DWELLING UNIT AND OPERATOR REQUIREMENTS.
Bed and breakfast facilities shall be confined to the single-family dwelling unit which is the
principal dwelling unit on the property. The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast facility is to be
located shall be the principal residence of the operator, and said operator shall live within said principal
residence when bed and breakfast operations are active.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-8-89) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.03 GUEST REGISTER.
Each operator shall keep a list of the names of all persons staying at the bed and breakfast
operation. Such list shall be available for inspection by city officials at any time.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-8-89) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.04 LENGTH OF STAY.
The maximum stay for any occupant of a bed and breakfast operation shall be 14 consecutive
days and not more than 30 days in one year.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-8-89) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.05 PUBLIC NUISANCE VIOLATIONS.
Bed and breakfast facilities shall not be permitted whenever the operation thereof constitutes a
bona fide public nuisance.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-8-89)
§ 110.06 APPLICATION REVIEW.
(A) Review of initial application or application to re-establish. The Planning Commission,
upon review of an initial application or an application to re-establish a bed and breakfast facility in the
city, may deny approval of the application when, in its opinion, the application does not meet the
requirements set forth herein or the applicable requirements of the city Zoning Ordinance pertaining to
bed and breakfast operations.
(B) Review of renewal application. The Building Inspector, upon review of an annual
application to renew an established bed and breakfast operations permit, may deny approval of the
application when, in the Building Inspector's opinion, the application no longer meets the requirements
set forth herein or the applicable requirements of the city Zoning Ordinance pertaining to bed and
breakfast operations.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-8-89)
§ 110.07 APPEALS.
An applicant denied approval of an application to establish, re-establish or renew a bed and
breakfast facility license by the city may appeal that decision to the city Zoning Board of Appeals for
further review and consideration in accordance with the rules and procedures for hearing appeals as set
forth and regulated in the city Zoning Ordinance. The Board of Appeals may deny issuance or reissuance
of a license when, in the Board's opinion, good cause is shown after investigation and after opportunity
has been given to the licensee to be heard in opposition thereto. In its investigation, the compliance or
noncompliance with state law and local ordinances, the conduct of the licensee relative to the public
and the guidelines set forth in this chapter and other considerations pertinent to the appeal brought to
the attention of the Board shall be weighed in determination of such issue.
(Ord. 106, passed 3-8-89)
CHAPTER 111: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
111.01 Purpose and intent
111.02 Definitions
111.03 Permit and/or license required
111.04 Application requirements; license fees
111.05 Conditions for approval of permit
111.06 Issuance; notice of denial; false information
111.07 Inspection
111.08 Revocation
111.09 Transfer of permit
111.10 Location restrictions
111.11 Adult entertainment regulations
111.12 Exterior portions of sexually oriented businesses
111.13 Persons younger than 18 prohibited from entry
111.14 Exemption
111.15 Notice requirements
111.16 Injunction and other remedies for violations
§ 111.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses and related activities to
promote the health, safely and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city. The provisions of the chapter do not have the purpose of imposing a
limitation or restriction on the content or any communicative material, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Neither is it the intent of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES. Any uses of land, whether vacant or combined with structures or
vehicles thereon by which said property is devoted to displaying or exhibiting material for
entertainment, a significant portion of which includes matter or actions depicting, describing or
presenting SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. For purposes of this
definition, the term significant, as used above and as following, shall be defined as greater than 20% of
the total material displayed or exhibited for sale or entertainment purposes. Adult entertainment uses
shall include, but are not limited to the following.
(1) ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity of 50
or more persons used for presenting material which has a significant portion of any motion picture or
other display depicting SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS for observation
by patrons therein.
(2) ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity
for less than (50 persons used for presenting material which has a significant portion of any motion
picture or other display depicting, describing, or presenting SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS for observation by patrons therein.
(3) ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place in which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time, and where a significant portion of images so displayed depict,
describe, or relate to SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
(4) ADULT BOOK STORE. A use which has a display containing books, magazines,
periodicals, slides, pictures, videos, cassettes, or other printed or recorded material which has a
significant portion of its content or exhibit matter or actions depicting, describing, or relating to
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS or an establishment with a significant
segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.
(5) ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features
live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, “go-go” dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or
similar entertainers, where performances show,, depict, or describe SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
(6) ADULT MOTEL. A motel wherein matter, actions or other displays are presented
which contain a significant portion depicting, describing, or relating to SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
(7) ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place where for any form of consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatment or any
other treatment of any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto
exposes SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. This definition shall not include services provided by a licensed
medical doctor, osteopathic physician, chiropractor licensed by the State of Michigan as a medical
professional, or similarly licensed professional providing message therapy as part of a bonafide health
procedure.
(8) ADULT MODEL STUDIO. Any place where, for any form of consideration or
gratuity, figure models who display SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS are provided to be observed or
sketched. This definition shall not include an accredited state-licensed public or private educational
institution offering art instruction which may involve the full exposure of the human body for purposes
of sketching or photography as part of a bonafide course.
(9) ADULT SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. Any business, agency, or person who, for
any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of
the same family, may congregate, assemble, or associate for the purpose of engaging in SPECIFIED
SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or exposing SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
(10) ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment in which the uses
defined in subsections (1) through (9) are carried on.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals,
female genitals, or female breast without a fully opaque complete covering of the breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a discernible turgid state even if
completely and opaquely covered.
PERMITTEE. A person in whose name a permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been
issued as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application form.
PERMIT. A special use permit for the operation of a sexually oriented business as issued
pursuant to this sexually oriented business ordinance.
PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
association, or legal entity.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS This term includes the following.
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
(2) Human male genitals in discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. This term includes the following.
(1) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy.
(2) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or
female breasts.
(3) Human genitals in a state of sexual simulation or arousal.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult bookstore or adult video store, adult motion picture
theater, adult mini-theater, or adult entertainment establishment.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. This term means
and includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business.
(2) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business,
whether by sale, exchange, or similar means.
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers
the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon
the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98)
§ 111.03 PERMIT AND/OR LICENSE REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid permit
issued by the Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.04 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; LICENSE FEES.
(A) An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the city. The
application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of square footage of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
(B) Applications for permit shall be made and delivered to the Building Inspector and Zoning
Administrator by the intended operator of the establishment. The intended operator shall be required
to give the following information on the application form.
(1) The name and street address (and mailing address, if different) and driver's
license number of the intended operator if he or she has such a driver's license and the name and street
address (and mailing address, if different) of the owner(s), if different.
(2) The name under which the establishment is to be operated and general
description of the services to be provided.
(3) The telephone number of the establishment or, if unavailable, the operator's.
(4) The address, and legal description, of the tract of land on which the
establishment is to be located.
(C) The fact that a person possesses other types of state or county permits and/or licenses
does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit form the
city.
(D) The application shall be accompanied by the following.
(1) Payment of the application fee in full based on the following schedule:
Adult Entertainment Business License Fee $250 annually
Adult Entertainment Manager License Fee $100
Adult Entertainment License Fee $100 annually
Adult Entertainment Server License Fee $50 annually
(2) Proof of current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is
to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed, land contract, or other instrument of
conveyances;
(3) If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land in division (D)(2)
of this section are not also the owners of the establishment, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase
option contract, lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of
the ownership or proposed owners of the establishment to have or obtain the use and possession of the
tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the establishment for the purpose of the operation of the
establishment.
(E) The application shall contain a statement under oath of the following.
(1) The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the
application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct.
(2) The applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98)
§ 111.05 CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL OF PERMIT.
(A) The Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator shall approve the issuance of a permit
to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he finds one or more of the
following to be true.
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant is overdue in his payment of taxes, fines or penalties assessed
against applicant or imposed upon applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance
of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.
(4) An applicant who has been denied a permit by the city to operate a sexually
oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or whose license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months.
(5) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been
approved by the Health Department for the use intended, if applicable, or any occupancy permit has
been issued by the City Building Inspector.
(6) The permit fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(7) An application for the proposal establishment is in violation of or is not in
compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(8) An applicant has been convicted of any of the following criminal offenses in any
jurisdiction.
(a) Prostitution, procuring or soliciting a prostitute.
(b) Sale, distribution or display of obscene material.
(c) Soliciting, procuring or aiding and abetting an unlawful sexual
performance by a minor.
(d) Possession, sale or distribution of child pornography.
(e) Public lewdness.
(f) Indecent conduct with a child.
(g) Sexual assault or rape.
(h) Incest.
(i) Sexual solicitation of a child.
(B) The applicant shall certify, as part of the application, that applicant has not been
convicted of any one or more of the foregoing criminal offenses.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98)
§ 111.06 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; NOTICE OF DENIAL; FALSE INFORMATION.
(A) The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to
whom it is granted, and the address of the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at
anytime.
(B) In the event that the Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator determine that an
applicant is not eligible for a permit, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the
denial within 30 days of the receipt of its application by the Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator,
provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period be extended for an additional
period of not more than ten days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make modifications
necessary to comply with this chapter.
(C) The Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator may also take all steps necessary to
revoke a permit if he determines that a permittee gave false information in the material submitted
during the application process.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98)
§ 111.07 INSPECTION.
An applicant or permittee shall allow the City Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator or
City Law Enforcement Officer to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of
insuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98)
§ 111.08 ACTION TO REVOKE PERMIT.
The Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator may take enforcement action, including the
revocation of a permit, if any of the following occurs.
(A) A permittee gave false or materially misleading information in the application process.
(B) A permittee has been convicted of using and/or allowing the use of controlled
substances within the establishment.
(C) A permittee has been convicted of prostitution or other activity fostering, promoting or
otherwise facilitating prostitution, within the establishment or elsewhere.
(D) A permittee or employee of the sexually oriented business has been convicted of any
crime of sexual nature or involving sexual conduct or the solicitation thereof within the establishment or
elsewhere.
(E) A permittee has been convicted of knowingly allowing a person under 18 years of age to
enter the establishment.
(F) There has been a transfer of ownership or control of an establishment without the prior
consent of the Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator, as required herein.
(G) A permittee has violated the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98)
§ 111.09 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another, nor shall a permittee operate a sexually
oriented business under the authority of permit at any place other than the address designated in the
application. Permittee must complete application.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.10 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
(A) A sexually oriented business may not be operated within 500 feet of the following.
(1) A church, synagogue or regular place of worship.
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school.
(3) A boundary of any residential structure within or without a zoned area.
(4) A public park.
(5) A licensed day-care enter.
(6) Another sexually oriented business.
(B) A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure, or
portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business.
(C) For the purpose of this chapter, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structure or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as
a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of
the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship, or public or private elementary or
secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or
residential lot, and licensed day-care center.
(D) For the purposes of Division (C) of this section, the distance between any two sexually
oriented business uses shall be made from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.11 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO ADULT ENTERTAINMENT.
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment establishment which
presents live entertainment for the enjoyment of an audience which has paid or promised to pay an
admission fee and which depicts specified sexual activities or displays specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements.
(A) Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the application shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or
more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures (indicating the type of
illumination intensity of each such fixture) and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons
will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 30 square feet of floor area. The diagram
shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object
and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various
internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises.
(B) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(C) No alteration in the configuration of the location of a manager's station may be made
without the prior approval of the City Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator.
(D) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one
employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside
the premises.
(E) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of a manager's station and of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations. The view required in this division (E) must be direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(F) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any
agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in division (E)
remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and
to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as
an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to division (A) of this
section. The manager would have to be in full view of the operation of the business.
(G) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0)
foot candle as measured at the floor level.
(H) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any
agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is
maintained at all times if any patron is present in the premises.
(I) All off-street parking requirements must be in compliance with the city zoning
ordinance; including that all areas of the off-street parking provided for the sexually oriented business
patrons must be fully lighted.
(J) All aspects of the city zoning ordinance that are applicable for the construction of all
structures associated with the sexually oriented business must be satisfactorily addressed and in
compliance with all zoning regulations that are applicable.
(K) Operational hours for the sexually oriented business are permitted between the hours
of l 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and it is prohibited for the operation of the sexually oriented business at
any other times not within the above-stated times.
(L) The sexually oriented business must comply with the terms of the city zoning ordinance.
(M) The premises shall meet all barrier free requirements and building code requirements
imposed by the State of Michigan.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.12 EXTERIOR PORTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow
the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment.
(B) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow
the exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have any words, lettering, photographs,
silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of a sexual or explicit manner, except to the extent
otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
(C) Signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of
any manner, and contain only the name of the enterprise.
(D) All signage must be in compliance with the city zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.13 PERSONS YOUNGER THAN 18 PROHIBITED FROM ENTRY.
(A) It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be
on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time that the sexually oriented business is open
for business.
(B) It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that an
attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all times during such
sexually oriented business's regular hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to not allow any person
under the age of 18 years to enter the sexually oriented business. It shall be presumed that an attendant
knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such attendant asked for and was furnished a valid
operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's license, or a valid personal identification certificate
reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or older.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.14 EXEMPTION.
It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did
so in a modeling class operated by one of the following.
(A) A proprietary school, licensed by the State of Michigan, a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
(B) A primate college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98)
§ 111.15 NOTICES.
(A) Any notice required or permitted to be given by the city or other agency under this
chapter to any applicant, operator or owner of an establishment may be given either by personal
delivery or by certified United States Mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the
most recent address as specified in the application for permit, or transfer application that has been
received by the city or any notice of address change that has been received by the city. Notices mailed
as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States Mail. In the event that any
notice by mail is returned by the Postal Service, the city shall cause to be posted at the principal
entrance to the establishment.
(B) Any notice required or permitted to be given to the city by any person under this
chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the principal office of the city.
(C) It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the permit application and each
operator to furnish notice to the city in writing of any change of residence or mailing address.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98)
§ 111.16 INJUNCTION AND OTHER REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid
permit and/or license or otherwise violates this chapter shall be subject to a suit for injunctive relief
and/or revocation of the sexually oriented business permit, as well as fines or other penalties as
provided by the city zoning ordinance. Any person, firm, or corporation which violates any of the above
provisions of this chapter or regulations, promulgated pursuant thereto, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.
(Ord. 169, passed 5-18-98) Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 112: JUNK DEALERS; SALE OF USED VEHICLES
Section
112.01 Definitions
112.02 Permit required; application; fee
112.03 City Council review of application
112.04 Issuance of license; revocation
112.05 Term of permit
112.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Restrictions on used vehicle sales pertaining to noise of vehicles, see § 91.18
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
USED AUTOMOBILE or TRAILER SALES LOT. An open area used for the display, sale or rental of
used motor vehicles, trailers, motorcycles, or other similar devices.
JUNK YARD. A place where waste, discarded, or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged,
stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled in an open area or partly in an open area.
(Ord. 9, passed 5-3-65)
§ 112.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.
On or before the 10th day of January of each year, the owner and/or operator of any used
automobile or trailer sales lot and the owner and/or operator of any junk yard shall secure from the City
Clerk of the city a permit to conduct said business, which application for permit shall show the
estimated value of current inventory, the legal description of the property on which the business is to be
located, the street address at which the business is to be located, the names and addresses of all parties
interested therein, and shall pay a fee of $5 for a used car lot and $15 for a junk yard license.
(Ord. 9, passed 5-3-65; Am. Ord. 9, passed 7-6-65) Penalty, see § 112.99
§ 112.03 CITY COUNCIL REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
(A) The City Clerk shall secure from the City Treasurer a statement of the status of all
personal and real property taxes in connection with said business location as of the date of the
application for said license.
(B) The City Clerk shall report the application together with the certificate of the City
Treasurer to the City Council, who shall determine whether or not a license permit should be issued to
the applicant at the location set forth in the application.
(C) In the event the City Council shall refuse to issue said license permit, the City Clerk shall
refund the license permit fee paid by the applicant and return the application with a notation that the
City Council has refused to issue the license permit.
(Ord. 9, passed 5-3-65; Am. Ord. 9, passed 7-6-65)
§ 112.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; REVOCATION.
The City Council may impose such restrictions or requirements as may be necessary to preserve
the public health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city before issuing the license permit. In
the event such specifications and requirements by the City Council are not complied with within a
reasonable time, the City Council shall have the right to revoke the license permit.
(Ord. 9, passed 5-3-65)
§ 112.05 TERM OF PERMIT.
The permit, when issued, shall be effective from January 1 of the year for which application is
made to December 31.
(Ord. 9, passed 5-3-65; Am. Ord. 9, passed 7-6-65)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this chapter in
any particular shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not to exceed $100 or may be imprisoned in the
County Jail not exceeding 90 days, or may be both fined and imprisoned in the discretion of the Court,
and each day a violation of this chapter continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 9, passed 5-3-65)
CHAPTER 113: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
General Provisions
113.01 Title
113.02 Definitions
113.03 Police power of city; authority to regulate
Licenses
113.10 License required
113.11 Application requirements
113.12 Issuance of license
113.13 Fee
113.14 Term of license
113.15 Renewal of license
113.16 Transfer of license or control of licensee company
113.17 Revocation
Construction and Equipment
113.30 Construction schedule
113.31 Master antenna construction standards
113.32 Placement of wires, cables, poles and the like; use of streets
113.33 Minimum interference; utilization of existing poles
113.34 Duty to restore disturbed surfacing
113.35 Duty to remove appurtenances upon notice
113.36 Underground installation of cables and lines required or preferred
Service Regulations
113.45 Rules and regulations promulgated by licensee
113.46 Duty to provide facilities; business office
113.47 Limitation on services provided by licensee
113.48 Rate regulation
113.49 Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited; exceptions
113.50 Interruption of service for repairs and the like
113.51 Books and records; record inspections; protection of confidential information
Basic Cable Service Rates
113.60 Definitions
113.61 Purpose; interpretation; conflicts
113.62 FCC rules applicable
113.63 Powers and regulatory authority of City Council
113.64 Failure to give notice; effect thereof
113.65 Rate schedule submission; additional information; burden of proof
113.66 Protection of proprietary information
113.67 Notice and comments; notice to operator; preliminary report on rates
113.68 Effective date of rates; tolling order
113.69 Hearing following tolling order; notice
113.70 Report of City Manager; cable operator's response
113.71 Decisions and orders of City Council; notice
113.72 Noncompliance of cable operator
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Community Antenna Television Systems
Licensing Ordinance.”
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. 98-549, 98 Stat. 2779
(October 30, 1984) codified at 47 USC §§ 521 et seq.
CATV SYSTEM. A mnemonic referring to “community antenna television system.”
CLERK. The City Clerk.
COUNCIL. The City Council of the city.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
LICENSEE. A person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.03 POLICE POWER OF CITY; AUTHORITY TO REGULATE.
Any person duly licensed to operate a CATV system shall at all times be subject to all lawful
exercise of the police power by the city and to such reasonable regulations as the city shall hereby, by
resolution or ordinance, provide.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
LICENSES
§ 113.10 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall own or operate a community antenna television system (CATV) in the city
except by license pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.11 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Application generally. Every person desiring to install, erect, construct, operate, and
maintain a community television antenna plant within the city shall make application in writing, signed
by the applicant or the applicant's duly authorized agent, to the City Clerk. Said application shall be
accompanied by a general plan of the system, showing the location of the antenna, and shall also be
accompanied by a financial statement of the applicant.
(B) Application to contain indemnification agreements.
(1) Each applicant shall, in the application, agree to save the city harmless from all
loss sustained by the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim, or demand whatsoever
resulting from negligence on the part of the licensee in construction, operation or maintenance of a
CATV system in the city. The city shall notify any licensee within ten days after the presentation of any
claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, made against the city on account of any negligence as
aforesaid on the part of such licensee.
(2) Each applicant in its application agrees to save the city harmless from all loss
sustained by the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever resulting
from a dispute over programming. The city shall notify any licensee within ten days after the
presentation of any claim or demand, either by any suit or otherwise, made against the city on account
of any allegedly improper or illegal program origination or transmission.
(C) Applicant's insurance. Each applicant shall in the application demonstrate by certificate
of insurance, which certificate shall include the city as named insured, that the applicant is protected by
liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state against claims
for property damage in the amount of $1,000,000 for any one accident and for personal injuries in the
amount of $1,000,000 for a personal injury to any one person, and $3,000,000 for all personal injuries
resulting from any one accident.
(D) Default and noncompliance; when excused. The licensee shall not be held in default or
noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating
thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes, refusals, acts of God,
power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.12 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
The City Clerk shall issue a license required by this chapter only upon receipt of an application
which complies with all of the requirements of this chapter, and upon approval by the Council of the
applicant's legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications, as well as the adequacy and
feasibility of the applicant's construction arrangements, after a full proceeding affording due process.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.13 FEE.
(A) The licensee shall pay to the city, for the privilege of operating a CATV system under this
chapter, a sum equivalent to 5% of the annual gross operating revenues taken in and received by the
licensee on all retail sales of television signals within the city, for all service installations and reconnects.
(B) The licensee shall pay to the City Treasurer the license fee within 30 days after each half
of the licensee's fiscal year following the inception of service to subscribers located in the city. At the
same time the licensee shall file with the City Clerk a summary report of the revenues upon which the
license fee is based.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.14 TERM OF LICENSE.
A license issued under this chapter shall authorize the operation of a CATV system within the
city, subject to the provisions of this chapter, for a period to be determined by the Council, but in no
event less than 15 years from the date of issuance hereunder. Renewals, unless revoked for cause, shall
remain in force and effect for periods of at least 15 years.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.15 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
(A) Any proceedings undertaken by the city that relate to the renewal of the licensee's
license shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act (codified at
47 USC 546) as such existed as of the effective date of the Cable Act), unless the provisions set forth
therein shall have been rendered inoperable by the provisions of subsequent law.
(B) In addition to the procedures set forth in said Section 626(a) (47 USC 546(a)), the city
shall notify the licensee of the city's preliminary assessment regarding the identity of future cablerelated
community needs and interests as well as the past performance of the licensee under the thencurrent
license term. The city's preliminary assessment shall be provided to the licensee prior to the
time that the four-month period referred to in Section 626(c) (47 USC 546(c)) is considered to begin.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section and consistent with Section 626(h) of
the Cable Act (47 USC 546(h)), at any time during the term of the then-current license, the city and
licensee may undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal or extension of the then-current
license and the city may grant a renewal or extension thereof. The terms set forth in this section shall be
considered consistent with and subject to the express provisions of said Section 626 of the Cable Act (47
USC 546). A reproduction of Section 626 of the Cable Act (47 USC 546) as such existed as of the effective
date of the Cable Act is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City Clerk and is
incorporated herein by this reference. The above notwithstanding, the city may grant extensions to the
then-existing license term to the extent appropriate under the circumstances, so long as such extensions
are not in lieu of licensee's ultimate right to be considered for renewal hereunder, and are consistent
with applicable law.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.16 TRANSFER OF LICENSE OR CONTROL OF LICENSEE COMPANY.
No sale, lease, sublease, assignment or other transfer of a license issued under this chapter shall
be made unless and until approved by resolution of the City Council, after receipt of a written
application for such transfer containing the same information as would be required of an original
application for a license. Nor shall a transfer of a majority interest in the stock of the licensee, if the
licensee is a corporation, or the addition or deletion of a general partner or partners of the licensee, if
the licensee is a partnership, which in the aggregate would exceed 50% of the partnership interest be
made unless and until approved by resolution by the City Council. Approval of such sale, assignment,
lease, sublease or other transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.17 REVOCATION.
Failure by the licensee to substantially perform any of the material provisions of this chapter or
the failure to substantially perform any of the material conditions or terms thereof shall be cause for the
revocation of its license and all rights thereunder. The Clerk shall report such noncompliance in writing
to the City Council, which, upon due notice to the licensee and after reasonable opportunity to place
itself in compliance and to be heard on the charge of noncompliance, may revoke such license,
provided, however, that any revocation proceeding hereunder shall be governed by the franchise
compliance standards and procedures set forth in Section 626 of the Cable Act (47 USC 546), on file and
available for inspection in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT
§ 113.30 CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.
Within one year from the issuance of its license hereunder, the licensee shall have accomplished
significant construction of its system. Thereafter, the licensee shall equitably and reasonably extend its
energized trunk cable to include an additional 20% of its licensed area in the city each year. This section
shall not apply to renewal licensees.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.31 MASTER ANTENNA CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
The licensee shall agree to construct the master antenna network in accordance with the
building and electrical codes of this city.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.32 PLACEMENT OF WIRES, CABLES, POLES, AND THE LIKE; USE OF STREETS.
Any licensee shall have the right, so long as its license is in force and effect, to utilize the streets
of the city for the transmission of television signals as herein authorized from its antenna location or
locations to the premises of subscribers. Licensee may erect all necessary wires, cables and
appurtenances in the said streets, provided that any such distribution system shall comply with all
applicable laws and regulations and ordinances and all of licensee's wires and cables suspended from
poles in the streets shall comply with the minimum clearances above ground required for telephone
lines, cables, wires and conduits. The placement of any necessary poles shall be subject to the approval
of the City Engineer. Licensee, may at its option, authorize the installation of such wires, cables,
conduits, poles and appurtenances by others for licensee's use and all such wires, cables, conduits, poles
and appurtenances placed or installed by others for the use of licensee shall be subject to the same
regulations as if the licensee installed them, and they shall exist and continue to exist solely by authority
of the permission granted to said licensee.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.33 MINIMUM INTERFERENCE; UTILIZATION OF EXISTING POLES.
All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the Licensee or on
its behalf within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and
reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets, and existing poles for
electric and communication purposes shall be utilized, wherever possible and practicable; provided
however, that this provision shall not grant any licensee the right to install all the necessary poles to
operate its system if such licensee is, for any reason, unable to use such existing poles for electric or
communication purposes.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.34 DUTY TO RESTORE DISTURBED SURFACING.
In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the licensee
shall, at the licensee's own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City Engineer, replace
and restore all pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing disturbed in as good a condition as
before said work was commenced.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.35 DUTY TO REMOVE APPURTENANCES UPON NOTICE.
In the event that, at any time during the existence of a license granted hereunder, the city shall
lawfully widen, realign or otherwise alter the street right-of-way, or construct, reconstruct, realign,
change the grade of or otherwise alter pavement or any water main, fire hydrant, sewer or
appurtenance belonging to the city, the licensee or anyone acting on the licensee's behalf in connection
with the use of streets, upon reasonable notice by the city, and to the extent necessary, shall remove,
relay and relocate its wires, cables, poles, underground conduits, and other appurtenances at the
licensee's own expense.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.36 UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION OF CABLES AND LINES REQUIRED OR PREFERRED.
In conduit districts now or hereafter established by ordinances of the city, and as hereafter
amended or altered, and in such other areas of the city in which telephone lines and electric utility lines
are underground, all of licensee's lines, cables, and wire shall be underground. It is the policy of the city
that underground installation, even where not required, is preferable to the addition of poles.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
SERVICE REGULATIONS
§ 113.45 RULES AND REGULATIONS PROMULGATED BY LICENSEE.
The licensee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and
conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the licensee
to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this chapter and to assure an uninterrupted
service to each and all of its customers, provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms, and
conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof, or the rules of any state or federal
regulatory agency, or the laws of the state.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.46 DUTY TO PROVIDE FACILITIES; BUSINESS OFFICE.
Subject to the existence of suitably situated, available public rights-of-way and public utility
easements, the licensee shall supply the facilities to all residents of the city who may request the
licensee's service who reside in any territory within the city's boundaries that has a population density
of at least 25 homes per strand mile from the trunk line existing at the time of such request. The
licensee shall maintain a business office in Muskegon County open at all reasonable business hours to all
such persons in the city who desire the services of the licensee.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.47 LIMITATION ON SERVICES PROVIDED BY LICENSEE.
The services performed pursuant to licenses issued hereunder shall not include the performance
of repairing, servicing, or selling television sets, or television antennas, nor shall the licensee
recommend service by others except as directly related to cable installation and/or connections,
provided, however, that no limitation is placed upon licensee in complying with the FCC's input selector
switch requirements set forth in FCC regulations, and, provided further, that no limitation is placed upon
the licensee in the business of providing other communications services permitted by the FCC with
respect to cable systems, or from distributing programming to home satellite dishes or other reception
technology than broadcast television.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.48 RATE REGULATION.
The licensee's rates for the provision of cable service and other service, including, but not
limited to, ancillary charges relating thereto, shall not be regulated except as authorized pursuant to
federal and state law including, but not limited to, the Cable Act and FCC rules and regulations relating
thereto. Licensee's rates and charges for the provision of any service or equipment, including but not
limited to basic service, pay service, second outlets, remote control units, converters, and the like, are
not established under Ordinance 104, passed 11-9-88, and are not regulated thereunder.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.49 PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
The licensee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations, or in any other
respect, make or grant preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice
or disadvantage, provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the
licensee's discretion to establish discounts for senior citizens or shut-ins or the hearing-impaired or to
establish free-of-charge service to public or private educational institutions, hospitals, eleemosynary
institutions, and, to the extent not otherwise required hereunder, to such public buildings as fire
stations, police stations, or City Hall.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.50 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE FOR REPAIRS AND THE LIKE.
Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs,
adjustments or installations, the licensee shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of
inconvenience to its customers, and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary,
it shall give reasonable notice thereof to its customers.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
§ 113.51 BOOKS AND RECORDS; RECORD INSPECTIONS; PROTECTION OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
The city may review such of the licensee's books and records, during normal business hours and
on a non-disruptive basis, as are reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms hereof.
Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, records required to be kept by the licensee
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC, and financial information underlying the summary
report pertaining to the license fee in § 113.13. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth
herein, licensee is not required to disclose personally identifiable subscriber information without the
subscriber's consent in recognition of Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551, regarding the
protection of subscriber privacy; nor shall licensee be required to disclose its income tax returns or
information underlying the preparation of any such returns. To the extent permitted by law, the city
agrees to treat on a confidential basis any information disclosed by the licensee to it under this section.
In so according confidential treatment, disclosure of licensee's records by the city shall be limited to only
those of its employees, representatives and agents that have a need to know, and that are in a
confidential relationship with the city.
(Ord. 104, passed 11-9-88)
BASIC CABLE SERVICE RATES
§ 113.60 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All other words and phrases used in this subchapter
shall have the same meaning as defined in the Act and FCC Rules, as defined below.
ACT. The Cable Communications Act of 1934, being 47 USC 521 et seq., as amended (and
specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub.
L. 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time.
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT. All equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR
76.923.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE. “Basic service” as defined in the FCC Rules, and any other cable television
service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the Act and the FCC Rules.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
FCC RULES. All rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the Act.
INCREASE. As applied to rates shall mean an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or
customer services.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.61 PURPOSE; INTERPRETATION; CONFLICTS.
(A) Purpose; interpretation. The purpose of this subchapter is to: (1) adopt regulations
consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulation; and (2)
prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested
parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the city. This subchapter shall be
implemented and interpreted consistent with the Act and FCC Rules.
(B) Conflicting provisions. In the event of any conflict between this subchapter and the
provisions of any prior ordinance or any franchise, permit, consent agreement or other agreement with
a cable operator, then the provisions of this subchapter shall control.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.62 FCC RULES APPLICABLE.
In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the
city shall follow all FCC Rules.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.63 POWERS AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL.
(A) Powers. The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC Rules, the cable
operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC
Rules, and this subchapter shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may
take any action not prohibited by the Act and the FCC Rules to protect the public interest in connection
with basic cable service rate regulation.
(B) Regulatory authority. In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to § 113.65, the City
Council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate
regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act
and the FCC Rules.
(C) Additional hearings. In addition to the requirements of this subchapter, the City Council
may hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the City Council, in its sole
discretion, shall prescribe.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.64 FAILURE TO GIVE NOTICE; EFFECT THEREOF.
The failure of the City Clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this
subchapter shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the City Council.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.65 RATE SCHEDULE SUBMISSION; ADDITIONAL INFORMATION; BURDEN OF PROOF.
(A) A cable operator shall submit a schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated
equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable
operator shall include as part of the submission such information as is necessary to show that the
schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable
operator shall file ten copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the City Clerk. For purposes of
this chapter, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten
copies have been received by the City Clerk. The City Council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt
rules and regulations prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part
of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase.
(B) In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the city
pursuant to subsection (A) above, a cable operator shall provide all information requested by the City
Manager in connection with the city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier
and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The City Manager may establish
deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such
deadlines.
(C) A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic
service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the Act and
the FCC Rules including, without limitation, 47 USC 543 and 47 CFR 76.922 and 76.923.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.66 PROTECTION OF PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
(A) If this subchapter, any rules or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to § 113.65(A),
or any request for information pursuant to § 113.65(B) requires the production of proprietary
information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly
proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of
the cable operator's response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The
request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that
support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines that the
preponderance of the evidence shows that non-disclosure is consistent with the provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act, 5 USC 552. The City shall place in a public file for inspection any decision
that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request
is denied, (1) where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, the cable operator may withdraw
the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to the cable operator;
or (2) the cable operator may seek review within five working days of the denial in any appropriate
forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review.
(B) Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with
the city. The city shall weigh the policy considerations favoring non-disclosure against the reasons cited
for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the
requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the
request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek
review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending
resolution of any appeal.
(C) The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to and
consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality including, without limitation,
47 CFR 76.938.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.67 NOTICE AND COMMENTS; NOTICE TO OPERATOR; PRELIMINARY REPORT ON RATES.
Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant
to § 113.65(A) above, the City Clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the city which shall state that: (1) the filing has been received by the City Clerk and (except those parts
which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying, and (2) interested
parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the City Clerk not later than seven
days after the public notice is published. The City Clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the
date, time, and place of the meeting at which the City Council shall first consider the schedule of rates or
the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first-class mail at least three days before the
meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed
increase is prepared for consideration of the City Council, then the City Clerk shall mail a copy of the
report by first-class mail to the cable operator at least three days before the meeting at which the City
Council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.68 EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES; TOLLING ORDER.
After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in these
rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect, or the proposed increase in rates will become
effective after 30 days from the date of filing under § 113.65(A) above unless the City Council (or other
properly authorized body or official) tolls the 30-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933 by issuing a
brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of filing. The City Council may
toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for
an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.69 HEARING FOLLOWING TOLLING ORDER; NOTICE.
If a written order has been issued pursuant to § 113.68 and 47 CFR 76.933 to toll the effective
date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these
rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information required or requested
pursuant to § 113.65 of this subchapter. In addition, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to
consider the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case
may be. The City Clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city which shall state: (1) the date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be
held, (2) that interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit
comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates, and (3) that copies of
the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information (except those parts
which may be withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the
Clerk. The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the City
Clerk shall mail by first-class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15 days
before the hearing.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.70 REPORT OF CITY MANAGER; CABLE OPERATOR'S RESPONSE.
Following the public hearing, the City Manager shall cause a report to be prepared for the City
Council which shall (based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested
parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or a consultant's review,
and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the decision of the City Council
pursuant to § 113.71. The City Clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first-class
mail not less than 20 days before the City Council acts under § 113.71. The cable operator may file a
written response to the report with the City Clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are filed by the
cable operator with the City Clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the
City Clerk shall forward it to the City Council.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.71 DECISIONS AND ORDERS OF CITY COUNCIL; NOTICE.
(A) Rate decisions and orders. The City Council shall issue a written order, by resolution or
otherwise, which in whole or in part approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated
equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a
rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become
effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC Rules. If the
City Council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject
to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR 76.933.
The order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling order under § 113.68 in all
cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150 days after the tolling
order under § 113.65 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing.
(B) Refund orders; notice. The City Council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in
47 CFR 76.942. Before the City Council orders any refund to subscribers, the City Clerk shall give at least
seven days written notice to the cable operator by first-class mail of the date, time and place at which
the City Council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable
operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent or by letter at such time for
the purpose of submitting comments to the City Council.
(C) Written decisions; public notice. Any order of the City Council pursuant to subsections
(A) or (B) shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the City Council, and shall be deemed
released to the public upon adoption. The Clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in
a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall: (1) summarize the written decision, and
(2) state that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the
office of the Clerk. In addition, the City Clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the
cable operator by first-class mail.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
§ 113.72 NONCOMPLIANCE OF CABLE OPERATOR.
The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator
(including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's franchise with the city) for
failure to comply with the Act, the FCC rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this
subchapter, any requirements of this subchapter, or any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder.
Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of
the city pursuant to this subchapter, any requirements of this subchapter, or any rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable
operator's franchise.
(Ord. 132, passed 9-20-93)
CHAPTER 114: FRANCHISES
Section
114.01 Electric franchises
114.02 Natural gas franchises
114.99 Penalty
§ 114.01 ELECTRIC FRANCHISES.
(A) (1) Grant; term. The city hereby grants to the right, power, and authority to the
Consumers Energy Company, a Michigan corporation, its successors, and assigns, hereinafter called the
“grantee,” to construct, maintain, and commercially use electric lines consisting of towers, masts, poles,
crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers, and other electrical
appliances for the purpose of transmitting, transforming, and distributing electricity on, under, along,
and across the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, waterways, and other public places, and to do a local
electric business in the city for a period of thirty years.
(2) Consideration. In consideration of the rights, power, and authority hereby
granted, said grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.
(3) Conditions. No highway, street, alley, bridge, waterway, or other public place
used by said grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair
and shall be restored to the same order and condition as when said work was commenced. All of
grantee's structures and equipment shall be so placed on either side of the highways as not to
unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes and pedestrian and non-motorized
traffic on sidewalks, bicycle paths, and bicycle lanes. All of grantee's wires carrying electricity shall be
securely fastened so as not to endanger or injure persons or property in said highways. The grantee
shall have the right to trim trees if necessary in the conducting of such business, subject, however, to
the supervision of the highway authorities.
(4) Repair and restoration. Following the completion of work by the grantee, the
grantee shall repair all damage to sidewalks, streets, bicycle paths, bicycle lanes, and other public and
private property that arose from the work of the grantee and shall restore such property to its condition
preceding work.
(5) Hold harmless. Said grantee shall at all times keep and save the city free and
harmless from all loss, costs, and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent
construction and maintenance of the structures and equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is
commenced against the city on account of the permission herein given, said grantee shall, upon notice,
defend the city and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost, and damage arising out of such
negligent construction and maintenance.
(6) Extensions. Said grantee shall construct and extend its electric distribution
system within said city and shall furnish electric service to applicants residing therein in accordance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
(7) Franchise not exclusive. The rights, power, and authority herein granted, are
not exclusive.
(8) Rates. Said grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said city, for
electric furnished therein, the rates as approved by the state Public Service Commission, to which
Commission or its successors authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate electric rates and rules
regulating such service in said city, are hereby granted for the term of this franchise. Such rates and
rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either said
city, acting by its City Council, or by said grantee.
(9) Revocation. The franchise granted by this section is subject to revocation upon
60 days written notice by the party desiring such revocation.
(10) State Public Service Commission jurisdiction. Said grantee shall, as to all other
conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and
regulations of the state Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to electric service in said
City.
(11) Repealer. This section, when accepted and published as herein provided, shall
repeal and supersede the provisions of an electric ordinance adopted by the city on February 13, 1980
entitled:
“An ordinance, granting to Consumers Power Company, its successors and assigns, the right, power, and
authority to construct, maintain, and commercially use electric lines consisting of towers, masts, poles,
cross arms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers, and other electrical
appliances on, under, along, and across the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places,
and to do a local electric business in the city for a period of thirty years.”
and amendments, if any, to such ordinance whereby an electric franchise was granted to Consumers
Energy Company.
(Ord. 67, passed 2-13-80; Am. Ord. 274, passed 6-9-12)
(B) Granting to the City of Grand Haven, acting by and through its Board of Light and Power,
its successors and assigns, the right, power and authority to construct, maintain, and commercially use
electric lines on, under, along and across the highways, streets, alleys, bridges and other public places,
and to do a local electric business in the city.
The City of Ferrysburg ordains:
(1) Definition. The word GRANTEE when used in this section, shall designate and
refer to the City of Grand Haven, acting by and through its Board of Light and Power, and its successors
and assigns.
(2) Grant of franchise. The right, power and authority is hereby granted and vested
in the grantee to construct, maintain and commercially use electric lines, consisting of towers, masts,
poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers and other
electrical appliances on, under, along and across the highways, streets, alleys, bridges and other public
places, and to do a local electric business in the City of Ferrysburg.
(3) Duty of grantee. In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby
granted, the grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.
(4) Streets and highways. No highway, street, alley, bridge or other public place
used by the grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair
and shall be restored to the same good order and condition as when such work was commenced. All
towers, masts, poles and other supports shall be set and all wires shall be suspended or buried in a
careful and proper manner so as not to injure persons or property. The grantee shall have the right to
trim trees if necessary in the conducting of such business, subject, however, to the supervision of the
City Council.
(5) Hold harmless. The grantee shall at all times keep and save the city free and
harmless from all loss, costs and damage to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent
construction and maintenance of the towers, masts, poles, wires and other structures and appliances,
the erection, burial and maintenance of which are hereby authorized.
(6) Rates.
(a) The grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of the city for
electric energy for light and power at rates fixed by the Board of Light and Power of the City of Grand
Haven and kept on files in its offices. These rates shall at no time exceed those rates charged by the
grantee to its customers located within the corporate limits of the City of Grand Haven.
(b) A11 bills for electric energy shall be payable monthly. The grantee may
collect any minimum charge specified in its rate schedule. It shall furnish and maintain commercially
accurate meters to measure the energy furnished. The grantee shall at all reasonable times have access
to the premises of its customers, for the purpose of reading, inspecting, removing and replacing such
meters.
(7) Not exclusive. The rights, power and authority herein granted, are not
exclusive.
(8) Payment in lieu of taxes. During the term of the franchise granted by this
section, the grantee shall pay to the city an annual payment in lieu of taxes. This payment in lieu of taxes
shall be billed by the city to the grantee July 1 of each year, beginning July 1, 1985, and shall be paid on
or before the following August 31. The amount of the payment in lieu of taxes shall be computed by
multiplying the hypothetical state equalized value of all of the grantee's real and personal property in
the city, which would have been subject to taxation under state law if it was owned by a private electric
utility, by the total city millage, including both millage authorized by Charter and special voted and/or
debt millage, levied in the year in which the payment in lieu of taxes is billed. The city millage rate shall
not include millage appearing on the city tax statement which is collected for the county, a school
district, or any other taxing authority. The city shall determine the hypothetical state equalized value of
grantee's personal property as of the tax determination day applicable to taxable property located in the
city and shall do so in the same manner and with the same methodology as it utilizes to determine the
state equalized value of property in the city owned by a private electric utility. The city shall notify the
grantee in writing of its determination of the hypothetical state equalized value of grantee's property no
later than April 1 of each year and shall give the grantee a reasonable opportunity to discuss with the
city the valuation amount and how it was determined.
(9) Revocation. The franchise granted by this section is subject to revocation at the
will of the City Council. In the event the City Council shall determine to revoke the franchise granted by
this section, then grantee may, on written notice to the city within 60 days of being notified of such
determination, request that the granting of a franchise for a period of 30 years, or such lesser period as
grantee may request, be submitted to the electors of the city at the next general election or at a special
election called for that purpose. Upon receipt of grantee's request for an election, the city shall submit
to its electors the granting of a franchise to grantee pursuant to the terms and provisions of this section
for a period of 30 years or such lesser period as shall be requested by grantee. Grantee shall pay all
expenses related to any special election and its fair share of any expenses related to the inclusion of the
franchise proposition as part of a general election. The grantee may choose at any time to relinquish the
franchise granted by this section.
(10) Acceptance. The grantee shall, within 30 days after the adoption of this section,
file with the City Clerk its written acceptance of this section. Upon filing of such acceptance, this section
shall constitute a contract between the city and the grantee.
(11) Severability. This section and the various parts, sections, sentences, phrases and
clauses hereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, sentence, phrase or clause is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this section shall not be
affected thereby.
(12) Effective date. This section is ordered to take effect on July 8, 1985, the date
being at least one day after publication in the Grand Haven Tribune, a newspaper circulating in the city,
pursuant to the provisions of the City Charter as amended.
(Ord. 93, passed 6-26-85)
§ 114.02 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISES.
The City of Ferrysburg ordains:
(A) Statement of purpose. The purpose of this section is to grant to Michigan Gas Utilities, a
division of UtiliCorp United Inc., a Delaware corporation, its successors and assigns, the right, power,
authority and permission to use the public streets, alleys, and bridges of the city for the purpose of
laying and maintaining gas pipes, mains, conduits, valves, drips and all necessary appurtenances in,
under and along the public streets, alleys, and bridges of the city, and the right, power, authority and
permission to conduct and operate a natural gas business and distribution system in the city, for a
period of 30 years. This franchise for the installation, maintenance and operation of a natural gas
business and distribution system in the city is granted in accordance with §§ 5.23, 5.24, and 5.26 of the
City Charter. Pursuant to the City Charter, the franchise granted herein shall be nonexclusive, and shall
be subject to revocation at the will of the City Council except as provided in division (L) of this section.
(B) Definitions. As used in this section:
CITY. The City of Ferrysburg, County of Ottawa, State of Michigan.
CITY COUNCIL. The City Council for the City of Ferrysburg.
CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Ferrysburg.
MGU. Michigan Gas Utilities, a division of UtiliCorp United Inc., a Delaware corporation
doing business in the State of Michigan, its successors and assigns.
PARKWAY. That portion of a public street or alley right of way which is open and not
developed for vehicular and pedestrian travel.
PUBLIC STREET AND ALLEY. Right of way dedicated to the public for street and alley
purposes, consisting of vehicular and pedestrian travel lanes and open and unpaved parkways either
side of vehicular travel lanes.
(C) Granting of franchise to use public streets, alleys, and bridges. The city hereby grants to
MGU a non-exclusive franchise with the right, power, authority and permission to construct, maintain,
operate and extend in the present and future public streets, alleys, and bridges of the city, a natural gas
distribution system, for the purposes of supplying and distributing natural gas for all purposes to the city
and its inhabitants and consumers in the vicinity thereof, and for the distribution of natural gas from or
through the city to points beyond the limits thereof. The city further grants MGU the right, power,
authority and permission to enter upon and use the public streets, alleys, and bridges of the city to lay,
install, maintain, operate, repair and extend therein, through and thereunder such mains, services,
pipes, conduits, valves, drips, apparatus, appliances and other appurtenances as may be necessary and
proper for the transmission, transportation, distribution and supply of natural gas for all purposes for
which it may be used, throughout and beyond the city and for the purpose of conducting and operating
a natural gas business in the city. subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter provided.
(D) Permit required for construction excavation, maintenance, and repair activities in public
streets alleys, and bridges. Whenever it desires to construct, install, excavate, repair or maintain
facilities in public street rights of way, including either a paved or unpaved portion of the street right of
way or on bridges, MGU shall apply to the city for a permit, for same, on forms provided by the city.
MGU shall submit to the city plans and specifications regarding the proposed operation in the street
rights of way, in sufficient detail as determined by the City Manager or his designee. MGU shall submit
with each permit application a reasonable fee as determined by the City Council. Within a reasonable
time, not to exceed ten days, the City Manager or his designee may request additional information from
MGU in order to determine whether or not a permit be issued. The City Manager or his designee shall
either issue a permit as applied for, or shall deny the permit as applied for and shall state the reasons for
the permit denial. Any permit issued under this section shall be revocable by the City Manager or his
designee for failure to comply with the terms of the issued permit. A permit issued pursuant to this
section shall constitute a binding contract between the city and MGU.
(E) Permit required for construction, maintenance and repair activities on bridges.
Whenever it desires to construct, install, excavate, repair or maintain facilities on bridges, MGU shall
apply to the city for a permit as provided in division (D). In addition to satisfying the requirements of
division (D), MGU shall demonstrate that public convenience and necessity are served by the proposed
activities.
(F) Emergency repairs. The permit described above shall not be required to be issued in
advance in the case of emergency repair operations by MGU. As soon as reasonably possible, in the case
of any such emergency operations, MGU shall provide notice of the repair operations and an estimate of
time for completion. No later than three business days following the commencement of emergency
operations, MGU shall apply for a permit in accordance with division (D) of this section.
(G) Standards for Construction, Repair and Maintenance Activities. Any and all
construction, repair and maintenance activities by MGU in, on, over or under a public street or a public
street right of way or on a bridge shall be in accordance with a permit issued by the city, in accordance
with standard industry practices for public utilities and in accordance with reasonable requirements as
approved by the City Council. Such requirements may not conflict with nor contradict safety or
construction standards established by state or federal regulatory authorities. The requirements shall
include the following:
(1) Prior notification to the MISS Dig underground reporting system.
(2) Provision and operation of barricades and traffic control measures necessary for
public safety.
(3) Notification to adjacent property owners who may be inconvenienced by an
activity.
(4) Identification of a contact person to handle complaints from property owners,
when appropriate.
(5) Upon request, periodic reports to the city public services supervisor regarding
the status of any activities permitted.
(6) A permit may specify additional reasonable requirements.
(H) Relocation of MGU's facilities.
(1) If the city elects to alter or change the grade of or otherwise alter any street,
alley, bridge. or public right of way, MGU upon reasonable notice from the city, shall remove and
relocate its facilities or equipment situated in the public rights of way, if such removal is necessary to
prevent interference and not merely for the convenience of the city, at the cost and expense of MGU
and the city shall provide MGU with a reasonable alternative location for MGU's facilities. The city shall
consider reasonable alternatives in designing its public works projects so as not arbitrarily to cause MGU
unreasonable additional expenses in exercising its authority under this section.
(2) If the city orders or requests MGU to relocate its facilities or equipment
primarily for non-public purposes or the primary benefit of a commercial or private project, and such
removal is necessary to prevent interference and not merely for the convenience of the city or other
right-of-way user, MGU shall receive payment from the commercial or private developer or other nonpublic
entity for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocating its facilities or equipment.
(I) Force Majeure. It shall not be a breach or default under this franchise if either party
fails to perform its obligations hereunder due to a Force Majeure event which is not reasonably within
the control of the affected party to control or overcome. Force Majeure shall include, but not be limited
to, the following: 1) physical events such as acts of God, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires,
freezing, storms, floods, washouts, explosions, breakage or accident or necessity of repairs to
machinery, equipment, distribution or transmission lines; 2) acts of others such as strikes, work-force
stoppages, riots, sabotage, insurrections or wars; 3) governmental actions such as necessity for
compliance with any court order, law, statute, ordinance, executive order, or regulation promulgated by
a governmental authority having jurisdiction; 4) and any other physical events, whether of the kind
herein enumerated or otherwise not reasonably within the control of the affected party to prevent or
overcome. Each party shall make reasonable efforts to avoid Force Majeure and to resolve such event as
promptly as reasonably possible once it occurs in order to resume performance; provided, however,
that this provision shall not obligate a party to settle labor strikes. Nothing in this section shall modify or
lessen any responsibility of the acting party to indemnify or hold harmless the other party pursuant to
division (J) of this section.
(J) Hold harmless. MGU during the term of this franchise, agrees to save harmless the city
from and against all claims, demands, losses and expenses arising from the actions of MGU, its
employees or agents or from the use or presence of MGU mains, pipes, conduits, valves, drips and all
other appurtenances, apparatus and appliances of MGU; provided, however, that MGU need not save
harmless the city from claims, demands, losses and expenses to the extent that such claims, demands,
losses or expenses are the proximate result of the acts of the city, its employees or agents, or third
parties not within the direction or control of MGU.
(K) Rates established by Michigan Public Service Commission governing rules and
regulations. This franchise is granted subject to all conditions, limitations and immunities now provided
for, or as hereafter amended, and applicable to the operations of a public utility, by the laws of the State
of Michigan. The rates to be charged by MGU for service within; the present or future corporate limits of
the city and the rules and regulations regarding the character, quality and standards of service to be
furnished by MGU shall be under the jurisdiction and control of such regulatory body or bodies as may,
from time to time. be vested by law with authority and jurisdiction over the rates, regulations and
quality and standards of service to be supplied by MGU.
(L) Franchise revocable. The franchise herein granted shall be revocable by either party as
authorized by the Michigan Constitution of 1963.
(M) Franchise violations. This section shall constitute a binding contract between the city and
MGU. If either party believes that the other party has failed to perform any obligation under this section
or has failed to perform in a timely manner, that party shall notify the other party in writing, stating with
reasonable specificity the nature of the alleged default. Upon notification of default each party has a
reasonable time to cure the default. The parties reserve their right to seek all remedies available at law
or in equity, including, not by limitation, misdemeanor prosecution, mediation, non-binding arbitration,
or litigation. The limitations on remedies contained in this section do not apply to enforcement of
permits.
(N) Severability. This section and the various parts, sections, subsections, sentences,
phrases and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, subsection,
sentence, phrase or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby declared that the
remainder of this section shall not be affected thereby.
(O) Non-waiver. Any waiver of any obligation or default under this franchise shall not be
construed as a waiver of any future defaults, whether of like or different character.
(P) Term. The rights and privileges granted in this franchise shall continue in force and
effect for a period of 30 years from the effective date hereof unless revoked by either party. The
effective date of this franchise shall be the date of the acceptance of the franchise by MGU which
acceptance shall be filed with the city by MGU, in writing, within 60 days after the enactment of this
section
(Q) Effective date of section. This section was approved and adopted by the City Council on
Sept. 4, 2001 and shall become effective upon its final passage and approval by the city, in accordance
with applicable laws and regulations, upon publication in the Grand Haven Tribune, a newspaper of
general circulation in the city.
(R) Notices. Any notices of revocation shall be sent to the following:
If to MGU: Vice President
Community Relations
Utilicorp United Inc.
20 W. 9th Street
Kansas City, Missouri 64105
If to the City: City Clerk, City of Ferrysburg
408 Fifth Street
PO Box 38
Ferrysburg, Michigan 49409
(Ord. 185, passed 9-4-01)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, the requirements of a permit issued
pursuant to Chapter 50 of the City Code, or the requirements of a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in § 10.99. The city may also seek such injunctive relief as may be appropriate. Any activity in
violation of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance per se.
(Ord. 184, passed 8-20-01)
CHAPTER 115: TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS
Section
115.01 Purpose
115.02 Conflict
115.03 Definitions
115.04 Permit required
115.05 Issuance of permit
115.06 Construction/engineering permit
115.07 Conduit or utility poles
115.08 Route maps
115.09 Repair of damage
115.10 Establishment and payment of maintenance fee
115.11 Modification of existing fees
115.12 Savings clause
115.13 Use of funds
115.14 Annual report
115.15 Cable television operators
115.16 Existing rights
115.17 Compliance
115.18 Reservation of police powers
115.19 Authorized city officials
115.20 Municipal civil infraction
§ 115.01 PURPOSE.
The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by
telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health,
safety, and welfare and to exercise reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the
Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts
of 2002), being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et seq., and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city
qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with
the Act.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.02 CONFLICT.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Metropolitan
Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, or other applicable law.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACT. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48
of the Public Acts of 2002), being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.3101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
AUTHORITY. The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight
Authority created pursuant to the Act.
CITY. The City of Ferrysburg.
CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Ferrysburg or its designee. This section does not
authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the CITY
COUNCIL.
CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or his or her designee.
M.P.S.C. The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry
Services; M.P.S.C. shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act.
PERMIT. A nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this chapter to a
telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications
facilities.
PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other
legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley,
easement or waterway. PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES. The equipment or personal property, such as
copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can
generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES do not include antennas, supporting structures for
antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used
to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as
commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. As
defined in § 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, being M.C.L.A § 484.2102.
TELECOMMUNICATION PROVIDER does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when
providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in § 332(d) of Part I of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as
commercial mobile radio service in 47 C.F.R. 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a PROVIDER also includes all of
the following:
(1) A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service.
(2) Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.
(3) A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications
provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall
apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter.
(B) Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application
form approved by the M.P.S.C. in accordance with the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file the
application in triplicate with the City Clerk. Applications shall be complete and include all information
required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's
existing and proposed facilities in accordance with the Act.
(C) Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of
the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential
information, which is exempt from Michigan's Freedom of Information Act, Act No. 442 of the Public
Acts of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq., as amended, pursuant to § 6(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A.
§ 484.3106(5), the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map.
(D) Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, an application shall be
accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount established from time to time
by resolution of the City Council.
(E) Additional information. The City Manager may request an applicant to submit such
additional information which the City Manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant
shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional
information established by the City Manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the
requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the
M.P.S.C. as provided in § 6(2) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(2).
(F) Previously issued permits. Pursuant to § 5(1) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(1),
authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under § 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications
Act, Act No. 179 of the Public Acts of 1991, being M.C.L.A. §§ 484.2101 et seq., as amended, and
authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995
amendment of § 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit
requirements of this chapter.
(G) Existing providers. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(3), within
180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with
facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained
authorization or a permit under § 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Act No. 179 of the
Public Acts of 1991, as amended, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to § 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the application fee required under
subsection (D) of this section. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180
days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority for good cause, as provided in § 5(4) of
the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3105(4).
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
(A) Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is
delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(3), the City
Manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit in accordance with § 115.04 for access to
a public right-of-way within the city. The City Manager shall notify the M.P.S.C. when the City Manager
has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was
filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The City Manager shall not unreasonably
deny an application for a permit.
(B) Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City Manager shall issue
the permit in the form approved by the M.P.S.C. with or without additional or different permit terms, in
accordance with §§ 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(1) and (2) and § 484.3115.
(C) Conditions. Pursuant to § 15(4) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(4), the City
Manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the
telecommunications provider's access and use of the public right-of-way.
(D) Bond requirement. Pursuant to § 15(3) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(3), and
without limitation on subsection (C) of this section, the City Manager may require that a bond be posted
by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not
exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition
during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.06 CONSTRUCTION/ENGINEERING PERMIT.
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under
the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as
required under the city code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall
be charged for such a construction or engineering permit.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.07 CONDUIT OR UTILITY POLES.
In accordance with the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or
under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.08 ROUTE MAPS.
Pursuant to § 6(7) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(7), a telecommunications provider
shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications
facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both
the M.P.S.C. and to the city. The route maps should be in electronic format unless and until the
M.P.S.C. determines otherwise, in accordance with § 6(8) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3106(8).
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.09 REPAIR OF DAMAGE.
A telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing
telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-ofway
in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface
and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the
public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.10 ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE FEE.
In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in § 115.04(D), a
telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall
pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to § 8 of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3108.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.11 MODIFICATION OF EXISTING FEES.
In compliance with the requirements of § 13(1) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(1), the city
hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, fees charged to telecommunications providers after
November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and use of the public rights-of-way,
to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be
paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of § 13(4) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3113(4), the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication
facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees
required under § 8 of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3108. The city shall provide each
telecommunications provider affected by the fee a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the
requirement of § 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in
excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such
imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a
provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.12 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
Pursuant to § 13(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(5), if § 8 of the Act, being M.C.L.A. §
484.3108, is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under § 115.11 above shall
be void from the date the modification was made.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.13 USE OF FUNDS.
Pursuant to § 10(4) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3110(4), all amounts received by the city
from the Authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance
with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the Authority shall be deposited into the
Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street Fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public
Acts of 1951, being M.C.L.A. §§ 247.651 et seq.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.14 ANNUAL REPORT.
Pursuant to § 10(5) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3110(5), the City Manager shall file an
annual report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the
Authority.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.15 CABLE TELEVISION OPERATORS.
Pursuant to § 13(6) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3113(6), the city shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay
after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of
gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through
broadband internet transport access services.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
Cross-reference:
For provisions regarding cable television, see Ch. 113
§ 115.16 EXISTING RIGHTS.
Pursuant to § 4(2) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3104(2), except as expressly provided herein
with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider
or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.17 COMPLIANCE.
The city declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the
requirements of the Act, and the provisions of this chapter should be construed in such a manner as to
achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including
but not limited to the following:
(A) Exempting certain route maps from disclosure consistent with the Act and state law as
provided in § 115.04(C);
(B) Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in
accordance with § 115.04(F);
(C) Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public rightof-
way within the city, in accordance with § 115.05(A);
(D) Notifying the M.P.S.C. when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with
§ 115.05(A);
(E) Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with § 115.05(A);
(F) Issuing a permit in the form approved by the M.P.S.C., with or without additional or
different permit terms, as provided in § 115.05(B);
(G) Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications
provider's access and use of the public right-of-way, in accordance with § 115.05(C);
(H) Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable
cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the
telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with § 115.05(D);
(I) Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or
engineering permits, in accordance with § 115.06;
(J) Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees
with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with § 115.11;
(K) Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with § 115.14; and
(L) Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise
fees, in accordance with § 115.15.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.18 RESERVATION OF POLICE POWERS.
Pursuant to § 15(2) of the Act, being M.C.L.A. § 484.3115(2), this chapter shall not limit the
city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public
right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
public.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.19 AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIALS.
The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to
issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil
infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations
bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the city code.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
§ 115.20 MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION.
A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a permit is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to such civil infraction fines and costs as
provided in this code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the
city in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit.
(Ord. 198, passed 12-16-02)
CHAPTER 116: FILM PERMITS
Section
116.01 Definitions
116.02 Permit required
116.03 Exempt activities
116.04 Permit applications
116.05 Investigation of application
116.06 Issuance requirements
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION, RADIO, OR PHOTOGRAPHIC PRODUCTION. All activity attendant
to staging or shooting (video taping or filming or digital recording) commercial motion pictures,
television shows, programs, or commercials and to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale
or use for a commercial purpose where either or both of the following occur:
PUBLIC PROPERTY, EASEMENT, OR RIGHT OF WAY. Activity attendant to a motion, picture,
television, radio, or photographic production or other stationary equipment placed on publicly owned
land, easement, or right-of-way in any one location for longer than five consecutive minutes, or in the
event that public use of publicly owned land, easement, or right-of-way is impaired.
PRIVATE PROPERTY. Activity attendant to a motion picture, television, radio, or photographic
production involves any of the following:
(1) The outdoor presence of five or more passenger vehicles on private property or
adjacent publicly owned land, easement, or right-of-way.
(2) The outdoor presence of one or more semi-trucks or commercial vehicles
exceeding a gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds on private property or adjacent publicly owned land,
easement, or right-of-way.
(3) The outdoor use of pyrotechnics, explosives, or stunts using vehicles.
(4) The outdoor use of one or more electric generators.
(5) The outdoor presence of 12 or more people.
(6) The outdoor use of floodlights at night.
(7) The generation of excessive noise heard outdoors.
(Ord. 266, passed 12-6-10)
§ 116.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No motion picture, television, radio, or photographic production may take place in the city
unless he/she shall have first made application for and obtained, as prescribed in this chapter, a permit
for each instance.
(Ord. 266, passed 12-6-10) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 116.03 EXEMPT ACTIVITIES.
Notwithstanding the foregoing definition, the following activities are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter:
(A) Current news productions, which includes reporters, photographers, or camera persons
in the employment of a newspaper, news service, broadcasting station, or similar entity engaged in the
broadcasting of news events;
(B) Productions which are conducted by the city's public, education, and government access
organizations or by or at the direction of the city;
(C) Companies doing weddings, senior photos, athletic events, parades, or other similar
events of a public nature, and non-commercial events are exempt from this chapter and fees.
(D) Any other activity deemed to be in the public interest by the City Manager.
(Ord. 266, passed 12-6-10)
§ 116.04 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
(A) Any person desiring a permit to conduct a motion picture, television, radio, or
photographic production that is not exempt under the provisions of § 116.03 shall make application on
the appropriate form provided by the city, or by furnishing the required information in person or by first
class mail, facsimile, or the internet to the City Clerk's office. The form must be signed and accompanied
by all required fees, deposits, hold harmless agreements, and insurance certificates required by this
chapter before it will be processed.
(B) The applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall supply all the requested
information as describe in the production filming permit application.
(C) Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, in an amount which shall be established
from time to time by the City Council as necessary and which shall be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
(D) Each application for a permit required by this chapter shall be accompanied by a
detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective permittee's
plans to provide for the following:
(1) The size or area of the property to be used, including a sketch of the filming site
showing placement of work trucks and location of production vehicles;
(2) Sketch of the “base camp” if any, showing any off-street locations for crew
parking, honey wagon, catering, and nonessential production vehicles;
(3) Traffic control plan of the exact filming location, listing roads or lanes to be
closed, if any;
(4) Letter of notification and signatures from businesses/neighborhoods impacted
by filming if required by the City Manager or his/her designee; and
(5) Insurance arrangements and coverage.
(Ord. 266, passed 12-6-10)
§ 116.05 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.
Upon receipt by the City Clerk's office, copies of the application for a permit required by this
chapter shall be forwarded to the appropriate city departments and to such other appropriate public
officials as the City Manager or his/her designee deems necessary.
(Ord. 266, passed 12-6-10)
§ 116.06 ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) In processing an application for a production filming permit required by this chapter, the
city shall, at a minimum, require the following:
(1) Security personnel. The permittee shall employ at his or her own expense such
security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of
the maximum number of attendants at the location of the filming activity and for the preservation of
order and protection of property in and around the site of the filming activity.
(2) Notification. The permittee or his/her designee shall notify affected residents,
occupants, and businesses in advance of filming, and as instructed by the City, of the duration and
location of filming activities.
(3) Access. Production vehicles may not block parking lot access drives, fire
hydrants, or be parked in fire lanes and must allow a minimum of 20 feet of clearance between vehicles
parked on either side of the road for emergency response vehicles to pass.
(4) Base camps. Base camps may not be located on a public street unless approved
in writing by the city or the Police Chief or his/her designee.
(Ord. 266, passed 12-6-10)
CHAPTER 117: PEDDLERS
Section
117.01 Definitions
117.02 License required
117.03 Exempt conduct
117.04 License
117.05 Investigation; issuance or denial
117.06 Term of license; non-transferable
117.07 Rules of conduct
117.08 Revocation of license
117.09 Appeal of denial or revocation
117.99 Violations; penalty
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
PEDDLER. Any person who goes about from place to place in the city, traveling by foot, motor
vehicle, or other means of conveyance, selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, or merchandise,
whether in a public place or upon private property.
(Ord. 271, passed 9-19-11)
§ 117.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person may engage in business as a peddler in the city without a license issued by the city
pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 271, passed 9-19-11) Penalty, see § 117.99
§ 117.03 EXEMPT CONDUCT.
The following conduct is exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
(A) Persons selling or offering for sale goods on behalf of a school system.
(B) Persons selling or offering goods for sale on behalf of a charitable organization qualified
as a charitable organization pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
(C) Persons selling or offering goods for sale on behalf of a religious organization.
(D) A veteran holding and acting in compliance with a veteran's peddlers and hawkers
license issued by the state pursuant to M.C.L.A. §§ 35.441 - 35.443.
(Ord. 271, passed 9-19-11)
§ 117.04 LICENSE.
(A) Application. A person or organization seeking a license shall file with the City Clerk an
application for a peddler's license. The application shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City
Clerk.
(B) Contents. The application shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The name and a physical description of the applicant;
(2) The address (permanent and/or temporary) of the applicant;
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or other items to
be sold;
(4) If the applicant is employed as a peddler, the name and address of the
applicant's employer together with credentials establishing such relationship;
(5) The length of time for which a license is desired;
(6) If a vehicle, vehicle trailer, temporary shelter, or temporary location is to be
used, a description, together with the license number and other information that may be required;
(7) A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the
date of filing such application, which photograph shall be two inches by two inches and shall show the
head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
(8) The social security number of the applicant;
(9) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime,
misdemeanor, or violation of any ordinance, and, if so, full particulars as to the nature of the offense,
the court before whom conviction was had or a plea of guilty entered, and the punishment or penalty
assessed; and
(10) A waiver signed by the applicant granting officials of the city authority to verify
the information provided by the applicant regarding the applicants criminal history.
(Ord. 271, passed 9-19-11)
§ 117.05 INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
(A) The City Clerk shall forward the application to the Chief of Police, who shall cause an
investigation to be made of the applicant's criminal history and, to the extent available, the business and
personal history of the applicant. After such investigation is completed, the Chief of Police shall endorse
upon such application a recommendation for approval or disapproval and shall forward the application
to the City Manager. If the Chief of Police recommends disapproval of such application, the Chief of
Police shall provide the City Manager with a statement of reasons for such recommendation of
disapproval.
(B) If the City Manager is satisfied that the applicant complies with the provisions of this
chapter and other pertinent ordinances of the city and the results of the investigation by the Chief of
Police indicate that the character of the applicant justifies the granting of such license, then the City
Manager shall return the application for license to the City Clerk with instructions that a license be
issued. On receipt of such instructions, the City Clerk shall issue the applicant a peddler's license.
(C) If the City Manager is not satisfied that the applicant complies with the provisions of this
chapter and other pertinent ordinances of the city or if the results of the investigation by the Chief of
Police do not indicate moral character or business responsibility which justifies the granting of such
license, then the City Manager shall deny the license and give notice of such denial to the applicant with
a copy to the Chief of Police specifying the cause of such denial.
(Ord. 271, passed 9-19-11)
§ 117.06 TERM OF LICENSE; NON-TRANSFERABLE.
Licenses may be issued under this chapter for a specified term not to exceed one year. No
license may be assigned or transferred.
(Ord. 271, passed 9-19-11)
§ 117.07 RULES OF CONDUCT.
(A) Hours of operation. No peddler may operate before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
(B) Display. Each peddler licensed pursuant to this chapter shall conspicuously and
prominently display the license granted to the peddler when the peddler is engaged in the business of
peddling.
(C) Street operations. No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets or other public areas. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to operate in a congested area where
the peddler’s operations might impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic or inconvenience the public.
(D) Congestion. No peddler shall conduct business in a congested area. No peddler shall
occupy a station or a location on a public street, sidewalk, parkway, park, parking lot, or any other public
property which is used by pedestrians or persons operating motor vehicles. A peddler shall be
presumed to have occupied a stationary location if the individual has conducted business in any such
public place for a period in excess of ten minutes.
(E) Loud noises; speaking devices. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person on the
licensee's behalf to shout, cry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound device, including loud speakers
or sound amplifiers, on any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the city, or upon any
private premises, for the purposes of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which
the licensee proposes to sell.
(F) Flashing lights. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person on the licensee's
behalf to use or employ any flashing lights on any vehicle or any other device for the purpose of
attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which the licensee proposes to sell.
(G) Duty to depart. A peddler shall immediately depart private property when requested to
do so by the owner, occupant, or person with apparent occupancy or control.
(H) Entry barred by posting. A peddler shall not enter into private property on which
signage is placed barring peddling.
(Ord. 271, passed 9-19-11)
§ 117.08 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
(A) A license may be revoked by the City Manager for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made when engaging in business
as a peddler;
(3) Any violation of this chapter or of any other ordinance of the city;
(4) Conviction of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
(5) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
(B) Whenever the City Manager shall revoke a license, a notice specifying the cause of such
revocation shall be given to the peddler.
(Ord. 271, passed 9-19-11)
§ 117.09 APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
Any person believing they have been aggrieved by an action of the City Manager in the denial or
revocation of a license may, within ten days after receipt of notice of denial or revocation, file a written
request for a hearing with the City Clerk. The City Council shall then set a time and place for a hearing,
and notice shall be given to the appellant. Upon such hearing, the City Council shall determine whether
the license should be denied or revoked; and such determination shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 271, passed 9-19-11)
§ 117.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
(A) Civil infraction. A violation of Chapter 117 shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine.
Increased civil fines will be imposed for repeated violations that occur within a six-month period. The
civil fine for a first offense is $50. The civil fine for the first repeat offense is $250. The civil fine for the
second repeat offense is $500. The City shall also be entitled to equitable relief to abate the violation
and to such other relief as may be available to the city pursuant to Chapters 83 and 87 of the Michigan
Revised Judicature Act, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8301 et seq. and 600.8701 et seq. Each day
on which any violation of those sections occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this
section shall restrict other remedies available to the city.
(B) Nuisance. A violation of Chapter 117 is declared to be a nuisance per se.
(C) Enforcement. The City Manager and all police officers of the City are authorized to issue
civil infractions citations pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 271, passed 9-19-11)
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
130.01 Disorderly conduct
130.02 Curfew for minors
130.99 Penalty
§ 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to
or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public
has access.
(B) Acts prohibited. No person shall do any of the following.
(1) Commit an assault, or an assault and battery, on any person.
(2) Be drunk in any public place or under the influence of any narcotic drug in any
public place.
(3) Engage in any indecent, insulting, immoral, or obscene conduct in any public
place.
(4) Reserved.
(5) Fire, discharge, display, or possess any fireworks except for the type and under
the conditions permitted by Chapter 39 of the Penal Code of the state.
(6) Engage in peeping in the windows of an inhabited place.
(7) Bathe in any body of water in a naked state in public, or with his or her person
so much undressed that there shall be an indecent exposure of the body.
(8) Make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his or her person.
(9) Sell, Offer for sale, give away, exhibit or publish or have in his or her possession
for any such purpose any obscene, lewd, lascivious, indecent or immodest book, pamphlet, paper,
picture, cast, statuary, image or representation or other article of an indecent or immoral nature, or any
book, paper, print, circular or writing made up principally of pictures or stories of immodest deeds, lust,
or crime, or exhibit any such article within the view of any passerby.
(10) Willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property
not his or her own, or any public school building, or any public building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box,
street light, street sign, traffic control device, railroad sign or signal, parking meter, or shade tree
belonging to the city or located in the public places of the city, or mark or post hand bills on, or in any
manner mar the walls of, any public building, or fence, tree, or pole within the city, or destroy, take, or
meddle with any property belonging to the city, or remove the same from the building or place where it
may be kept, placed or stored, without proper authority; or disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage
any city water meter without proper authority.
(11) Engage in any disturbance, fight, or quarrel in a public place.
(12) Loiter on or play games on any street or sidewalk or in any park or public
building or conduct himself in any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of
the public.
(13) Engage in any act of prostitution.
(14) Attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate of any place where
prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor or any other illegal or immoral business or
occupation is permitted or conducted.
(15) Keep or maintain a gaming room, gaming table, or any gaming device used for
gaming; or knowingly suffer a gaming room, gaming table, or any gaming device to be kept, maintained,
played or sold on any premises occupied or controlled by him or her.
(16) Obstruct, resist, hinder, or oppose any member of the Police Department or any
peace officer in the discharge of his or her duties as such.
(17) Disturb any school, meeting, or congregation lawfully assembled, whether
religious, political, or otherwise.
(18) Prowl about any alley or the private premises of any other person in the
nighttime, without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises.
(19) Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any person
or automobile.
(20) Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from any moving
automobile.
(21) Summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise without any good reason therefor, by
telephone or otherwise, the Police of Fire Department or any public or private ambulance to go to any
address where the service called for is not needed.
(Ord. 12, passed 8-17-67; Am. Ord. 173, passed 4-5-99)
§ 130.02 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
(A) Curfew hours. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter,
wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds,
wharves, docks, or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and
entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
immediately following; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the
minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
(B) Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other adult
person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 17 years to permit or suffer such minor
to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, wharves, docks, or other public grounds, public places, and public buildings, places of
amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. immediately following; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not
apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business
directed by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
(C) Violations. Any minor violating the provisions of this section shall be dealt with in
accordance with Juvenile Court law and procedure. Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having
the care and custody of a minor violating this section shall be subject to the penalty specified in §
130.99.
(Ord. 14, passed 8-17-67)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
Any person convicted of violations of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$100 and costs of prosecution or be imprisoned for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
(Ord. 12, passed 8-17-67; Am. Ord. 14, passed 8-17-67)
CHAPTER 131: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
131.01 Definition
131.02 Use of drug paraphernalia prohibited
131.03 Exceptions
131.04 Administrative liability
131.99 Penalty
§ 131.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. Any equipment, product, material, or combination of equipment,
products, or materials, which is specifically designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance as defined by the Michigan Public
Health Code or the laws of the state; including but not limited to all of the following:
(1) An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing the potency
of any species of plant which plant is a controlled substance;
(2) Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the
strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance;
(3) A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing or measuring
a controlled substance;
(4) A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, specifically designed for use with a controlled substance;
(5) A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing twigs and
seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana;
(6) An object specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body;
(7) A kit specifically designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;
(8) A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converging,
producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;
(9) A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically designed for use
in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body, and which
consists of at least a razor blade and a mirror;
(10) A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed to deliver a
measured amount of controlled substances to the user;
(11) A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically designed to carry a
small amount of controlled substances to the user's nose;
(12) A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is specifically designed
to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used
for brake fluid, oil, or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and concealing
controlled substances;
(13) A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small diameter bowl and
that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances
into the human body.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-19-97)
§ 131.02 USE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following.
(A) Use or possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a drug or
controlled substance in violation of the Michigan Public Health Code or the laws of the state.
(B) Deliver, or possess with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it would be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a drug or
controlled substance in violation of the Michigan Public Health Code or the laws of the state.
(C) Place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement,
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as
drug paraphernalia.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-19-97) Penalty, see § 131.99
§ 131.03 EXCEPTIONS.
This chapter shall not apply to the following.
(A) An object sold or offered for sale to a person licensed under article 15 or under the
occupational code, Public Act 299 of 1980, being M.C.L.A. §§ 339.101 through 339.2721, or any intern,
trainee, apprentice, or assistant in a profession licensed under article 15 or under Public Act 299 of 1980
for use in that profession.
(B) An object sold or offered for sale to any hospital, sanitarium, clinical laboratory, or other
health care institution including a penal, correctional, or juvenile detention facility for use in that
institution.
(C) An object sold or offered for sale to a dealer in medical, dental, surgical, or
pharmaceutical supplies.
(D) Equipment, a product, or material which may be used in the preparation or smoking of
tobacco or smoking herbs other than a controlled substance.
(E) A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device not specifically designed for a use
described in § 131.01.
(F) A hypodermic syringe or needle sold or offered for sale for the purpose of injecting or
otherwise treating livestock or other animals.
(G) An object sold, offered for sale, or given away by a state or local governmental agency
or by a person specifically authorized by a state or local governmental agency to prevent the
transmission of infectious agents.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-19-97)
§ 131.04 ADMINISTRATIVE LIABILITY.
No city officer, agent or employee, or member of the City Council, or of the Spring Lake-
Ferrysburg Police Department shall render himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may
accrue to any person as a result of any act, decision or other consequence or occurrence arising out of
the discharge of his or her duties and responsibilities pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-19-97)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 10.99. The city may also seek injunctive
relief as may be appropriate.
(Ord. 165, passed 5-19-97)
CHAPTER 132: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS
Section
132.01 Definitions
132.02 Discharge of firearms and other weapons prohibited; exceptions
132.03 Discharge of BB guns prohibited; exceptions
132.04 Discharge of paintball guns prohibited; exceptions
132.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Firearms and weapons prohibited in parks, see § 94.20
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BB GUN. A smooth bore rifle or handgun designed by a manufacturer exclusively for propelling
BB's not exceeding .177 caliber by means of a spring or air or gas.
BOW. A device for propelling an arrow from a string drawn, held, and released by hand where
the force used to hold the string in the drawn position is provided by the archer's muscles.
CROSSBOW. A weapon consisting of a bow mounted transversely on a stock or frame and
designed to fire an arrow, bolt, or quarrel by the release of a bow string which is controlled by a
mechanical or electric trigger.
FIREARM. A weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by using explosives,
gas or air as a means or propulsion. FIREARM does not include a smooth bore rifle or handgun designed
by a manufacturer exclusively for propelling BB's not exceeding .177 caliber by means of a spring or air
or gas. FIREARM does not include paintball guns.
INDOOR RANGE. An area contained entirely inside a building and used for the discharge of
bows, crossbows, or firearms and designed to prevent the propulsion of arrows, bolts, quarrels, bullets
or other projectiles outside the range.
OUTDOOR RANGE. The shooting of a bow provided that:
(1) The target is of sufficient size and depth to reasonably prevent travel of the
arrow beyond the target;
(2) The target is placed so that the line of travel of the arrow is not in the direction
of a residence or occupied building within 150 feet of the target; and
(3) The target is set back from the property line a minimum of 25 feet.
PAINTBALL GUN. A smooth bore rifle or handgun designed by a manufacturer exclusively for
propelling balls filled with paint by means of a spring or air or gas.
PARCEL OF LAND. A continuous parcel of land under common ownership.
POLICE OFFICER. A person permitted or licenced by the city, county, state or federal government
to engage in law enforcement activities and who is acting within the scope of the licence or permit.
(Ord. 173, passed 4-5-99)
§ 132.02 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any bow, crossbow or firearm within the city
except:
(A) Within an indoor range.
(B) While engaged in the discharge of a bow at an outdoor range in a manner that does not
endanger persons or property.
(C) Upon a parcel of land 30 acres in size or greater provided that a bow, crossbow or
firearm may not be discharged within 450 feet of an occupied building, dwelling, house, residence, or
cabin or any barn or other building used in connection with a farm operation, without having obtained
the written permission of the owner, renter or occupant of the property or pursuant to divisions (A), (B)
or (D) of this section.
(D) By a police officer in the enforcement of law.
(Ord. 173, passed 4-5-99) Penalty, see § 132.99
§ 132.03 DISCHARGE OF BB GUNS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a BB gun within the city except in a safe manner
when on private property and with the consent of the owner or occupant. Juveniles discharging BB guns
shall be supervised by an adult.
(Ord. 173, passed 4-5-99) Penalty, see § 132.99
§ 132.04 DISCHARGE OF PAINTBALL GUNS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a paintball gun within the city except in a safe
manner when on private property and with the consent of the owner or occupant. Juveniles discharging
paintball guns shall be supervised by an adult.
(Ord. 173, passed 4-5-99) Penalty, see § 132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 10.99. The city may also seek injunctive
relief as may be appropriate.
(Ord. 173, passed 4-5-99)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AFFECTING POLICE FUNCTIONS
Section
133.01 Resisting officer
133.02 Obeying officer
133.03 Impeding police investigation
133.04 Hindering police investigation
133.99 Penalty
§ 133.01 RESISTING OFFICER.
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, obstruct, hinder, or oppose any police officer or
other law enforcement agent while in the discharge or apparent discharge of the officer or agent’s duty,
or in any way interfere with or hinder the officer or agent in the discharge of his or her duty.
(Ord. 230, passed 7-17-06)
§ 133.02 OBEYING OFFICER.
It shall be unlawful for any person or refuse to obey the lawful command of any police officer, or
fail to disperse when directed to do so by a police officer or other law enforcement agent.
(Ord. 230, passed 7-17-06)
§ 133.03 IMPEDING POLICE INVESTIGATION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to partake in, give countenance to or aid in willfully acting in a
belligerent or boisterous manner so as to disrupt a police investigation.
(Ord. 230, passed 7-17-06)
§ 133.04 HINDERING POLICE INVESTIGATION.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, aid, give countenance to or assist in the making of
any statement or report that individual knows to be false, to a police officer or other law enforcement
agent in the course of a lawful investigation. A person shall not refuse to provide identification upon the
request of a police officer or other lawful agent in the course of a lawful investigation.
(Ord. 230, passed 7-17-06)
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in § 10.99
(Ord. 230, passed 7-17-06)
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 1
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
150.01 House numbering
Standard Codes
150.10 [Reserved]
150.11 [Reserved]
150.12 [Reserved]
150.13 [Reserved]
150.14 [Reserved]
150.15 International Property Maintenance Code
150.16 International Fire Code
150.17 State construction codes adopted
150.18 Construction Board of Appeals
Permits
150.25 Permit required
150.26 Residential rental property permits
150.27 Owner occupied property
150.28 Application for permit
150.29 Fees
150.30 Violations; relief; citations
150.99 Penalty
Cross-reference:
Adoption of codes by reference, see Charter § 5.15
§ 150.01 HOUSE NUMBERING.
(A) Marking of premises required. From and after the date hereof, all buildings and
improved property shall be conspicuously marked with a premises number placed in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
(B) Numbering system. The numbering system for the city is established by the City
Clerk. Anyone wishing to establish the number of a premises shall contact the City Clerk.
(C) Required marking of property. All buildings and improved property shall be
marked with a number as follows:
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the owner to contact the appropriate agency
to procure the correct number for each premises.
(2) The numbers used shall be at least three inches high and shall be made of
durable material. Arabic numbers must be used. Numbers written out shall not be used to replace
the arabic numbers.
(3) The numbers shall be placed near the front entrance, clearly visible from
the street. In cases where the numbers will not be visible from the street, an additional set of
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 2
numbers shall be placed at the street, at least five feet off the side of the driveway and at least 42
inches above the ground.
(D) Administration.
(1) The Building Inspector shall administer this section.
(2) No building permit shall be issued for any building until the owner has
procured a premises number from the City Clerk.
(3) No occupancy permit shall be issued until the numbers are in the approved
place.
(4) It shall be the duty of all city police officers and firefighters to report
violations of this section.
(5) The Building Inspector, upon notification of violation, shall give written
notice within ten days to comply from the date of notice. If there is not compliance within the ten
days, a summons shall be issued requiring appearance at the District Court and imposing fines as
designated under § 150.99.
(Ord. 54, passed 8-9-78; Am. Ord. 295, passed 4-2-18) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.10 [RESERVED].
§ 150.11 [RESERVED].
§ 150.12 [RESERVED].
§ 150.13 [RESERVED].
§ 150.14 [RESERVED].
§ 150.15 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
(A) Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code. The International
Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, is
hereby adopted by reference, subject to the modifications contained in this section. A complete
copy of the code is made available to the public at the office of the Ferrysburg City Clerk.
(B) Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition.
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, is amended to read as follows:
SECTION 101.1 Title. Insert:
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 3
City of Ferrysburg.
SECTION 103.6 Fees. Amend to read:
The fees for activities and services performed by the department carrying out its responsibilities
under this Code shall be established by the City Council by resolution.
SECTION 106.3 Penalties. Amend to read:
A violation of this Code shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine. Increased civil fines will be
imposed for repeated violations that occur within a six-month period. The civil fine for a first
offense is $50. The civil fine for the first repeat offense is $250. The civil fine for the second
repeat offense is $500. The city shall also be entitled to equitable relief to abate the violations
and to such other relief as may be available to the city pursuant to Chapters 83 and 87 of the
Michigan Revised Judicature Act, as amended at the present time or in the future. Each day of a
violation shall be a separate offense.
Issuance of civil infraction citations. Police officers, Building Inspectors, and the City Manager
are authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this Code.
SECTION 302.4 Weeds. Delete section.
SECTION 303.14 Insert Screens. Insert:
April 1 until October 1.
SECTION 602.3 Heat Supply. Insert:
October 1 until April 1.
SECTION 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Insert:
October 1 until April 1.
(Ord. 98, passed 5-28-86; Am. Ord. 154, passed 1-15-96; Am. Ord. 162, passed 1-20-97; Am.
Ord. 191, passed 5-20-02; Am. Ord. 235, passed 10-2-06; Am. Ord. 295, passed 4-2-18)
§ 150.16 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
(A) International Fire Code, 2015 Edition. The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition,
and all appendices thereto, is hereby adopted in the City of Ferrysburg subject to the revisions
contained in this section. The complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of
the Ferrysburg City Clerk.
(B) Amendments to Code. The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, is amended to
read as follows:
SECTION 101.1 Insert:
City of Ferrysburg
SECTION 109.3 Penalties. Amend to read:
With the exception of violations described in Section 111.4, a violation of this
Code shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine. Increased civil fines will be imposed for
repeated violations that occur within a six-month period. The civil fine for a first offense is $50.
The civil fine for the first repeat offense is $250. The civil fine for the second repeat offense is
$500. The city shall also be entitled to equitable relief to abate the violations and to such other
relief as may be available to the city pursuant to Chapters 83 and 87 of the Michigan Revised
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 4
Judicature Act, as amended at the present time or in the future. Each day of a violation shall be a
separate offense.
Issuance of Civil Infraction Citations. Police officers, the Fire Chief, and the
City Manager are authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this
Code.
SECTION 111.4 Failure to Comply with Stop Work Order. Amend to read:
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop
work order, except as the person may be directed to perform for the purpose of abating or
removing a violation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor with a penalty of not more than $500 and
90 days in jail.
SECTION 4-105. Penalties is amended to read:
SECTION 4-105. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to
comply with any requirements thereof or who shall work in violation of an approved plan or
direction of the Fire Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under provisions of this Code,
shall be guilty of a Civil Infraction subject to a fine. Increased civil fines will be imposed for
repeated violations that occur within a six-month period. The civil fine for the first offense is
$50. The civil fine for the first repeat offense is $250. The civil fine for the second repeat offense
is $500. The City shall also be entitled to equitable relief to abate the violation and to such other
relief as may be available to the city pursuant to chapters 83 and 87 of the Michigan Revised
Judicature Act, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8301 et seq. and 600.8701 et seq. Each day
that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 88, passed 2-22-84; Am. Ord. 153, passed 1-15-96; Am. Ord. 235, passed 10-2-06; Am.
Ord. 295, passed 4-2-18)
Cross-reference:
Burning, see Ch. 92
§ 150.17 STATE CONSTRUCTION CODES ADOPTED.
Pursuant to the Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, Act 230 of the
Public Acts of 1972, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq., as amended, the city assumes
responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the Michigan State Construction Code
throughout its corporate limits including the Michigan Building Code, the Michigan Electrical
Code, the Michigan Plumbing Code, Michigan Mechanical Code, Michigan Existing Buildings
Code, and all other subordinate codes, additions, modifications, and amendments thereto as the
Director of the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, or an authorized representative
of the Director may determine. The Building Inspector of the city is designated as the enforcing
agent to discharge the responsibilities of the city.
(Ord. 206, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 295, passed 4-2-18)
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 5
§ 150.18 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS.
(A) A Construction Board of Appeals for the city shall be created consisting of not
less than three nor more than seven members, as determined by resolution of the City Council.
The members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed for two-year terms by the City Council.
A member of the Board of Appeals shall be qualified by experience or training to perform the
duties of members of the Board of Appeals. If an inspector refuses to grant an application for a
building permit, or if an inspector makes any other decision pursuant or related to this section, or
any other section of this code, an interested person, or the person's authorized agent, may appeal
in writing to the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall hear the appeal and render and
file its decision with a statement of reasons for the decision with the inspector from whom the
appeal was taken not more than 30 days after submission of the appeal. Failure by the Board of
Appeals to hear an appeal and file a decision within the time limit is a denial of the appeal for
purposes of authorizing the institution of an appeal to the Construction Code Commission. A
copy of the decision and statement of the reasons for the decision shall be delivered or mailed,
before filing, to the party taking the appeal.
(B) The business which the Board of Appeals may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting of the Board of Appeals held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts
of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 et seq. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the
meeting shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976.
(C) A record of decisions made by the Board of Appeals, properly indexed, and any
other writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the Board of Appeals in
the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with
Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 et seq.
(Ord. 206, passed 10-20-03; Am. Ord. 295, passed 4-2-18)
Cross-reference:
Creation of boards and commissions, see Charter § 4.25
§ 150.25 PERMIT REQUIRED.
If the building code adopted by the city requires a building permit for a specified activity,
no person, firm, or corporation shall erect or construct, or repair or improve or enlarge, or move
or demolish any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, without first
obtaining a building permit, and, if applicable, an electrical permit, a plumbing permit, and a
mechanical permit for each such building or structure from the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-5-97) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.26 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY PERMITS.
(A) Intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate residential rental arrangements in
the City of Ferrysburg to ensure, to the maximum extent practical, that compatibility between
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 6
different types of occupied property is maintained. Further, as the City of Ferrysburg Master Plan
seeks to preserve the city's unique character, the intent of this section is to ensure that short-term
rental occupants, long-term rental occupants, and owner-occupants can enjoy the community and
neighborhoods harmoniously with minimal conflict. This section strives to balance the rights of
landowners, regardless of occupancy, to enjoy the benefits of home ownership for living
purposes or for profit. As one of many sections adopted by the City of Ferrysburg to protect
public health, safety, and welfare, the intent of this section is to minimize the potential for
problems caused by mismanagement of rental property and to provide for an enforceable
regulatory and permitting framework.
(B) Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used with relation to
this section, shall have the following meanings assigned to them, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
BEDROOM. A room which is intended, arranged, and designed to be occupied
by one or more persons primarily for sleeping purposes.
DWELLING. A building or portion of a building providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
eating, cooking, sanitation, and one or more separate bedrooms for sleeping.
HOMESTAY. The rental of one or more, but not all, bedrooms in an
owner-occupied dwelling while a permanent resident is present.
LOCAL AGENT. The owner, or individual authorized by the owner, serving as
the official contact for the rental dwelling.
MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY. The maximum number of allowable occupants for
the dwelling, as established by this section.
OCCUPANT. An individual at least 24 months of age who is living in, sleeping
in, or otherwise having possession of a space.
OWNER. A person holding legal or equitable title to the property.
RENT OR RENTAL. To permit, provide for, or offer possession or occupancy
of a dwelling to a person who is not the legal owner of record, pursuant to a written or unwritten
agreement.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL. The rental of any dwelling to a single party or
individual for a term of 7 to 27 consecutive days, not including: campgrounds; bed and breakfast
establishments; hotel rooms; transitional housing operated by a non-profit entity; group homes
such as nursing homes and adult foster care homes, hospitals, or housing provided by a
substance-abuse rehabilitation clinic; mental-health facility or other health-care related clinic
family occupancy; homestays and house-sitting arrangements; temporary rental terms between
the buyer and seller of a dwelling; and occupancy of an estate representative.
(C) Registration, permitting, and certificates of compliance.
(1) All rental dwellings shall be registered with the city on an annual basis.
The owner of any rental dwelling shall register the rental dwelling prior to allowing occupancy.
Application for registration shall be made on a form prepared by the city.
(a) A Long-Term Rental Permit is required for all rental of dwellings
with terms greater than 27 days.
(b) A Short-Term Rental Permit is required for all rental of dwellings
with terms of 7 to 27 consecutive days.
(2) Rental of dwellings for terms less than seven days is prohibited.
(3) Application requirements.
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 7
(a) Local agent information. The local agent shall be available to be
reached any time that the dwelling is rented and a mobile contact number shall be provided.
(b) Phone number. For each short-term rental, land lines are required.
(c) Occupancy. The maximum occupancy proposed for the dwelling in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
(d) Statement regarding inspections. A statement certifying that the
property owner consents to inspections by the city and will make the dwelling available to
inspectors upon request.
(e) An inspection by a licensed contractor may need to be submitted
for heating units, electrical, and the like, to certify they are properly installed, code compliant
and safe.
(4) Rental dwellings shall not be occupied without a certificate of compliance.
(5) A fee shall be charged by the building department for the issuance of a
residential rental property permit. The amount of the fee shall be set by the City Council by
resolution, and shall be subject to change by resolution. The fee does not include any
re-inspection or other inspections by city inspectors.
(6) The annual registration date shall be January 2 of each year, and all fees
for residential rental property permits shall be paid on or before February 1 of each year.
(7) Any unpaid fees, as required by this section and/or the Uniform Housing
Code, which remain unpaid after February 1, shall become a debt to the city from the owner or
person otherwise to be assessed on tax day provided by law. Such unpaid fees shall become a
lien upon such real property and the lien for such amounts and for all interest and penalties
thereon shall continue until payment thereof. All such amounts shall be thereafter collected in the
same manner as real property taxes.
(D) Local agent. The owner, in its annual filing with the city, shall identify a
responsible local agent, which may be a person, corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture,
trust, association, organization, or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in property
who has authority to do the following:
(1) Receive all official notices concerning housing, zoning, dangerous
buildings, and other code violations on behalf of the owner of a non-owner occupied residential
dwelling or unit, and any notice received by the responsible local agent shall be deemed to have
been received by the property owner;
(2) Be responsible for providing access to the non-owner occupied residential
dwelling or unit for any inspection necessary under this section; and
(3) Be available to accept telephone calls at all times that the dwelling is
rented. The local agent, or another authorized individual, must be able to access the property
within two hours at any time the dwelling is rented.
(E) Requirements for all rentals.
(1) In order for the city to issue a certificate of compliance, the rental dwelling
must have a fully functioning carbon monoxide detector in each unit.
(2) The maximum number of occupants per rental dwelling is one occupant
for the first 70 square feet of bedroom space and one occupant per additional full 50 square feet
of bedroom space, per bedroom.
(3) Posting of information. The following information shall be posted in a
conspicuous place within the dwelling:
(a) Local agent contact information;
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 8
(b) Maximum occupancy approved by the City of Ferrysburg;
(c) Parking instructions;
(d) Outline of enforcement and penalties;
(e) City ordinance packet, including Residential Rental Property
Permits (§ 150.26), Fireworks (§ 91.05), Prohibited Noises (§ 91.17), and Burning (Chapter 92);
and
(f) Owner's rules and regulations, and homeowners' association
regulations, as applicable.
(F) Requirements for short-term rentals.
(1) Campfires. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 92 of this code, the
following requirements apply:
(a) Only dry and seasoned firewood may be burned;
(b) Fires must be at least 20 feet from any structure, building, lot line,
fence, wooded area, dune grass, or combustible material;
(c) Fires are prohibited on combustible decks and patios and ground
fire pits are not permitted. Fires shall be contained within a chiminea, outdoor portable fire pit, or
other free-standing container, and shall be covered by a screen or other spark cover; and
(d) A garden hose, fire extinguisher, or other means of extinguishment
shall be available for immediate use.
(2) Camper trailers, travel trailers, and motor homes are prohibited.
(G) Inspections.
(1) An inspection of the residential rental property shall be conducted by the
building official once within a three-year time frame, Additional inspections may be conducted if
a complaint is received regarding suspected safety issues or if violations are observed.
(2) The owner of any rental dwelling shall be responsible for additional fees at
the going inspection fee, for re-inspection of the rental dwelling or for inspections by the
mechanical, plumbing, electrical, or other building officials.
(H) Enforcement.
(1) Violations and penalties. Violators of this section are subject to penalties
in accordance with Ferrysburg City Code § 150.99. A written notice of violation shall be issued
to the local agent prior to issuance of a citation. A notice of violation is not required to be issued
to a renter prior to issuing a citation.
(2) Revocation of a Permit.
(a) In addition to the penalties authorized by Ferrysburg City Code §
150.99, a permit may be revoked in the following cases:
1. The local agent has failed to fulfill the requirements of this
section within a time frame specified by the City of Ferrysburg after a notice of violation;
2. The local agent has been issued three notices of violation of
the requirements of this section by their own actions, or lack thereof, or the actions of tenants of
the property; or
3. Three citations for violations of city laws have been issued
to renters of a dwelling within a 12-month time frame.
(b) If revoked, the owner shall not be issued a rental permit for a
period of 12 months.
(I) Appeal.
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 9
(1) Rights. Any owner whose application was denied or whose rental permit
was revoked may file an appeal to the City Council within 30 days following the decision or
action.
(2) Notice. The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an
appeal. At least seven days prior to the meeting, the city shall provide written notice to persons
who own real property within 300 feet of the property in question, and to the occupants of
dwellings within the same distance. Notice shall be delivered by mail addressed to the respective
owners and tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll. If the tenant's name is not
known, the term occupant may be used.
(3) Decision. The City Council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision or
action of the City Manager. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
(Ord. 235, passed 10-2-06; Am. Ord. 282, passed 4-21-14; Am. Ord. 292, passed 12-18-17; Am.
Ord. 293, passed 4-16-18)
§ 150.27 OWNER OCCUPIED PROPERTY.
(A) Change of occupancy permit required. A change of occupancy permit shall be
required whenever a dwelling is sold and/or a dwelling has a new occupancy.
(B) Inspections. When there is a change in the dwelling occupancy, an inspection by
the building official or an authorized representative of the building department may be required
prior to the granting of a permit. If the property does not comply with the requirements of the
housing code, the occupancy permit may be denied until corrections are made.
(C) Fees. A fee shall be charged for the change of occupancy permit of a dwelling
when the occupancy is changed. The amount of the fee shall be set by the City Council by
resolution, and shall be subject to change by resolution.
(Ord. 235, passed 10-2-06)
§ 150.28 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
An applicant for a building, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical permit shall file an
application in writing, on forms furnished for that purpose by the city, for all proposed work
which requires a permit.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-5-97)
§ 150.29 FEES.
The City Council shall by resolution establish reasonable fees to be charged for acts and
services performed by the appropriate inspectors or Construction Board of Appeals, which fees
shall be intended to bear a reasonable relation to the costs, including overhead, to the city of the
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 10
acts and services, including, without limitation, those services and acts as issuance of building
permits, examination of plans and specifications, inspection of construction undertaken pursuant
to the building permit, the issuance of certificates of use and occupancy and, in case of a
Construction Board of Appeals, hearing appeals in accordance with the Stille-Derossett-Hale
Single State Construction Code Act, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq. The city shall only
use fees generated under this section for the operation of the Building Inspector and the
Construction Board of Appeals and shall not use the fees for any other purpose.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-5-97; Am. Ord. 206, passed 10-20-03)
§ 150.30 VIOLATIONS; RELIEF; CITATIONS.
The Building Inspector and Zoning Administrator of the city and all deputies of the
Ottawa County Sheriff’s Department are authorized to issue civil infraction citations pursuant to
this subchapter.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-5-97; Am. Ord. 292, passed 12-18-17) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
Unless specifically provided otherwise, a violation of Chapter 150 of the Ferrysburg City
Code shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine. Increased civil fines will be imposed for
repeated violations that occur within a six-month period. The civil fine for a first offense is $100.
The civil fine for the first repeat offense is $250. The civil fine for the second repeat offense is
$500. The city shall also be entitled to equitable relief to abate the violations and to such other
relief as may be available to the city pursuant to Chapters 83 and 87 of the Michigan Revised
Judicature Act, as amended at the present time or in the future. Each day of a violation shall be a
separate offense.
(Ord. 164, passed 5-5-97; Am. Ord. 235, passed 10-2-06; Am. Ord. 292, passed 12-18-17)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
151.01 Statutory authorization
151.02 Findings of fact
151.03 Purpose
151.04 Methods of reducing flood losses
151.05 Definitions
151.06 Applicability of provisions
151.07 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
151.08 Compliance required
151.09 Abrogation and greater restrictions
151.10 Interpretation
151.11 Warning and disclaimer of liability
Permits
151.25 Development permit
151.26 Application
Flood Hazard Reduction
151.35 General standards
151.36 Specific standards
151.37 Floodways
Administration and Enforcement
151.45 City Building Inspector; duties
151.46 Appeals and requests for variances
FEMA Floodplain Management
151.50 Enforcing agency
151.51 Code appendix adopted
151.52 Designation of flood prone hazard areas
151.53 Application process
Violations
151.99 Violations; penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
The Legislature of the state has in the Michigan Flood Plain Act, M.C.L.A §§ 117.1 et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council does ordain this
chapter.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
(A) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss
of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(B) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special
flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage
uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from
flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.03 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and
to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
(A) to protect human life and health;
(B) to minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(C) to minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(D) to minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(E) to minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(F) to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of
areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
(G) to insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood
hazard; and,
(H) to insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility
for their actions.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
(A) restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due
to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
(B) requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be
protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(C) controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural
protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
(D) controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood
damage; and,
(E) preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPEAL. A request for a review of the City Building Inspector's interpretation of any provision of
this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or VO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the
path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and, velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a
one per cent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given
year.
DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard.
EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of
streets) is completed before the effective date of this chapter.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the mobile
homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or
the pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets).
FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
(2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration
that includes flood profiles, the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than 584 feet above sea level.
HABITABLE FLOOR. Any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping,
eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a
HABITABLE FLOOR.
MOBILE HOME. A structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent
chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after
the effective date of this chapter.
NEW MOBILE HOME PARK OR MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lot (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads, and the construction of streets) is completed on or after the effective date of
this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other
than a mobile home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of
excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and
filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure (other than a mobile home) without a
basement or poured footings, the START OF CONSTRUCTION includes the first permanent framing or
assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For mobile homes not within a
mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, START OF CONSTRUCTION means the affixing of the
mobile home to its permanent site. For mobile homes within mobile home parks or mobile home
subdivisions, START OF CONSTRUCTION is the date on which the construction of facilities for servicing
the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets,
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is completed.
STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building or mobile home that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
(1) Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50 per cent of the market value of the structure either: before the improvement or repair is
started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
(2) For the purposes of this definition SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered
to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
(3) The term does not, however, include either:
(a) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or
(b) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in
a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.06 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a
scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Ferrysburg,
Michigan, Ottawa County,” dated August 1977, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and
Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at the City Hall, 408 5th Street, Ferrysburg, Michigan 49409.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.08 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered
without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.09 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.10 INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
(A) considered as minimum requirements;
(B) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
(C) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.11 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any
officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
PERMITS
§ 151.25 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any
area of special flood hazard established in § 151.07.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78) Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.26 APPLICATION.
Application for a development permit may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
(A) elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
structures;
(B) elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;
(C) certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in § 152.36(B); and,
(D) description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a
result of proposed development.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.35 GENERAL STANDARDS.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
(A) Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be
that:
(a) over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile
home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with mobile homes less than 50 feet
long requiring one additional tie per side;
(b) frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional
ties per side at intermediate points, with mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional
ties per side;
(c) all components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force
of 4,800 pounds; and,
(d) any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored.
(B) Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(C) Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
(D) Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or 5 acres (whichever is less).
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78) Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.36 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set
forth in § 151.07 or § 151.45(B)(2), the following provisions are required:
(A) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood
elevation.
(B) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(2) have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(3) be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards
of this subsection are satisfied (Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
151.45(C)(2)).
(C) Mobile homes.
(1) Mobile homes shall be anchored in accordance with § 151.35(A)(2).
(2) For new mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions; for expansions to
existing mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions; for existing mobile home parks and mobile
home subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads
equals or exceeds 50 per cent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair,
reconstruction or improvement has commenced; and for mobile homes not placed in a mobile home
park or mobile home subdivision, it is required that:
(a) stands or lots are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the
lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level;
(b) adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are provided; and,
(c) in the instance of elevation on pilings, that:
1. lots are large enough to permit steps;
2. piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten
feet apart; and
3. reinforcement is provided for pilings more than six feet above
the ground level.
(3) No mobile home shall be placed in a floodway, except in an existing mobile
home park or existing mobile home subdivision.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78) Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.37 FLOODWAYS.
For locations within areas of special flood hazard established in § 151.07 or areas designated as
floodways, since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which
carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(A) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development, are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is
provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(B) If subsection (A) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this subchapter.
(C) The placement of any mobile homes is prohibited, except in an existing mobile home
park or existing mobile home subdivision.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78) Penalty, see § 151.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.45 CITY BUILDING INSPECTOR; DUTIES.
(A) Designation of City Building Inspector. The City Building Inspector is hereby appointed
to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
(B) Duties and responsibilities of City Building Inspector. Duties of the City Building
Inspector shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Permit review. The city Building Inspector shall:
(a) review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
(b) review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval
is required;
(c) review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development adversely affects the carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For purposes of
this chapter, ADVERSELY AFFECTS means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when
combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
(2) Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been
provided in accordance with § 151.07, the City Building Inspector shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to
administer § 151.36(A) and (B).
(3) Information to be obtained and maintained. The City Building Inspector shall:
(a) obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures;
(b) for all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
1. verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
2. maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §
151.26(C);
(c) maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
(4) Alteration of watercourses. The city Building Inspector shall:
(a) notify adjacent communities and the Water Resources Commission,
Bureau of Water Management, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;
(b) require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
(5) Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The city Building Inspector shall make
interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 151.46.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
§ 151.46 APPEALS AND REQUESTS FOR VARIANCES.
(A) Generally.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals as established by the city shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the City Building Inspector in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Ottawa County Circuit Court.
(4) In passing upon such applications the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
(b) the danger to life and property due to flooding;
(c) the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(d) the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
(e) the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(f) the availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are
not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(h) the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for that area;
(i) the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
(j) the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of ½ acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (a)-(k) in subsection (A)(4)
above have been fully considered; as lot size increases beyond ½ acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(6) Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (A)(4) and the purposes of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(7) The City Building Inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and
report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
(B) Conditions for variances.
(1) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places,
without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
(2) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(3) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) a showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) a determination that the granting of a variance will not:
1. result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, or extraordinary public expense;
2. create nuisances;
3. cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in §
151.26(D)(4); or
4. conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(5) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that
the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation
and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
(Ord. 51, passed 2-8-78)
FEMA FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
§ 151.50 ENFORCING AGENCY.
Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.1501 et seq., the Building Inspector of the city is hereby designated as
the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under the State Construction Code within
the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 272, passed 12-5-11)
§ 151.51 CODE APPENDIX ADOPTED.
Pursuant to the State Construction Code, Section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended, being § 125.1508b(6), Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the city,
through its enforcing agency within the corporate limited of the city.
(Ord. 272, passed 12-5-11)
§ 151.52 DESIGNATION OF FLOOD PRONE HAZARD AREAS.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled
“Ottawa County, Michigan (all jurisdictions)” and dated December 16, 2011, and the Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRMS) panel numbers 26139C, 0059E, 0076E, 0077E, 0078E, 0079E, and 0083E, dated
December 16, 2011, are adopted for the purpose of administration of the State Construction Code, and
declared to be part of Section 1612.3 of the State Building Code to provide the content of the “Flood
Hazards” section of Table R301.2(1) of the State Building Code.
(Ord. 272, passed 12-5-11)
§ 151.53 APPLICATION PROCESS.
In the discretion of the Building Inspector, an applicant for a permit to construct improvements
in or near a flood prone hazard area shall provide with the application a site plan certified by a licensed
surveyor or professional engineer depicting the location of proposed improvements in relation to the
flood hazard area and, if required by the Building Inspector, an as-built plan certifying that the
improvements comply with the regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 272, passed 12-5-11)
VIOLATIONS
§ 151.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
Violations of Chapter 151 are subject to the following penalties:
(A) Civil infraction. A violation of Chapter 151 shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine.
Increased civil fines will be imposed for repeated violations that occur within a six-month period. The
civil fine for a first offense is $50. The civil fine for the first repeat offense is $250. The civil fine for the
second repeat offense is $500. The City shall also be entitled to equitable relief to abate the violation
and to such other relief as may be available to the city pursuant to Chapters 83 and 87 of the Michigan
Revised Judicature Act, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 600.8301 et seq. and 600.8701 et seq. Each day
on which any violation of those sections occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing in this
section shall restrict other remedies available to the city.
(B) Nuisance. A violation of Chapter 151 is declared to be a nuisance per se.
(C) Enforcement. The City Manager and all police officers of the City are authorized to issue
civil infractions citations pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 272, passed 12-5-11)
CHAPTER 152: SAND MINING
Section
General Provisions
152.01 Title; purpose
152.02 Definitions
Permits
152.15 Permits required; effect of provisions on existing operations
152.16 Application requirements; fees
152.17 Application review and approval; issuance of permit
152.18 Standards for review of permit applications
152.19 Performance guarantee
152.20 Term of permit
152.21 Transferability
152.22 Permit renewal
Regulations
152.35 Applicability of subchapter
152.36 Operations standards
152.37 Restoration requirements
152.38 Reuse requirements
Administration and Enforcement
152.50 Right of entry
152.51 Noncompliance; permit revocation; appeals
152.99 Penalty
Statutory reference:
Sand dune mining, state regulations, see M.C.L.A. §§ 324.63701 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 TITLE; PURPOSE.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Sand Mining Ordinance.” Because sand
mining sites and operations can be detrimental to persons and property due to dirt, dust and noise
emitted as a result of sand mining operations, and because sand mining operations can create steep
hillsides, shifting earth, standing water and other potentially hazardous conditions, and because sand
mining operations can result in permanent changes to the topographical and geological characteristics
of the site being mined, the city has determined to establish operational, maintenance, performance,
reclamation and reuse standards and regulations for sand mining sites and sand mining operations and
to require that all operators of sand mining sites obtain a permit for such sand mining operations, in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
BARRIER DUNE. The first landward sand dune formation along the shoreline of a Great Lake or
a sand dune formation designated by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
BUILDING INSPECTOR. The City Building Inspector.
CELL. A subunit of a sand mining site as determined in size and location by a permittee, but
which subunit shall not exceed 10 acres in size except in those instances authorized by the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources.
COMMERCIAL USE. Includes INDUSTRIAL USE and means any use where the sand is mined for
resale at a profit to the permittee, and does not include excavation of sand in conjunction with
installation or maintenance of public or private utilities, streets, or other public utilities in accordance
with a permit issued by the city, and does not include excavation of sand which is of limited scope and
duration and which is undertaken primarily for the immediate use and development of land in
accordance with a building permit issued by the city.
CRITICAL DUNES. A geographic area designated by the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources in its atlas of critical dunes areas, as amended from time to time.
dB(A) The sound pressure level in decibels measured on the “A” scale of a standard sound level
meter having characteristics defined by the American National Standard Institute.
DECIBEL. A unit used to express the magnitude of sound pressure and sound intensity, where
the sound pressure level of a given sound is defined to be 20 times the common logarithm of the ratio of
the sound pressure to a reference pressure of 2 x 10-5N/m2 (Newtons per meter squared).
IMPORTING SAND. Bringing to a sand mining site which is regulated by this chapter any sand
which originates from another location.
PERMIT. A sand mining permit issued in accordance with this chapter.
PERMITTEE. Any person, or persons, or firm who has received a permit in accordance with this
chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission.
RESTORATION. Reestablishing surface contours and slopes and reestablishing protective
vegetative ground cover for the purpose of stabilizing the ground surface and prevention of erosion of
the ground surface.
REUSE. Another use of a sand mining site which would occur after completion of restoration of
a sand mining site, and which would be in compliance with the city's future land use plan.
SAND. A granular soil material having a grain size range of .0625 mm to 2.0000 mm.
SAND LOADING. Moving mined sand, processed or unprocessed, onto a truck, railroad car, boat
or barge, or any other means for eventual transportation of sand off of the sand mining site.
SAND LOADING EQUIPMENT. Any equipment, structures, or improvements, above ground or
below ground, or in, over, or under water, used to load unprocessed or processed sand onto a truck,
railroad car, boat or barge, or any other means of transporting sand off of the sand mining site.
SAND MINING. The removal of sand by excavation, stripping, pumping, or other method from
any naturally occurring land formation for commercial use.
SAND MINING EQUIPMENT. Any equipment, structures, or improvements above ground or
below ground used to remove sand from any naturally occurring land formation.
SAND MINING SITE. Any lot or lots of record in the city on any portion of which sand is mined,
moved, processed, or loaded for commercial use.
SAND MOVING. Changing the location of mined sand within a sand mining site for purposes of
processing mined sand for eventual loading and transportation.
SAND MOVING EQUIPMENT. Any equipment, structures, or improvements, above ground or
below ground, used to move mined sand from a mining site to sand processing equipment, including
conveyors, pipelines, trucks, railroad cars, or any other means of moving mined but unprocessed sand
within a mining site.
SAND PROCESSING. Washing, grading, separating, mixing, sorting, grinding and any similar
activity performed upon mined sand for eventual loading and transportation.
SAND PROCESSING EQUIPMENT. Any equipment, structures or improvements, above ground or
below ground, used for washing, grading, separating, mixing, sorting, or grinding mined sand
preparatory to transporting the processed sand off of the mining site.
SAND TRANSPORTATION. Moving mined sand, processed or unprocessed, to or from a sand
mining site.
SAND TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT. Any equipment, vehicles, rolling stock, vessels,
structures, or improvements, above ground or below ground, or in, on, under, or over water, used to
remove or to import mined sand from a sand mining site.
STAGNANT WATER. Any standing, unflowing surface water which has become foul from lack of
movement.
SUBSURFACE SAND MINING. Any sand mining conducted below the prevailing ground water
level of the sand mining site.
SURFACE LAND MINING. An sand mining conducted above the prevailing ground water level of
the sand mining site.
TERMINATION OF SAND MINING. Any of the following:
(1) the actual cessation of substantial sand mining activities for a continuous period
of 12 months;
(2) the actual cessation of substantial sand mining activities with the intention of
abandoning such activities; or
(3) the actual cessation of substantial sand mining activities for a period of six
months with the revocation of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources sand mining permit for
the sand mining activities.
UTILITIES. Potable water mains and appurtenances, sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances,
and storm water drains and sewers and appurtenances.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
PERMITS
§ 152.15 PERMITS REQUIRED; EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON EXISTING OPERATIONS.
(A) After the effective date of this chapter, no person, firm or corporation shall conduct any
sand mining, moving, processing, loading or transportation operations on a sand mining site within the
city except in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
(B) For all operations on a sand mining site existing as of the effective date of this chapter
which have been issued a permit in accordance with Ordinance 96, passed 1-8-86, as amended by Ord.
131, passed 5-3-93, such permitted sand mining operations may continue until the expiration date of
the issued permit. No person, firm or corporation continuing sand mining operations under a previously
issued permit shall continue sand mining operations after the expiration date of the issued permit
except in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94) Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.16 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
Any person or firm desiring to conduct sand mining, moving, processing, loading, or transporting
operations on any lot or lots of record within the city shall submit the following items to the Building
Inspector not less than 90 days prior to the proposed date of commencement of operations:
(A) Sand mining permit application form. The applicant shall submit a completed sand
mining permit application form provided by the Building Inspector, including:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant/operator;
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's contact person;
(3) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner if different than the
applicant;
(4) A legal description of the lot or lots for which a sand mining permit is sought;
(5) The tax parcel code numbers for (4) above;
(6) The signature of the applicant certifying that the information submitted on and
with the permit application is true and correct to the best of his or her knowledge;
(7) The signature of the applicant certifying that the applicant has complied with
any limitation upon the importing of sand that is set forth in this chapter, and will comply with any
limitation upon the importing of sand that is set forth in this chapter;
(8) If the owner is different than the applicant, the signature of the owner certifying
that the applicant is authorized to submit the permit application.
(B) Sand mining operations plan narrative. The applicant shall submit a sand mining
operations plan narrative, including:
(1) A description of the type of sand to be mined;
(2) A description of the method of mining sand from the site;
(3) A description of the method of moving sand mined from the site for processing;
(4) A description of the method of processing sand mined from the site;
(5) A description of the method of loading sand mined from the site for
transporting;
(6) A description of the method of transporting sand mined from the site to its
destinations;
(7) A description of any other equipment, structures, or land improvements at the
mining site;
(8) The estimated quantities of sand to be mined from the site, from the current
year to completion of mining:
Year Cell No./Surface Cell No./Subsurf. Cell Total
Total Surface Sand Subsurface Sand Total Sand
(9) The proposed sequence in which cells will be mined, from the current year to
completion of mining:
Year Cells to be Mined
(10) The estimated dates for completion of the restoration of cells:
Year Cells Restored
(11) The estimated dates for the reuse of restored cells:
Year Cells Reused
(12) The measures to be taken to control noise;
(13) The measures to be taken to control wind-blown sand;
(14) The measures to be taken to control access to the site;
(15) The measures to be taken to control glare;
(16) The measures to be taken to prevent trespassing;
(17) The measures to be taken to prevent waste accumulation;
(18) The measures to be taken to prevent erosion;
(19) The measures to be taken to prevent stagnant water;
(20) The measures to be taken to preserve existing vegetation;
(21) The measures to be taken to protect barrier dunes and critical dunes;
(22) A description of the hours of operations: mining, moving, processing, loading,
and transporting;
(23) If mined sand will be shipped off-site by truck, a description of the type of trucks
used, the weight of loaded trucks, the number of trucks leaving the site per day, and the route through
the city to be used by trucks leaving the site;
(24) A description of any other significant aspect of proposed sand mining
operations;
(25) A description of the impact of the proposed sand mining operations upon
existing sand mining operations in the city.
(C) Hydrogeological report. The applicant shall submit a current hydrogeological report
prepared by a qualified engineer, explaining the impact of the proposed sand mining operations upon
the groundwater under the sand mining site and under adjacent property within ½ mile of the sand
mining site.
(D) Sand mining site plan. The applicant shall submit a sand mining site plan (drawing)
including the lot or lots on any portion of which sand mining, sand moving, sand processing, sand
loading, and sand transportation is to occur, and including adjacent property within 200 feet of the lot
boundaries, which has been prepared by a registered engineer or land surveyor, is dated, sealed, and
signed, and is on a scale of 1 inch = 100 feet, and which includes the following:
(1) A North point, scale, date, and revision block;
(2) Adjacent public streets which provide access to the site;
(3) The location of all existing structures and land improvements;
(4) Delineation of the 100-year flood plain boundaries;
(5) Existing elevations at 5-foot contours;
(6) Existing driveways and on-site service roads;
(7) Bench mark references;
(8) The location of any recorded easements or rights-of-way;
(9) The location of any fences, gates, signs, and parking areas;
(10) The location of any fixed sand mining equipment or structures;
(11) The location of any fixed sand moving equipment or structures;
(12) The location of any fixed sand processing equipment or structures;
(13) The location of any fixed sand loading equipment or structures;
(14) The location of any fixed sand transportation equipment or structures;
(15) The boundaries of the lot or lots for which a permit is sought;
(16) The boundaries of adjacent properties within 200 feet of the lot boundaries;
(17) The boundaries of the area proposed to be mined, with mining cells numbered
and cell boundaries indicated and cell acreage indicated; and completed, interim, active and future cells;
(18) Setback lines as required by this chapter;
(19) The location of any exterior lighting fixtures;
(20) The location of any barrier dunes or critical dunes areas as designated by the
state;
(21) The boundaries of any man-made lakes, and an indication of the existing
acreage of surface area.
(E) Sand mining site restoration plan. The applicant shall submit a restoration plan
(drawing) including the lot or lots on any portion of which sand mining, sand moving, sand processing,
sand loading, and sand transportation has been conducted, is being conducted, or will be conducted,
and including adjacent property within 200 feet of the lot boundaries, which has been prepared by a
registered engineer or land surveyor, is dated, sealed and signed, and is on a scale of 1 inch = 100 feet,
and which includes the following:
(1) A North point, scale, date, and revision block;
(2) Adjacent public streets which provide access to the site;
(3) The locations of post-mining structures and land improvements, if any;
(4) Delineation of the 100-year flood plain boundaries;
(5) Post-mining elevations at 5-foot contours;
(6) Post-mining driveways and on-site service roads;
(7) Bench mark references;
(8) The location of any recorded easements or rights-of-way;
(9) The location of any post-mining fences, gates, signs, and parking areas;
(10) The boundaries of the lot or lots for which a permit is sought;
(11) The boundaries of adjacent properties within 200 feet of the lot boundaries;
(12) The boundaries of the land area that has been restored, and an indication of the
acreage;
(13) The boundaries of the land area in the process of being restored, and an
indication of the acreage;
(14) The boundaries of the land area being mined, and an indication of the acreage;
(15) The boundaries of the land area to be mined, and an indication of the acreage;
(16) Setback lines as required by this chapter;
(17) The location of any barrier dunes or critical dunes areas as designated by the
state;
(18) The boundaries of any man-made lakes, and an indication of the acreage of
surface area;
(19) A complete narrative description of:
(a) The materials and methods proposed to restore the topsoil, and the
amount and type of plants or landscaping proposed to restore the finished elevations;
(b) The schedule of restoration activities from the permit application year
to completion, including the starting and completion of final grading, topsoil replacement, and planting
or landscaping, by cell;
(c) An estimate of the current costs to complete the restoration of each
cell, and a total for all cells;
(d) The schedule for removal from the site of all sand mining, moving,
processing, loading and transporting equipment, and any other items;
(e) An estimate of the current costs to complete the removal of the items in
(d) above.
(F) Sand mining site reuse plan. The applicant shall submit a reuse plan (drawing) including
the lot or lots on any portion of which sand mining, sand moving, sand processing, sand loading, and
sand transportation has been conducted or will be conducted, and including adjacent property within
200 feet of the lot boundaries. A reuse plan submitted in accordance with this chapter shall not be
binding upon either the applicant or the city. The submission and review of a reuse plan shall not
constitute either an application for approval by the applicant or an approval by the city of a land use
plan. The reuse plan shall be prepared by a professional community planner, be dated, sealed, and
signed, and have a scale of 1 inch = 100 feet, and shall include the following:
(1) A North point, scale, date, and revision block;
(2) Adjacent public streets which provide access to the site;
(3) The location of existing structures which would remain on site, if any, and the
location of existing structures which will be removed from the site;
(4) Delineation of the 100-year flood plain boundaries;
(5) Final elevations at 5-foot contours;
(6) Bench mark references;
(7) The location of any recorded easements or rights-of-way;
(8) The boundaries of the lot or lots for which a permit is sought;
(9) The boundaries of adjacent properties within 200 feet of the lot boundaries;
(10) The location of any barrier dunes or critical dunes areas as designated by the
state;
(11) The boundaries of any bodies of water, natural or manmade;
(12) An indication of existing adjacent land uses;
(13) The location of proposed buildings, structures, or other improvements, and an
indication of required setbacks;
(14) The location of proposed streets, drives, and parking areas;
(15) The location of proposed trees, shrubs, and other landscaping;
(16) The location of existing and proposed water mains, sanitary sewer mains, and
storm water drainage facilities, and appurtenances;
(17) The location of existing and proposed electric lines, natural gas mains, and
telephone and cable television lines;
(18) A complete narrative description of:
(a) Proposed land use or uses, which is or are compatible with the city's
adopted future land use plan;
(b) An estimate of the water and sanitary sewer use factors for the
proposed land uses;
(c) The calculation of the amount of storm water runoff from the site in its
proposed use;
(d) An estimate of the current costs to extend water mains, sanitary sewer
mains, and storm water drainage facilities, with appurtenances, to the site in sufficient capacities to
serve the proposed use;
(e) The proposed schedule for implementing the proposed use described in
(a) above.
(G) Fees. The applicant shall submit a permit application and review fee, to be remitted to
the city in such amounts and at such times as follows:
(1) $1,500 to be remitted simultaneously with the submission of the other
submittals required by this section;
(2) The city's actual costs for review of a permit application, including the fees of a
planning consultant retained specifically to review an application, the costs of city employees to review
an application, and the city's costs for giving notice of the public hearing on the application, as follows:
(a) Any amount not covered by the $1,500 deposit shall be remitted by the
applicant to the city not later than 30 days following receipt of the city's invoice.
(b) In the event that the actual costs of the city are less than the amount of
the deposit, the surplus shall be remitted by the city to the applicant not later than 30 days following the
city's determination of the actual costs.
(H) Number of copies; form; date of submission. An applicant for a sand mining permit shall
submit 12 copies of all materials to the Building Inspector at least 90 days prior to the proposed date of
commencement of operations, or at least 90 days prior to the expiration of any previously issued sand
mining permit. For any required submittal with a 1 inch = 100 feet scale, an applicant shall submit one
copy at scale and 12 reduced to 24-inch x 36-inch copies. Any incomplete submittal shall be returned to
the applicant. An applicant is encouraged to review a draft submittal with the Building Inspector prior to
the submittal of an official permit application.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
§ 152.17 APPLICATION REVIEW AND APPROVAL; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
(A) Initial review. Upon receiving a complete application for a sand mining permit, the
Building Inspector shall review the application for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The
Building Inspector may retain a planning consultant to assist in the review of the application.
(B) Report of Building Inspector. After completing his or her review of the application, the
Building Inspector shall give a written report on the applicant's compliance with the requirements of
this chapter to the Planning Commission.
(C) Notice of hearing. At the same time he or she submits the report and the application to
the Planning Commission, the Building Inspector shall schedule a public hearing on the application by
the Planning Commission. Notice of the public hearing shall be published not more than 15 days and not
less than five days prior to the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Notice of
the public hearing shall also be mailed by first class mail to owners of property within 300 feet of the
boundaries of the lot or lots proposed for sand mining.
(D) Hearing before Planning Commission. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall receive a presentation from the applicant regarding his or her application, and shall receive written
and oral comments regarding the application and the effects of the proposed sand mining upon persons
and property within 300 feet of the proposed mining site and on the city as a whole.
(E) Additional information; Planning Commission review. After the public hearing, the
Planning Commission may request additional information from the applicant. After the public hearing
and after receiving and considering any additional information, the Planning Commission shall either
recommend approval of, recommend disapproval of, or make no recommendation on, the permit
application to the City Council, and shall transmit the permit application to the City Council.
(F) City Council review. The City Council shall review any recommendation from the
Planning Commission and shall consider the permit application for approval or disapproval.
(G) Non-approval by City Council. If the City Council does not approve the permit
application, it shall advise the applicant in writing of its reasons for not approving the permit application.
(H) Approval by City Council. If the City Council approves the permit application, the
Building Inspector shall issue a sand mining permit to the applicant upon receiving the required
performance guarantee (see § 152.19) in the amount established by the City Council. The application
and all documents, drawings, and plans submitted with the permit application shall be incorporated by
reference into the permit issued by the Building Inspector.
(I) Joint issuance of permits. If the person or firm authorized to conduct sand mining
operations and the owner of the sand mining site are not the same person or firm, then the Building
Inspector shall issue an authorized permit jointly to the operator and property owner.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
§ 152.18 STANDARDS FOR REVIEW OF PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
The following are the standards for Planning Commission and City Council review of permit
applications:
(A) the applicant's compliance with the operations, maintenance, performance,
reclamation, and reuse standards described in §§ 152.35 et seq.;
(B) the impact of sand mining, moving, processing, loading, and transportation on adjacent
property;
(C) the impact of sand mining on the groundwater under the mining site and under
adjacent property;
(D) the creation of any public or private nuisance;
(E) the adequacy of the plan for restoration of the site after mining is completed;
(F) the adequacy of the plan for reuse of the site after mining is completed and the site is
restored;
(G) the spirit and intent of the city's adopted future land use plan being preserved and
promoted by the reuse plan;
(H) the elimination of preferred future land uses for the land to be mined due to the
proposed sand mining;
(I) the reasonableness of the applicant's schedule for completion of sand mining,
completion of restoration of the mining site, and commencement of reuse of the restored site;
(J) the financial burden placed upon the city by the proposed sand mining;
(K) the commercial necessity of the proposed sand mining;
(L) the impact of the proposed sand mining operations upon existing sand mining
operations in the city;
(M) special conditions which may need to be imposed with approval of an application:
(1) to eliminate or mitigate any potentially adverse impacts upon adjacent
property, on public services or facilities, or on the natural environment;
(2) to conserve natural resources or energy;
(3) to ensure that sand mining operations will not create a nuisance or
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property;
(4) or otherwise to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
§ 152.19 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
(A) Performance guarantee required; contents. Each applicant for a sand mining permit for
whom a permit has been authorized by the City Council shall submit to the city a performance
guarantee in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, surety bond, or
other type of security acceptable to the City Council. The performance guarantee shall name the city as
the beneficiary. The performance guarantee shall be conditioned upon the prompt and complete
compliance by the applicant with all terms of this chapter and with the terms and conditions of a sand
mining permit issued in accordance with this chapter.
(B) Amount.
(1) The amount of the required performance guarantee shall be established by the
City Council. In establishing the amount, the City Council shall consider the prevailing cost to complete
restoration of the sand mining site and to complete removal of all mining, moving, processing and
loading equipment and any other equipment if the permittee terminates the operations, court costs,
and other reasonable expenses.
(2) In establishing the amount, the City Council shall also consider the amount of
any performance guarantees which an applicant may have provided to the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources which guarantee completion of any of the work described in this subsection.
(C) Issuance of permit conditioned on receipt of performance guarantee. The Building
Inspector shall not issue a sand mining permit authorized by the City Council until he or she has received
the required performance guarantee as described in this section and in the amount as established by
City Council when it authorized the permit.
(D) Special assessment in case of insufficient performance guarantee. If the performance
guarantee submitted in accordance with this section is insufficient to pay for the costs for restoration of
a sand mining site, or to pay for the costs for removal of all mining, moving, processing, loading and
transportation equipment, or to pay for the city's court costs and other reasonable expenses, or to pay
for any or all of the above, then any of said costs not covered by the performance guarantee may be
reported to the City Assessor to be levied by him or her as a special assessment upon the premises
owned by the permittee. Such special assessment shall be subject to review after proper notice is given
as in all other cases of special assessments prescribed by the City Charter, and such special assessment
when confirmed shall be a lien upon the premises and shall be collected in the same manner as other
city taxes, or the city may collect the amount from the owner of the premises in an action of assumpsit,
together with costs of suit.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
Cross-reference:
Taxation, see Charter §§ 6.9 et seq.
Special assessments, see Charter Ch. VII
§ 152.20 TERM OF PERMIT.
Each permit issued by the Building Inspector in accordance with this chapter shall be valid for a
period of three years from the date of authorization by the City Council.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
§ 152.21 TRANSFERABILITY.
A permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred, provided a written request for
transfer is submitted to the city, and provided that the City Council approves the transfer. The transfer
of an existing permit shall not be unreasonably refused by the City Council.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
§ 152.22 PERMIT RENEWAL.
(A) Permit renewal application requirements.
(1) Contents. If an operator with a valid sand mining permit issued in accordance
with this chapter desires to continue any sand mining, sand moving, sand processing, sand loading, or
sand transportation operations or restoration activities beyond the stated expiration date of the permit,
the operator shall submit the following items to the Building Inspector:
(a) a completed sand mining permit application form provided by the
Building Inspector, which shall be the same form as described in § 152.16(A) above;
(b) a sand mining operations plan narrative in the same form as described
in § 152.16(B) above;
(c) a hydrogeological report updated within three years of the date the
permit renewal application is submitted, in the same form as described in § 152.16(C) above;
(d) a sand mining site plan in the same form as described in § 152.16(D)
above;
(e) a sand mining site restoration plan in the same form as described in §
152.16(E) above;
(f) a sand mining site reuse plan in the same form as described in §
152.16(F) above;
(g) a permit renewal application and review fee, to be remitted to the city
in such amounts and at such times as follows:
1. $1,500 to be remitted simultaneously with the submission of
the other submittals required by this section;
2. the city's actual costs for review of a permit renewal
application, including the fees of a planning consultant retained specifically to review an application, the
costs of city employees to review an application, and city costs for giving notice of the public hearing on
the application, as follows:
a. Any amount not covered by the $1,500 deposit shall be
remitted by the applicant to the city not later than 30 days following receipt of the city's invoice.
b. In the event that the actual costs of the city are less
than the amount of the deposit, the surplus shall be remitted by the city to the applicant not later than
30 days following the city's determination of the actual costs.
(2) Number of copies; form; date of submission. An applicant for renewal of a
permit shall submit 12 copies of all materials to the Building Inspector at least 90 days prior to the
expiration date of the previously issued sand mining permit. For any required submittal with a 1 inch =
100 feet scale, an applicant shall submit one copy at scale and 12 copies reduced to 24-inch x 36-inch
copies. Any incomplete submittal shall be returned to an applicant. An applicant for renewal of a permit
is encouraged to review a draft submittal with the Building Inspector prior to the submittal of an official
permit renewal application.
(B) Permit renewal application procedures.
(1) Permit renewal application procedures shall be the same as described in §
152.17 above.
(2) In the event that the renewal of a permit is denied, then the applicant shall be
provided with a written report stating the reasons for the denial. The City Council shall not unreasonably
deny an application for renewal of a permit.
(C) Standards for review of permit renewal applications. The Planning Commission and the
City Council shall consider those factors described in § 152.18 above in their review of a permit renewal
application.
(D) Renewal permit performance guarantee. The renewal permit performance guarantee
shall be the same as described in § 152.19 above.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
REGULATIONS
§ 152.35 APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
The minimum operational, maintenance, performance, reclamation and reuse standards
provided by this subchapter shall apply to all sand mining sites in the city.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
§ 152.36 OPERATIONS STANDARDS.
(A) Access. Each sand mining site shall have at least one access to a city street classified as
a major street. Each driveway serving a sand mining site shall meet applicable city standards for
driveways.
(B) Barrier dunes. Except for sand mining on barrier dunes which has been permitted by
the Michigan Department of Natural Resources as of the effective date of this chapter, sand mining is
prohibited on barrier dunes in the city, and sand mining shall be set back 150 feet from the base of the
slope of any barrier dune. Reclamation activities, if authorized, may be allowed within the setback up to
the base of the barrier dune slope.
(C) Burning. Intentional burning on any sand mining site shall comply with the
requirements of city ordinances which regulate intentional burning.
(D) Clay aquitard. An operator of a sand mining site shall not disturb in any manner any clay
aquitard underlying the sand formations which are being mined. An operator of a sand mining site shall
be permitted to mine or to otherwise disturb clay lenses within sand formations which are being mined,
so long as those clay lenses are not continuous with a clay aquitard.
(E) Critical dunes. Except for sand mining on critical dunes which has been permitted by
the Michigan Department of Natural Resources as of the effective date of this chapter, sand mining is
prohibited on critical dunes in the city, and sand mining shall be set back 150 feet from any critical
dunes area. Reclamation activities, if authorized, may be allowed within the setback up to the edge of
the critical dunes area.
(F) Driveways and on-site roads. An operator of a sand mining site will control dust on any
unpaved driveway or road on the site. As a minimum, the first 75 feet of any driveway to a sand mining
site from a city street, which driveway is regularly used in the course of sand mining operations, shall be
paved. Driveways leading to a sand mining site shall be secured to prevent unauthorized access during
non-operating hours.
(G) Erosion. An operator of a sand mining site shall make provisions to prevent the blowing
of sand or dust which would be a nuisance to adjacent public or private property. Vegetation indigenous
to the undisturbed portion of a sand mining cell shall not be removed prior to commencement of sand
mining activities in that cell unless the vegetation removal maintains the ground cover and topsoil
within the cell in stable condition.
(H) Fencing. Except for fencing installed as of the effective date of this chapter, a fence at
least five feet high and of a type to discourage and impede unauthorized entry shall be erected around
any areas of a sand mining site where slopes exceed 3:1 and around any other hazardous areas within a
sand mining site.
(I) Glare. Any lighting fixtures associated with sand mining equipment, sand moving
equipment, sand processing equipment, or sand loading equipment shall be directed away from
adjacent property so as to avoid as nearly as possible the direction of glare onto adjacent property
having substantially the same elevation as the equipment location.
(J) Hours of operation. Sand mining and sand moving operations shall be restricted to the
hours between 6 a.m. and midnight, except under emergency circumstances.
(K) Importing sand.
(1) Importing sand to a sand mining site for which a permit has been issued in
accordance with this chapter shall be prohibited unless the sand mining site has been in operation
pursuant to a permit that was in existence before January 1, 1994, or a renewal thereof. With regard to
sand mining sites that have been in operation pursuant to a permit that was granted before January 1,
1994, or a renewal thereof, the tonnage of sand imported to the sand mining site is limited to 40,000
tons per year. Any sand imported to a sand mining site pursuant to this chapter shall have a grain size
different from the sand mined at the sand mining site, and shall be used to blend with sand mined at the
sand mining site for commercial use.
(2) An applicant for a permit or renewal permit may apply for a higher limit on the
number of tons of sand to be imported per year, provided that the applicant shows that additional tons
of blending sands are required for blending with sand mined at the sand mining site for the fulfillment of
reasonably expected needs of the applicant's customers.
(3) During the term of any permit issued in accordance with this chapter, a
permittee may apply to the City Council for a higher limit on the number of tons of sand to be imported
during a specific calendar year, provided that the permittee shows that additional tons of blending sands
are required for blending with sand mined at the sand mining site for the fulfillment of reasonably
expected needs of the permittee's customers.
(L) Noise. At no point on the boundaries of a sand mining site shall the sound pressure
level of a sound emanating from any sand mining equipment, any sand moving equipment, any sand
processing equipment, and any sand loading equipment exceed 70 dB(A), except for warning devices
emitting sound for warning purposes as authorized by law.
(M) Sand mining equipment, sand moving equipment, sand processing equipment, sand
loading equipment, and sand transportation equipment. Only that sand mining equipment, sand
moving equipment, sand processing equipment, sand loading equipment, and sand transportation
equipment which has been authorized specifically through the permit process of this chapter is
permitted on a sand mining site. If a permittee wishes to add sand mining equipment, sand moving
equipment, sand processing equipment, sand loading equipment, or sand transportation equipment
after a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall notify in writing the Building
Inspector at least 30 days prior to the planned placement of the equipment. The Building Inspector may
authorize the placement of the equipment, or, if the Building Inspector believes the proposed
equipment would result in a significant, material, and substantial change in the permitted sand mining
operations, the Building Inspector may refer the request to the Planning Commission for approval or
disapproval. In the event the Building Inspector refers an equipment placement request to the Planning
Commission, the permittee shall not install the proposed equipment until the Planning Commission
authorizes the installation.
(N) Screening. Residential uses and public streets adjacent to a sand mining site shall be
screened from sand mining operations with a minimum six-feet high screen. Acceptable screening
methods are raised earth berms, coniferous trees, fences which provide 80% solid visual barrier, and
natural topography.
(O) Setbacks.
Type of Setback Setback Setback Setback from Setback
Equipment from from from Lake Grand River from "the
Property Public Michigan (in feet)* "Sag"
Lines Streets (in feet) (in feet)
(in feet) (in feet)
Mining 150 200 1,000 400 25
Moving 150 200 1,000 0 0
Processing 500** 1,000 1,000 150 150
Loading 1,000 1,000 1,000 0 0
*Does not include the embayment commonly known as “the Sag.”
**Except for processing equipment in place as of the effective date of this chapter. Setbacks of existing
processing equipment shall not be reduced.
(P) Signs. Any sign on a sand mining site shall comply with city sign regulations applicable
to industrial use zones.
(Q) Slopes.
(1) Any sand mining site shall have slopes restored as follows:
(a) surface slopes: minimum three feet horizontal/one foot vertical;
(b) subsurface slopes:
1. minimum six feet horizontal/one foot vertical from water's edge
to six feet deep;
2. minimum one foot horizontal/one foot vertical beyond six feet
deep.
(2) A permittee may apply to and receive from the Planning Commission a variance
from these requirements which would allow steeper restored surface slopes, provided the permittee
can demonstrate that steeper surface slopes would provide a more orderly transition to undisturbed
topographic features.
(R) Structures. Any existing or new structure, or any addition thereto, on a sand mining site
must comply with applicable city building codes and ordinances.
(S) Subsurface mining. No subsurface mining shall be conducted below the 550-foot USGD
elevation. Any subsurface mining activity shall also comply with applicable state regulations.
(T) Surface mining. Any surface mining activity shall comply with applicable state
regulations.
(U) Truck traffic. If trucks will be used to ship sand from the mining site or to import sand to
the mining site, then said trucks shall follow a route designated by the City Council to pose the least
interference with other traffic. If trucks are so used, the permittee shall be responsible for removal of
any sand which falls from trucks onto public streets, without requiring any notice or request from the
city.
(V) Vegetation existing. Vegetation existing on a sand mining site shall not be removed
preparatory to sand mining so as to expose sand to erosion. Vegetation indigenous to the undisturbed
portion of a sand mining cell shall not be removed prior to commencement of sand mining activities in
that cell unless the vegetation removal maintains the ground cover and topsoil within the cell in stable
condition. On-site burying of existing vegetation is prohibited.
(W) Waste.
(1) No trash, rubbish, junk, refuse of any kind, inoperable vehicles or equipment,
building materials, or unwholesome substances shall be permitted to accumulate at any sand mining
site, unless the same is contained in a dumpster in accordance with the provisions of Ord. 120, passed
11-28-90, the dumpster ordinance, or, in the case of inoperable vehicles or equipment, unless they are
housed within a building or structure or are enclosed completely by an opaque fence which is erected
and maintained in compliance with city ordinances.
(2) Building materials on a sand mining site to be used as part of construction on
the site for which a city building permit has been issued are not considered waste.
(X) Water body creation. If creation of a body of water is otherwise authorized to result
from sand mining operations, such a body of water shall not be permitted to become stagnant. Final
underwater slopes shall be as required above. Beyond the intercept of submerged slopes, the minimum
depth of such a body of water shall be ten feet. Creation of a body of water shall also comply with state
regulations.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94) Penalty, see § 152.99
Cross-reference:
Accumulation of rubbish, junk vehicles, and the like, see § 91.02
Burning, see Ch. 92
Building regulations, see Ch. 150
§ 152.37 RESTORATION REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Reclamation and restoration. Within 12 months after the termination of sand mining on
a sand mining site, the permittee shall have completed the following:
(1) restoration of the sand mining site in accordance with the last restoration plan
submitted by the permittee and approved by the city; and
(2) the removal of all sand mining equipment, all sand moving equipment, all sand
processing equipment, all sand loading equipment, and all sand transportation equipment, above or
below ground, or in, on, over or under water.
(B) Restoration plan. Any required restoration plan shall provide for restoration of the
surface with dune grass (amophilia) at 24 inches on center with appropriate fertilizer, or an approved
alternate, to within ten feet of any water body that may be created. Any required restoration plan shall
provide for restoration of above-surface and below-surface slopes as required by this chapter. No
restoration of a mining site, including any filling, is permitted except in accordance with a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter. Restored areas of a mining site shall be maintained by the permittee for at
least one year.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94) Penalty, see § 152.99
§ 152.38 REUSE REQUIREMENTS.
Each applicant for a sand mining permit shall submit a reuse plan for each sand mining site,
which plan shall indicate a use or uses for the sand mining site when sand mining has been completed
and when the sand mining site has been restored. Each use indicated in a reuse plan shall be compatible
with the city's future land use plan.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.50 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
The Building Inspector shall have the right to enter and to inspect a sand mining site at all
reasonable times for purposes of monitoring compliance with this chapter and with the terms of any
permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
§ 152.51 NONCOMPLIANCE; PERMIT REVOCATION; APPEALS.
(A) If the Building Inspector determines any instance of noncompliance with the terms of
this chapter or with the terms of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the Building Inspector shall
notify the permittee in writing of the instance or instances of noncompliance, and shall give the
permittee 30 days to comply with the terms of this chapter and with the issued permit.
(B) If a permittee has not brought his operations into compliance as requested by the
Building Inspector at the expiration of the 30-day notice period, the Building Inspector shall deliver to
the permittee at the local business address listed on the permit a notice of revocation of permit. Upon
receipt thereof, the permittee shall promptly cease all sand mining operations until the entire operation
is brought into compliance as requested.
(C) If a permittee disagrees with a determination of the Building Inspector, a permittee may
obtain a de novo redetermination of the facts and the law from the City Manager. A permittee shall file
an application for redetermination with the City Manager no later than 30 days after the determination
of the Building Inspector was delivered or mailed to the permittee. A record shall be made of the
redetermination hearing. A permittee who is aggrieved by the redetermination of the City Manager may
appeal the redetermination by filing an appeal with the Circuit Court of Ottawa County no later than 30
days after the date that the redetermination was delivered or mailed to the permittee. On appeal, the
Circuit Court shall review the record and the decision of the City Manager to insure that the decision: (1)
complies with the laws of the state; (2) is based upon proper procedure; (3) is supported by competent,
material, and substantial evidence on the record; and (4) represents the reasonable exercise of
discretion by the City Manager.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
A violation of this chapter is a civil infraction with a maximum fine of $500. This chapter may
also be enforced in the Ottawa County Circuit Court. Failure of a permittee to pay a fine or cost within
30 days after due will result in a lien against land, buildings or structures.
(Ord. 140, passed 12-19-94)
CHAPTER 153: LAND DIVISION
Section
General Provisions
153.01 Title; statutory authorization
153.02 Applicability of chapter
153.03 Compliance with zoning and other regulations
153.04 Definitions
Land Division Approval
153.15 Approval required
153.16 Application requirements; fee
153.17 Application review; requirements for approval
153.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 TITLE; STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the city “Land Division Ordinance.” The
regulations of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the statutory authority of Public Act 288 of 1967, as
amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 - 560.293, otherwise known as the Land Division Act.
(Ord. 167, passed 12-15-97)
§ 153.02 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
This chapter shall apply to all land divisions governed by the provisions of the Land Division Act,
Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 - 560.293.
(Ord. 167, passed 12-15-97)
§ 153.03 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING AND OTHER REGULATIONS.
Approval of a land division does not grant approval for the use of such divided lot or parcel. Any
lot or parcel proposed for division must comply with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the
city or any other applicable ordinances or regulations.
(Ord. 167, passed 12-15-97)
§ 153.04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
ASSESSOR. The City Assessor.
CLERK. The City Clerk.
LAND DIVISION ACT. Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101 - 560.293.
The definitions of terms contained in the Land Division Act are incorporated in this chapter.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator of the city.
ZONING ORDINANCE. The Zoning Ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 167, passed 12-15-97)
LAND DIVISION APPROVAL
§ 153.15 APPROVAL REQUIRED.
The approvals and requirements of this chapter shall be satisfied prior to any land division
within the city.
(Ord. 167, passed 12-15-97) Penalty, see § 153.99
§ 153.16 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; FEE.
(A) An application for land division shall be submitted to the Clerk. Each application shall be
accompanied by the following, unless deemed unnecessary by the Clerk:
(1) the payment of a fee as established by the City Council;
(2) a completed application form, as provided by the city;
(3) a complete and accurate legal description of each proposed lot or parcel
created by the land division;
(4) a graphic or written description of any previous land divisions from the parent
parcel including the size, number, and date of such divisions;
(5) evidence of approvals from the County Health Department for on-site water
supply and sewage disposal, if public water and/or sewer are not available;
(6) three copies of a complete tentative parcel map drawn to scale, which shall be
not less than 1 inch = 20 feet for property totaling under three acres and at least 1 inch = 100 feet for
those totaling three acres or more, and which shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The parcel map shall be prepared by a registered engineer or land
surveyor.
(b) The tentative parcel map shall include, at a minimum:
1. the date, a North arrow, a scale, and the name of the individual
or firm responsible for the completion of the tentative parcel map;
2. proposed lot lines and their dimensions;
3. the location and nature of proposed ingress and egress
locations to any existing public or private streets;
4. the location of any public or private street, driveway, or utility
easements to be located within any proposed parcel (Copies of the instruments describing and granting
such easements shall be submitted with the application.);
5. general topographical features including contour intervals no
greater than ten feet;
6. the zoning designation of all proposed lots or parcels;
7. the proposed method of providing storm drainage;
8. the depth to width ratio of each parcel resulting from the
proposed land division;
9. the location of each structure on each proposed lot or parcel
created by the requested land division, including dimensions in feet from each structure to existing and
proposed lot lines.
(B) Applications for land divisions shall not be accepted unless all of the required materials
are submitted and are complete.
(Ord. 167, passed 12-15-97)
§ 153.17 APPLICATION REVIEW; REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL.
Land division applications shall be considered by the Assessor and Zoning Administrator. The
Assessor and Zoning Administrator shall review the application and such other information as may be
available. The Assessor and Zoning Administrator shall approve a proposed land division within 45 days
after the filing of a complete application with the Clerk if, in addition to the requirements of Section 108
of the Land Division Act, being M.C.L.A. § 560.108, all of the following requirements are met:
(A) Each resulting parcel has an adequate and accurate legal description and is included in a
tentative parcel map showing area, parcel lines, public utility easements, accessibility, and other
requirements of this chapter and section 108 of the Land Division Act.
(B) Each resulting parcel has an area not less than that required by the Zoning Ordinance.
(C) Each resulting parcel is accessible, meaning that it satisfies one or both of the following
requirements:
(1) It has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access to an existing road or
street and meets all applicable location standards of the State Transportation Department or the city,
whichever has jurisdiction, or has an area where a driveway can provide vehicular access to an existing
road or street and meet all such applicable location standards.
(2) It is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access to an existing
road or street and meets all applicable location standards of the State Transportation Department or the
city, whichever has jurisdiction, or can be served by a proposed easement that will provide vehicular
access to an existing road or street and meet all such applicable location standards.
(D) The division meets all of the requirements of M.C.L.A. § 560.108.
(E) Each resulting parcel that is a development site has all of the following:
(1) public water or health department approval for on-site water supply under rules
described in M.C.L.A. § 560.105(g);
(2) public sewer or city, county, or district health department approval for on-site
sewage disposal under rules described in M.C.L.A. § 560.105;
(3) adequate easements for public utilities from the parcel to existing public utility
facilities.
(F) (1) Each resulting parcel satisfies the following rules regarding depth to width ratio:
(a) No lot or parcel shall be created the depth of which exceeds four times
its width.
(b) The width to depth ratio requirements of this section shall not apply to
lots or parcels that have more than one-half of their street frontage on a cul-de-sac. The minimum lot
width for a lot on a cul-de-sac or other irregularly shaped lot shall be measured at the front yard setback
line and shall not be diminished throughout the remainder of the lot. Such lots shall have a minimum lot
width of 40 feet at the front property line.
(c) For corner lots, the depth of the lot shall be measured along the longest
front lot line which is parallel or generally parallel to the public or private street right-of-way or
easement. The width of the corner lot shall be that front lot line which is parallel or generally parallel to
the public or private street right-of-way or easement and is the shorter of the two front lot lines. Where
such lot lines are of equal length, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the measurement of lot
width to depth for purposes of this section.
(2) The Assessor and Zoning Administrator may permit the division of a lot or parcel
which does not comply with this provision provided that the following findings are made:
(a) The greater width to depth ratio is necessitated by conditions of the
land which make compliance with this section impractical. (Such conditions may include topography,
road access, soil conditions, wetlands, floodplains, or water bodies, or other similar condition.)
(b) The division and use of such lot or parcel will not conflict with other
federal, state, county, or city ordinances or regulations, unless an appropriate variance or approval is
granted as required or permitted by such ordinances or regulations.
(Ord. 167, passed 12-15-97)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
(A) A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. A
violation of this chapter is a municipal civil infraction, for which the fine shall be not less than $100 nor
more than $500 for the first offense and not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 for subsequent
offenses, in the discretion of the court, and in addition to all other costs, damages, and expenses
provided by law.
(B) For purposes of this section, SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE means a violation of the provisions
of this chapter committed by the same person within 12 months of a previous violation of the same
provision of this chapter for which said person admitted responsibility or was adjudicated to be
responsible; provided, however, that offenses committed on subsequent days within a period of one
week following the issuance of a citation for a first offense shall all be considered separate first offenses.
Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(C) The city may request injunctive or other equitable relief to abate violations of this
chapter.
(Ord. 167, passed 12-15-97)
Ferrysburg, Michigan Code of Ordinances
American Legal Publishing Corporation 1
§ 154.01 ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The comprehensive zoning ordinance bearing the date of March 15, 1999, is adopted and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein. Copies of
the zoning ordinance are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed 8-27-75; Am. Ord. 171, passed 7-20-98; Am. Ord. 174, passed 4-5-99; Am. Ord.
176, passed 7-19-99; Am. Ord. 177, passed 11-22-99; Am. Ord. 180, passed 6-19-00; Am. Ord.
181, passed 3-26-01; Am. Ord. 183, passed 8-6-01; Am. Ord. 186, passed 12-3-01; Am. Ord.
187, passed 3-4-02; Am. Ord. 190, passed 4-15-02; Am. Ord. 193, passed 7-1-02; Am. Ord. 199,
passed 1-20-03; Am. Ord. 201, passed 7-7-03; Am. Ord. 202, passed 7-7-03; Am. Ord. 205,
passed 8-18-03; Am. Ord. 210, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 211, passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 212,
passed 5-3-04; Am. Ord. 217, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 218, passed 11-15-04, Am. Ord. 219,
passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 220, passed 12-20-04; Am. Ord. 221, passed 12-20-04; Am. Ord.
222, passed 2-7-05; Am. Ord. 223, passed 6-6-05; Am. Ord. 224, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 229,
passed 2-20-06; Am. Ord. 232, passed 8-21-06; Am. Ord. 238, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 239,
passed - -; Am. Ord. 242, passed 12-3-07; Am. Ord. 243, passed 3-3-08; Am. Ord. 244, passed
4-21-08; Am. Ord. 245, passed 8-11-08; Am. Ord. 246, passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 247, passed
12-1-08; Am. Ord. 248, passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 249, passed 3-2-09; Am. Ord. 250, passed
5-18-09; Am. Ord. 256, passed 7-6-09; Am. Ord. 258, passed 8-3-09; Am. Ord. 259, passed
9-8-09 ; Am. Ord. 261, passed 4-5-10; Am. Ord. 265, passed 10-5-10; Am. Ord. 268, passed
12-6-10; Am. Ord. 269, passed 2-7-11; Am. Ord. 270, passed 5-2-11; Am. Ord. 273, passed
12-19-11; Am. Ord. 278, passed 7-1-13; Am. Ord. 283, passed 10-6-14; Am. Ord. 284, passed
1-19-15; Am. Ord. 285, passed 5-4-15; Am. Ord. 287, passed 3-21-16; Am. Ord. 288, passed
3-21-16; Am. Ord. 290, passed - -; Am. Ord. 291, passed 8-7-17; Am. Ord. 294, passed 3-5-18)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
155.01 Short title
155.02 Purposes
155.03 Definitions
Design Principles and Standards
155.15 Conformance to other requirements and regulations
155.16 Street location and arrangement
155.17 Street design
155.18 Block design
155.19 Lot plan
155.20 Easement plan
Street and Utility Improvement Requirements
155.30 Purpose
155.31 Engineering plans
155.32 Improvement requirements
155.33 Schedule of improvement requirements
155.34 Guarantee of completion
Plat Procedures
155.45 Stages of procedures
155.46 Basic policy stage
155.47 Master subdivision plan
155.48 Preliminary plat preparation
155.49 Preliminary plat submission
155.50 Preliminary plat review
155.51 Preliminary plat approval
155.52 Final plat preparation
155.53 Final plat submission
155.54 Final plat review
155.55 Final plat approval
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 SHORT TITLE.
These regulations shall be known and cited as the Subdivision Regulations of Ferrysburg,
Michigan, herein referred to as “regulations”.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.02 PURPOSES.
The purposes of these regulations are to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious
development of the community; to secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street
systems with relation to major thorough-fares, adjoining subdivisions, and public facilities; to achieve
individual property lots of maximum utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water
supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage, and other health requirements; to secure adequate provisions
for recreational areas, school sites, and other public facilities; and to provide procedures for the
achievement of these purposes.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.03 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of these regulations, certain words, terms and phrases shall be defined as
follows:
BUILDING SETBACK. The horizontal distance between a dwelling and a street line.
CITY ENGINEER. An official so designated by the City Mayor to carry out the functions and duties
of City Engineer specified herein.
COMMISSION. The Ferrysburg City Planning Commission.
CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Ferrysburg.
DRAINAGE COLLECTION BASIN. An area of land which, because of the nature of the topography,
collects naturally the surface drainage of the surrounding land.
EASEMENT. A grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, a corporation, or
persons, for specific uses and purposes, to be designated as a “public” or “private” easement,
depending on the nature of the use.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN. The comprehensive plan, or elements thereof, for development
of the community, which shall have been duly adopted by the Planning Commission, i.e., the “master
plan”.
LOT. A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as in a
subdivision or on a record survey map or by metes and bounds, for purposes of sale, lease, or separate
use.
(1) MINIMUM LOT WIDTH. In the case of rectangular lots or lots on the outside of
the curve of a street: the distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum building setback line
on a line parallel to the street or street chord; in the case of lots on the inside of the curve of a street:
the distance between side lot lines measured at the rear line of the dwelling or 30 feet behind the front
setback line, parallel to the street or street chord.
(2) USABLE LOT AREA. That portion of a lot usable for or adaptable to the normal
uses made of a residential property, excluding any areas which may be swampy, excessively steep,
covered by water, or included in a public easement for surface drainage or a private easement for a high
voltage power transmission line.
MASTER STREETS AND THOROUGHFARES PLAN. The part of the General Development Plan
which sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and
thoroughfares.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. Any security which may be accepted by the City Council in lieu of a
requirement that certain public improvements be made prior to approval of a final plat, including
performance bonds, escrow deposits and other similar collateral or surety agreements.
PLAT. A map of a subdivision.
(1) FINAL PLAT. A map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial
conformance to the preliminary plat of the subdivision, prepared and certified by a registered engineer
or land surveyor in compliance with requirements of the Plat Act, P.A. 288 as suitable for recording in
the County Register of Deeds.
(2) MASTER SUBDIVISION PLAN. A preliminary plan for the development of a large
landholding to be developed progressively by sections, meeting the requirements of § 155.47.
(3) PRELIMINARY PLAT. A preliminary map and supporting data indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision in sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review by the
Commission and meeting requirements of § 155.48.
(4) SKETCH PLAN. A sketch map of a proposed subdivision at sufficient accuracy and
scale to serve the purposes of § 155.46.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS. A set of standards approved by the City Council
establishing the design and material specifications to be used in all public improvements installed
pursuant to these regulations. Such public improvement standards shall be based on and reflect the
general policies set forth in the Schedule of Improvement Requirements in § 155.33 herein.
STREET. Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, land, parkway, viaduct, alley, or other way which is
an existing state, county, or municipal roadway; or, a street or way shown in a plat heretofore, approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the
office of the County Register of Deeds. A street includes the land between the street lines whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas,
and out lawns.
(1) ALLEY. A minor service street used primarily to provide vehicular access to the
rear or side of properties otherwise abutting upon a street.
(2) BOULEVARD STREET. A street developed with two two-lane, one-way
pavements separated by a grassed island.
(3) COLLECTOR STREET. A street within a neighborhood used primarily to carry
traffic from minor streets to major thoroughfares; including principal entrance streets to a residential
development.
(4) CUL-DE-SAC STREET. A short minor street having one end permanently
terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
(5) MAJOR THOROUGHFARES. Any interstate, state or county highway, or any local
traffic artery of considerable continuity carrying a large volume of vehicles.
(6) MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street paralleling and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(7) MINOR STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to
abutting residential properties.
(8) U STREET. A short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular
turnaround.
SUBDIVIDER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust, or
any other legal entity commencing proceedings under these regulations to effect the subdivision of land
for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or division of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots,
tracts, or parcels of land; or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land; or the division
into more than two parts of any lot or piece of land, the boundaries of which have been fixed in a
recorded plat; provided that a partitioning or division of land into tracts or parcels of land of ten acres or
more, and not involving a new street, shall not be deemed a subdivision.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS
§ 155.15 CONFORMANCE TO OTHER REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS.
(A) Every subdivision plat shall conform to the requirements and objectives of the General
Development Plan, or any parts thereof, as adopted by the Commission; to the Zoning Ordinance and
other city ordinances; and to the Public Acts of the State of Michigan.
(B) Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a street designated on the
Master Streets and Thoroughfares Plan, such street shall be platted in the location and width indicated
on such plan.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.16 STREET LOCATION AND ARRANGEMENT.
(A) Street layout shall provide for the continuation of existing major or collector streets in
surrounding areas, or conform to a plan for neighborhood development approved by the Commission.
(B) Certain proposed streets, as designated by the Commission, shall be extended to the
boundary line of the tract to provide future connection with adjoining unplatted land. In general, these
extensions shall not be more than 1300 feet apart.
(C) Where a subdivision abuts any of the following right-of-ways or zone districts, the
Commission shall normally require location of a street approximately parallel to and one lot depth
distant from such right-of-ways or zones.
(1) Any street the Commission may designate as a major traffic artery.
(2) Railroads and major overhead utility transmission lines.
(3) Commercial or industrial districts.
(D) Proposed streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to produce
desirable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
(E) Except where justified in unique conditions, alleys will not be approved in those parts of
the plat proposed for one or two-family residential use.
(F) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.17 STREET DESIGN.
(A) Minimum right-of-way widths.
(1) Major thoroughfares - as indicated on Master Streets and Thoroughfare Plan.
(2) Collector streets - 66 feet.
(3) Minor streets - 66 feet.
(4) Boulevard streets - 80 feet.
(5) “U” streets - 120 feet, terminating in a circle 120 feet in diameter.
(6) Marginal access streets (where permitted) - 40 feet, abutting thoroughfare
right-of-way.
(7) Alleys (where permitted) - 20 feet.
(8) Half-streets - prohibited, except where absolutely essential to the reasonable
development of the tract in conformity to principles herein stated. Whenever a half-street has
previously been platted and constructed shall be platted within the tract.
(B) Grades.
(1) Maximum - all streets, 5%, provided that, where essential to reasonable
development, 7% may be permitted for collector and minor streets.
(2) Minimum - concrete streets and gutters, 0.40%.
(3) All other street and gutter surfacing, 0.50%.
(C) Vertical Alignment.
(1) Major thoroughfares: minimum sight distance, 600 feet, measured on and 5
feet above street centerline.
(2) All other streets: minimum sight distance, 300 feet, measured as in (C)(1)
above.
(D) Horizontal Alignment.
(1) When tangent centerlines deflect from each other more than 100 and less than
900, they shall be connected by a curve with a minimum radius of:
(a) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(b) Minor streets: 150 feet.
(2) Between reverse curves there shall be a minimum tangent distance of 100 feet.
(3) Streets intersecting a major thoroughfare shall do so at as near a 90° angle as
possible.
(4) Minor streets intersecting a collector street or major thoroughfare shall have a
tangent section of centerline at-least 50 feet in length measured from the right-of-way line of the major
street, provided that no such tangent is required when the centerline of the minor street has a curve
radius greater than 400 feet with curve center located on the right-of-way line of the major street.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.18 BLOCK DESIGN.
(A) Maximum length of blocks, measured between intersections of centerlines: 1300 feet.
This maximum may be exceeded by not more than 500 feet in developments with lot sizes averaging ½
acre, or where extreme topographic conditions warrant.
(B) Maximum length of cul-de-sac and “U” streets, measured from the intersection of rightof-
way lines to the extreme depth of turning circle along centerline of street: 600 feet. Exceptions may
be made for extreme topographic conditions. Exceptions shall not be made for the purpose of avoiding
the extension of streets to connect with adjoining unplatted or platted parcels.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.19 LOT PLAN.
Minimum lot widths, depth, and area shall be appropriate for the location and character of
development and for the type and extent of street and utility improvements proposed. In general, the
following minimums shall prevail:
(A) Minimum lot width at building line: 60 feet.
(B) Minimum usable lot area: 7,200 square feet - (Sec. 7.10 of Zoning Ordinance).
(C) The depth-to-width ratio of the usable area of a lot shall not exceed 3 to 1.
(D) Building setback lines shall conform to the minimum requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance.
(E) Side lot lines shall generally be at right angles or radial to street lines except where, in
the opinion of the Commission, other treatment may be justified.
(F) Every lot shall abut upon a public street which shall provide satisfactory connection to
an existing public street.
(G) Lots extending through the block and having frontage on two streets shall be prohibited.
Reverse frontage shall be prohibited except as permitted by § 155.16(C).
(H) However, where existing zoning requires higher standards than above, the lotting shall
satisfy such higher standards.
(I) However, where public water and sewer, and full urban right-of-way improvements will
not be provided, lotting shall be commensurate with utilities and improvements as provided for in §
155.48(C).
(J) However, in cases of cluster subdivisions, golf course subdivisions, multiple townhouse
subdivisions, or other such subdivisions or parts thereof designed with the intent of consolidating open
land areas for park and recreation purposes, the Planning Commission may modify lotting standards in
keeping with the objectives and intent of these regulations.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.20 EASEMENT PLANNING.
(A) Except where alleys are provided for the purpose, a private utility easement, not less
than 12 feet in total width, shall be provided along rear or side lot lines or in such other location as may
be recommended by the utility company.
(B) Poorly drained land, or land within a public drainage easement intended for surface use,
or land within a private utility easement for major power transmission (tower) lines, shall not be
considered a part of the minimum required lot area except where lots equal or exceed 15,000 square
feet in ground easements or utility easements for distribution purposes.
(C) Lots arranged to back to thoroughfares, railroads or commercial and industrial districts,
as required in § 155.16(C), shall be provided an extra depth of at least 25 feet to be recorded as a nonaccess
private easement. Not more than 25 feet of such extra depth shall be excluded in determining
the depth-to-width ratio of § 155.19(C).
(D) Private fencing shall not be permitted within public drainage easements.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.30 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this subchapter to:
(A) Establish in outline the minimum acceptable standards for improvement of streets and
utilities.
(B) Define the responsibility of the subdivider in the planning, construction and financing of
public improvements.
(C) Establish procedures for review and approval of engineering plans.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.31 ENGINEERING PLANS.
(A) Preparation.
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to have prepared by a registered
engineer a complete set of engineering plans, including profiles, cross-sections, specifications, and
supporting data, for construction of required public improvements. Such engineering plans shall be
based on the approved preliminary plat and be prepared in conjunction with the final plat. Such plans
shall be prepared in compliance with the schedule of improvement requirements set forth in § 155.33,
supplementary public improvement standards in § 155.32, and with applicable requirements of county
and state authorities.
(2) Where, for any reason, the approval of County or State Health or Highway
Departments is required by law, as in the case of sewage treatment plants and county or state highway
improvements, such approvals shall be secured in writing and attached to engineering plans prior to
submittal for local review and action.
(B) Submittal. Three copies of engineering plans shall be filed with the City Clerk
simultaneous with the filing of the final plan.
(C) Review.
(1) The City Clerk shall check the submission for completeness and, if complete, the
record receipt and the date thereof, and immediately distribute the documents as follows:
(a) One copy to the Commission for review and recommendations.
(b) One copy to the City Engineer for review of compliance to requirements
and standards, preparation of construction cost estimates, and recommendation for rejection or
approval.
(2) Reviewing bodies shall make known their recommendations in writing to the
City Clerk as soon as possible, bearing in mind the 30-day maximum time limit for final action by the City
Council as required in § 155.55(A).
(3) If either recommendation is for rejection, it shall specify the reasons therefor,
the City Clerk being notified immediately so that the filing date can be revised.
(D) Approval. Approval of engineering plans by the City Council shall be simultaneous with
that of the Final Plat as set forth in § 155.55.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.32 IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Responsibility. The subdivider shall provide street and utility improvements in each new
subdivision in accordance with the standards and requirements described in the following schedule. This
schedule may be supplemented by public improvement standards adopted by the City Council
establishing design and material specifications to be used in all public improvements installed pursuant
to these regulations.
(B) Types of Development. The standards and specifications for each general type of
development shall be as follows:
(1) TYPE “A”.
(a) Single-family residential developments having minimum lot widths of 60
feet; lot areas less than 9,000 square feet; public sewer and water.
(b) Two-family and multiple-family developments shall increase the floor
requirements for each additional unit in excess of one by 50% of that required for a single-family
dwelling and the open space requirement for each additional unit in excess of one by 25% of that
required for a single-family dwelling. The first unit of a multiple-family dwelling shall meet the
requirements of a single-family dwelling.
(2) TYPE “B”. Single-family residential developments having minimum lot widths of
75 feet; minimum lot areas of less than 9,000 square feet; public sewer and public water.
(3) TYPE “C”. Single-family residential developments having minimum lot widths of
100 feet; minimum lot areas less than 15,000 square feet; public sewer and public water.
(4) TYPE “D”. Single-family residential developments having minimum lot widths of
100 feet; minimum lot areas of 20,000 square feet; public sewer and public water.
(5) For commercial, industrial and other types, as determined by the Planning
Commission with the advice of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.33 SCHEDULE OF IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
The following requirements supplement those provided by the Standards and Specifications for
Plat Development and Street Construction of the Ottawa County Road Commission.
(A) Major thoroughfares: where an existing road abuts the subdivision, the subdivider shall
improve his half of said road to a width and standard equal to his interior street requirements; subject
to plans approved by the City Engineer.
(B) Collector streets: 66 ft. ROW; 32 ft. pavement measured face to face of curbs, rolled or
battered curbs; 5 ft. concrete sidewalk both sides; street trees.
(C) Minor streets: 66 ft. ROW; 26 ft. pavement measured face to face of curbs; rolled or
battered curbs; 4 ft. concrete sidewalk both sides; street trees.
(D) Boulevard streets: 80 ft. ROW; two 18 ft. pavements measured face to face of curbs and
separated by 18 ft. island; rolled or battered curb both sides of both pavements; 5 ft. concrete sidewalk
next to both ROW lines; street trees in island and along both sides.
(E) Marginal access streets: 40 ft. ROW abutting major street ROW; 18 ft. pavement
measured face to face of curbs; rolled or battered curb on outside pavement edge; curb on inside
pavement edge if major street is curb; no curb on inside if major street has swale drainage; grassed
island; 4 ft. sidewalk on outside only; street trees on outside only.
(F) Cul-de-sac streets: Same as division (C) above except for turning circle with 120 ft.
diameter ROW; 26 ft. pavement with 45 ft. outside radius; grass island; rolled or battered curb all
pavement edges; 4 ft. concrete sidewalk both sides; street trees.
(G) “U” streets: 120 ft. ROW; two 18 ft. pavements measured face to face of curbs and
separated by 44 ft. island; terminated by turning circle with 120 ft. diameter ROW, pavement with 40 ft.
outside radius; rolled or battered curb all pavement edges; 4 ft. concrete sidewalk both sides; street
trees in island and along both sides.
(H) Alleys: 20 ft. ROW; 20 ft. pavement with reverse crown.
(I) Street and lot grading: per plans and profiles approved by City Engineer.
(J) Curb or curb and gutter: per details and specifications approved by City Engineer.
(K) Pavement: per details and specifications approved by City Engineer.
(L) Sidewalks: per details and specifications approved by City Engineer.
(M) Street trees: in accordance with standards of variety, size and installation adopted by the
city, shall be planted 60 feet apart, between curb and sidewalk.
(N) Street signs: shall be placed at all intersections simultaneous with completion of
pavement. Detail and specifications in accordance with adopted city standards.
(O) Monuments: permanent metal monuments shall be installed in compliance with the
Plat Act, Sec. 10. After installation of improvements; the subdivider shall have a registered engineer or
surveyor check the location of monuments and certify to their accuracy in accordance with Sec. 11, Plat
Act.
(P) Sewage Disposal: public system per plans approved by City Engineer.
(Q) Water Supply: public system per plans approved by Michigan Department of Health and
the City Engineer.
(R) Storm Drainage:
(1) Fully enclosed system. Per plans approved by City Engineer. Additional approval
by County Drain Commission is required if County drains are involved.
(2) Drainage requirements.
(a) In addition to proposed development, all existing roads within or
abutting the plat shall be drained to acceptable outlet.
(b) All drains shall be located in public easements of a width to be
determined by the City Engineer.
(c) Drainage collection basins, where approved, shall be public easements
having public access.
(d) All lots shall be graded to avoid impounding of surface water on any lot.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.34 GUARANTEE OF COMPLETION.
(A) Form of financial guarantee. In lieu of actual installation of required public
improvements, the subdivider may elect to provide a financial guarantee of performance in one or a
combination of the following arrangements.
(1) Performance or surety bond.
(a) Value of bond: an amount satisfactory to the City Council.
(b) Length of term: a period specified by the City Council, provided that
such a period shall not exceed 12 months, and further provided that under extraordinary circumstances
this period may be extended by City Council action for not more than 12 months.
(c) Approval of bonding company: surety company to be authorized to do
business in the State of Michigan and be approved by the City Council.
(2) Cash deposit, certified check, or negotiable bonds: deposit shall be made with
the City Treasurer or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, subject to the approval of the City
Council, of money or negotiable bonds in the same amount and kind approved by law for securing
deposits of public money in banks. If a cash deposit is made, the agreement shall provide that progress
payments shall be made to the contractor or the subdivider out of the deposit as work progresses.
(3) Special assessment: in cases where all properties abutting on a public right-ofway
are not under the control of the subdivider, the subdivider may petition the city, through the City
Council to provide the necessary improvements and to assess the cost thereof against the abutting
property in accordance with local requirements regarding special assessments; provided, however, that
the subdivider shall be responsible for any differences between the cost of the improvements and the
amount that can be legally assessed by the city against the property to be subdivided and shall furnish
the necessary waivers to permit the assessment of the entire cost of the improvements.
(B) Penalty For failure to complete installation. In the event the subdivider does in any case
fail to complete such work within such period as required by the conditions of the guarantee, the City
Council shall have such work completed. The city, in order to reimburse itself for the cost and expense
thereof, may appropriate the deposit of cash money or negotiable bonds which the subdivider may have
deposited in lieu of a surety bond, or may take such steps as may be necessary to require performance
by the bonding company.
(C) Progressive installation. When any portion of an improvement has been fully completed
to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, he shall recommend, and the City Council authorize, the
reduction in bonds or a partial withdrawal of funds equal to the estimated cost of such completed
portion.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
PLAT PROCEDURES
§ 155.45 STAGES OF PROCEDURES.
Subdivision planning, review and approval shall proceed through the following stages.
(A) Basic policy stage.
(B) Preliminary plat preparation and submission.
(C) Preliminary plat review and approval.
(D) Final plat preparation and submission.
(E) Final plat review and approval.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.46 BASIC POLICY STAGE.
(A) Introduction.
(1) The basic policy stage comprises a process of preliminary investigation, which
precedes actual preparation of plans by the subdivider. During this stage the subdivider makes his
tentative plans known to the Commission and is advised by the Commission of specific public objectives
related to the subject tract and other details regarding procedures and requirements. As a result of this
interchange, basic development policies are agreed upon by both parties.
(2) The purpose of this stage is to guide and assist the subdivider in his future
decisions regarding detailed financial and physical planning, and to resolve potential conflicts of interest
at the earliest possible time and with the least hardship to both parties.
(3) To insure the greatest effectiveness of this stage, the subdivider should have
firm control of the site so that discussions need not be confidential.
(B) Obligations of the subdivider. The subdivider shall meet with the Commission or its
appointed representatives to present a general outline of his subdivision proposal, including but not
limited to the following.
(1) Sketch plans and ideas regarding land use, street and lot arrangement, tentative
lot sizes, and the like.
(2) Tentative proposals regarding water supply, sewage disposal, surface drainage,
and street improvements.
(3) Sketches indicating size and general character of proposed buildings.
(C) Functions of the Planning Commission. The Commission shall discuss with the subdivider
his proposal and advise him of procedural steps, design and improvement standards, and general plat
requirements. The Commission shall then carry out the following investigations preparatory to making
known its recommendations not later than the next regular Commission meeting.
(1) Inspect the site to determine its relationship to major thoroughfares, utility
systems and adjacent land uses, and the existence of any unusual development problems such as
topography, utilities, and the like.
(2) Check the existing zoning of site and make recommendations if zoning change is
required.
(3) Determine the need for preparation and review of a Master Subdivision Plan
prior to consideration of preliminary plat.
(4) Determine the adequacy of existing schools and public open spaces.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.47 MASTER SUBDIVISION.
(A) Conditions for Master Subdivision Plan. A Master Subdivision Plan shall be prepared
and submitted by the subdivider and tentatively approved by the Commission prior to preparation and
submission of the initial preliminary plat whenever either of the following conditions exist.
(1) The tract initially proposed for platting constitutes only a portion of a larger land
holding of the subdivider.
(2) The tract is a part of a larger land area, the development of which is
complicated by unusual topographic, utility, land use, land ownership, or other conditions.
(B) Preparation and submission.
(1) The Master Subdivision Plan shall be prepared to a scale and accuracy
commensurate with its purpose and shall include the following.
(a) General street pattern with particular attention to collector streets and
future circulation between neighborhoods.
(b) General location and size of school sites, parks or other public areas.
(c) Location of shopping centers, multi-family residential, or other
proposed land uses.
(d) Methods proposed for sewage disposal, water supply and storm
drainage.
(2) Five copies of the Master Subdivision Plan shall be filed with the City Clerk at
least ten days prior to a regular Commission meeting, whereupon the Clerk shall check the submittal for
completeness, assign it a case number and place the case on the Commission meeting agenda.
(C) Review and approval.
(1) The Commission shall review the Master Subdivision Plan for compliance with
the objectives of the General Development Plan, giving special attention to the following:
(a) Streets and thoroughfares as related to neighborhood circulation.
(b) Utility methods or systems as related to the planned community
system.
(c) Location of any proposed commercial development as related to
existing or anticipated community or neighborhood need.
(d) Land required for schools, parks or other public use; the general
location and amount of public land and the approximate timing of acquisition shall be tentatively
determined at this stage. One copy of the plan shall be transmitted to the Superintendent of Schools for
his information and recommendations as to school needs.
(2) Owners of adjoining unplatted land shall be notified by registered mail of the
date, time and place of the meeting at which the case is to be heard at least five days prior to said
meeting. The Commission shall consider and act upon the plan not later than the next regular meeting
following its initial consideration. Action shall take the following form of recommended revision or
tentative approval, such approval being subject to modification from time to time as parts of the plan
are submitted as preliminary plats. The plan shall be kept current and the Commission furnished current
copies as modification takes place and preliminary plats are prepared.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.48 PRELIMINARY PLAT PREPARATION.
The information hereinafter required as part of the preliminary plat submittal may be shown
either graphically or by note or letter, and may comprise several sheets showing various elements of
required data. All mapped data shall be presented at a scale of one inch equal 100 feet. Required data
includes the following.
(A) Identification and description.
(1) Proposed name of subdivision and location by section showing section or
quarter-section corners for reference.
(2) Names and addresses of subdivider, band planner and/or engineer(s) preparing
plans or data.
(3) Graphic scale, north point, and date of preparation.
(B) Existing conditions.
(1) Topography by contours related to City of Ferrysburg survey datum; contour
interval to be 5 feet where grades exceed 5% and 2 feet for lesser grades.
(2) Location, width and names of all platted streets, railroads and utility right-ofways
within or adjacent to the tract.
(3) Location and identification of all public areas and municipal corporation lines
within or adjacent to the tract.
(4) Location of lakes, swamps, streams, and surface drainage ways with direction of
flow and water level elevations.
(5) Location and elevations of all existing sewers, water mains, storm drains or
other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract.
(6) Names of owners or tract designations of adjoining unplatted tracts.
(7) Acreage of tract to the nearest tenth.
(C) Proposed conditions.
(1) Layout of proposed plat showing the following.
(a) Location and width of public streets, alleys, walkways and easements,
including connections to adjoining platted streets and unplatted tracts. If plat abuts or includes a state
highway, the approval of the Michigan State Highway Department will be required for preliminary plat
approval.
(b) All lots including building setback lines, dimensions of typical lots, scaled
dimensions of all corner lots and lots on curvilinear sections of street; location of private utility
easements; lot numbers and total number of lots.
(2) Proposed land use, including the following.
(a) Location, area and designation of all land to be reserved, acquired or
dedicated for public use.
(b) Location, area and designation of all land to be reserved for common
use of lot owners in the subdivision.
(c) If plat includes land for which commercial, industrial or multi-family
residential zoning is proposed but nonexistent, rezoning shall be requested and acted upon prior to
formal consideratIon of the preliminary plat. In the event that such rezoning is not requested or not
approved, the subject area of the tract shall be designed as single-family residential in the preliminary
plat but such subject area may subsequently be withheld from the final plat.
(d) Draft of proposed protective covenants to be recorded with plat.
(3) Proposed utility installations.
(a) Sewage disposal, if proposed by individual systems. Preliminary plat
submittal shall include a tabulated record and a keyed map of soil percolation tests made by and
certified by a registered engineer, at the rate of one test per acre of usable land; also, a letter indicating
general appraisal of soil data for septic tank operation from the Ottawa Board of Health.
(b) Sewage disposal, if proposed by treatment plant. Preliminary layout and
estimate of cost of proposed system, type and capacity of treatment, location of plant and outlet;
subject to approval of Michigan Department of Health, Ottawa County Board of Health if required, City
Engineer, the Commission and the City Council.
(c) Water supply, if proposed by public system. Preliminary layout and
estimate of cost of proposed system, location and anticipation capacity of wells; subject to approval of
Michigan Department of Health if required, Ottawa County Board of Health, City Engineer, Commission,
and the City Council.
(d) Storm water disposal. Preliminary layout and estimate of cost of
proposed system, location, size and invert elevations; subject to approval of City Engineer, the
Commission, the City Council, and, if county drains are involved, the Ottawa County Drain Commission.
(e) Subsoil drainage. Wherever there is reason to expect that any part of
the tract has high water table or unstable subsoil conditions, preliminary plat submittal shall include a
tabulated record and a keyed map of soil borings made and certified by a registered engineer.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.49 PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBMISSION.
(A) Five copies of the preliminary plat and supporting data shall be filed with the City Clerk
at least ten days prior to the regular Commission meeting at which the subdivider can be heard. The City
Clerk shall check the submittal for completeness, assign it a case number, and place the case on the
Commission meeting agenda. The submittal shall be rejected if incomplete and the subdivider notified.
Owners of adjoining unplatted land shall be notified by registered mail of the date, time and place of the
meeting at which the case is to be heard at least five days prior to said meeting.
(B) Upon presentation of the plat and supporting data at the Commission meeting, its
receipt shall be entered in the minutes and one copy permanently retained in Commission files.
(C) Two copies to the Ottawa County Plat Board.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.50 PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW.
The Commission shall review the plat for compliance with the objectives of the General
Development Plan, giving special attention to the following elements.
(A) Design standards as set forth herein.
(B) Streets and thoroughfares as related to neighborhood circulation.
(C) Water areas: plan of any proposed water areas indicating depths, normal water levels,
slopes and type of bank retention; methods of controlling insects, water growths and vegetation.
(D) Utility methods and systems, and street improvements; one copy of submittal shall be
transmitted to the City Engineer for his information and recommendations.
(E) Existing and proposed zoning and land use.
(F) Land required for schools, parks or other public use; one copy of submittal shall be
transmitted to the Superintendent of Schools for his information, use and recommendations.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.51 PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL.
(A) Procedures. The Commission shall consider the preliminary plat at the next regular
meeting following its presentation, at which time the reviewing officials shall make known their
recommendations in person or by letter.
(1) If satisfied that all objectives of these regulations have been met, the
Commission shall give “recommended approval” to preliminary plat, the Chairperson making a notation
of such approval upon two copies of the plat, one to be forwarded to City Commission together with
pertinent minutes and other data, and one to be retained in the permanent Commission file.
(2) If the Commission's recommended approval is tentative and conditional, said
conditions shall be recorded in the meeting minutes, and the case tabled until the conditions have been
satisfied by the subdivider. The plat, when revised, shall be resubmitted in accordance with normal
procedures.
(3) If the Commission rejects the plat, it shall record the reasons therefor in the
meeting minutes, the Chairperson noting the rejection upon the Commission's file copy.
(4) An excerpt of the pertinent items of the meeting minutes shall be sent to the
subdivider in any event.
(5) The City Council shall receive a preliminary plat for consideration only when
accompanied by “recommended approval” of the Planning Commission. Following such receipt it shall
consider the case at its first regular meeting thereafter. If the City Council rejects a plat, it shall record
the reasons therefor in the meeting minutes, with copies thereof sent to the Planning Commission and
subdivider. If the City Council accepts the Planning Commission's recommendation and gives approval
(preliminary approval) to the preliminary plat, such approval shall be recorded in meeting minutes, with
copies thereof sent to the Planning Commission and subdivider.
(6) Ottawa County Plat Board shall receive two preliminary plats for its review and
get the concurrence of the state as outlined by P.A. 288.
(B) Significance of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval confers upon the subdivider
the following conditional rights for a period of one year from date:
(1) The general terms and conditions under which preliminary approval was
granted will not be changed.
(2) The subdivider may submit on or before the expiration date the whole or part of
the plat for final approval.
(3) Preliminary approval does not commit final acceptance of streets for dedication
nor continuation of zoning requirements for the tract or its environs.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.52 FINAL PLAT PREPARATION.
(A) Preparation of the final plat shall comply with the requirements and suggestions set
forth in the provisions of Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967 as adopted and subsequently amended, which
is hereby made a part of these regulations.
(B) The final plat shall conform substantially to the approved preliminary plat.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.53 FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION.
(A) The subdivider shall file with the City Clerk at least five copies of the final plat together
with three copies of engineering plans and estimates of cost, prepared in accordance with § 155.31.
(B) At the time of filing, the subdivider shall deposit with the City Clerk the sum of $60 for
expenses of inspection of land, meetings, and such fees required by the Plat Act, Public Act 288 as
amended.
(C) The City Clerk shall record receipt and date of filing, and immediately check the
submission for completeness. If the submission is incomplete, the subdivider shall be so informed and
the date of filing revised.
(D) Ottawa County Board shall receive two copies of the plat and a letter from the city
according to the instructions covered in the Ottawa Plat Board Rules and Procedures for Review of Plats.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.54 FINAL PLAT REVIEW.
(A) If the plat is complete, the City Clerk shall transmit one copy to each of the following
reviewing officers:
(1) Commission, for determination of substantial conformity to approved
preliminary plat.
(2) City Engineer, for determination that metes and bounds of plat are accurate and
the traverse closed; for detailed review of engineering plans in accordance with § 155.31 for preparation
of a cost estimate for installation of required improvements; and for recommendations as to the type
and amount of performance guarantee most appropriate.
(3) City Treasurer, for determination of unpaid taxes against the land or liens for
special assessments.
(4) Ottawa County Plat Board for their review and approval.
(B) The Clerk shall assemble recommendations of the reviewing offices and present them
together with the plat to the City Council at its next meeting.
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
§ 155.55 FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
(A) The City Council shall consider the recommendations of the reviewing offices, and
approve or reject the plat within 30 days of its acceptance for filing by the City Clerk.
(B) If the City Council rejects the plat for any reason, whatsoever, the subdivider shall be
notified in writing, with the reasons for rejection.
(C) A copy of excerpts of the City Council minutes, approving or rejecting the plat, shall be
sent to the Commission.
(D) Approval of the plat shall be simultaneous with approval of the engineering plans in
accordance with § 155.31.
(E) When the City Clerk has received evidence of completion of required improvements
from the City Engineer or evidence of deposit of performance guarantee from the Treasurer, he shall
transcribe a certificate of approval of the City Council on the plat and deliver it to the Clerk of the
County Plat Board.
(F) No construction of improvements shall be commenced by the subdivider until he has
received notice of the conditional approval of the City Council
(Ord. 24, passed 11-2-70)
CHAPTER 156: ESCROW ACCOUNTS
Section
156.01 Escrow account required; reimbursable expenses
156.02 Applications subject to requirement
156.03 Required deposits; excess funds; minimum balances
156.04 Application grant conditioned on reimbursement of city
156.05 Records required; separate account
156.06 Obligations of city regarding funds
156.07 Objections by applicant; procedure
156.08 Reserved powers regarding non-zoning fee schedules
§ 156.01 ESCROW ACCOUNT REQUIRED; REIMBURSABLE EXPENSES.
In addition to the fixed zoning fees, all other expenses and costs incurred by the city which are
associated with reviewing and processing a zoning application for uses specified in § 156.02 shall be paid
(or reimbursed to the city) from the funds in an Escrow Account established by the applicant as provided
in this chapter. The city may draw funds from an applicant's Escrow Account to reimburse the city for
out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the city relating to the application. Such reimbursable expenses
include, but are not limited to, expenses related to the following:
(A) Mailing legal notices, as required for Planning Commission meetings.
(B) Mailing legal notices, as required for Zoning Board of Appeals meetings.
(C) Mailing legal notices, as required for City Council meetings.
(D) Services of the City Attorney related to the application.
(E) Services of the City Engineer related to the application.
(F) Services of the City Planner related to the application.
(G) Services of other professionals working for the city related to the application.
(H) Any additional public hearings, required mailings and legal notice requirements
necessitated by the application.
(Ord. 208, passed 1-5-04)
§ 156.02 APPLICATIONS SUBJECT TO REQUIREMENT.
Applications involving the following shall be subject to the Escrow Fund requirement:
(A) Site Plan Reviews.
(B) Planned Unit Developments (PUD).
(C) Special Use Permits.
(D) Any rezoning.
(E) Preliminary and final Plat Approvals.
(F) Site condominiums.
(G) Private Road Approvals/Permits.
(H) Variance or interpretation proceedings before the Zoning Board of Appeals where the
Zoning Administrator determines that the scope of the project or application will probably require the
assistance of a city professional or involve additional costs referenced in § 156.01.
(Ord. 208, passed 1-5-04)
§ 156.03 REQUIRED DEPOSITS; EXCESS FUNDS; MINIMUM BALANCES.
The escrow fees for each application for matters specified in § 156.02 are established at $500
increments commencing with an initial $1,000 deposit by the applicant with the City Clerk. The initial
$1,000 escrow fee shall be provided by the applicant to the City Clerk at the time of application. No
application shall be processed prior to the required escrow fee having been deposited with the City
Clerk. Any excess funds remaining in the Escrow Account after the application has been fully processed,
reviewed and the final city decision has been rendered regarding the project will be refunded to the
applicant with no interest to be paid on those funds. At no time prior to the city’s final decision on an
application shall the balance in the Escrow Account fall below $500. If the funds in the Escrow Account
drop below $500, an additional deposit of $500 by the applicant into the Escrow Account shall occur
before the applications review process will be continued. Additional amounts above $1,000 may be
required to be placed in the Escrow Account by the applicant at the discretion of the city by the Zoning
Administrator. Notwithstanding the preceding:
(A) The escrow fee deposit for private roads involving only one or two parcels shall be
established at an initial $500 deposit with funds in the Escrow Account being replenished back up to
$500 when the funds in the account for such private roads serving one or two parcels drop below $100;
and
(B) The escrow fee deposit for a commercial or industrial Wind Energy Conversion System
shall be $100 and need not be replenished. There is no escrow fee required for residential Wind Energy
Conversion System applications.
(Ord. 208, passed 1-5-04; Am. Ord. 251, passed 5-18-09)
§ 156.04 APPLICATION GRANT CONDITIONED ON REIMBURSEMENT OF CITY.
No building permit, final city approval, or permit shall be granted for an application until all
outstanding out-of-pocket costs and expenses incurred by the city as specified have been reimbursed to
the city from the Escrow Account.
(Ord. 208, passed 1-5-04)
§ 156.05 RECORDS REQUIRED; SEPARATE ACCOUNT.
The City Clerk shall maintain records regarding the Escrow Account and shall authorize the
disbursement of escrow funds in writing. Such escrow funds (from one or more applicants) shall be kept
in a separate city bank account.
(Ord. 208, passed 1-5-04)
§ 156.06 OBLIGATIONS OF CITY REGARDING FUNDS.
The city shall collect and apply escrow funds in a reasonable fashion. All funds received in
escrow may be deposited with other escrow funds in one or more escrow accounts. The city shall have
no obligation to account for the value of any benefit received by the city, directly or indirectly, by reason
of the deposit of such escrow funds.
(Ord. 208, passed 1-5-04)
§ 156.07 OBJECTIONS BY APPLICANT; PROCEDURE.
If an applicant objects to the reasonableness or amount of escrow funds it must deposit with
the city or how the escrow funds have been applied, it can appeal the city's determination regarding
these matters to the City Council. All such appeals shall be in writing and shall be made not later than
30 days after final city action regarding the application.
(Ord. 208, passed 1-5-04)
§ 156.08 RESERVED POWERS REGARDING NON-ZONING FEE SCHEDULES.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted as limiting the authority of the city to
adopt separate fee schedules as limiting the authority of the city to adopt separate fee schedules
relative to non-zoning matters involving the design, engineering, and construction of buildings,
improvements and developments within the city.
(Ord. 208, passed 1-5-04)
CHAPTER 157: STORM WATER; ILLICIT CONNECTIONS AND DISCHARGES
Section
157.01 Statutory authority and title
157.02 Findings
157.03 Purpose
157.04 Applicability and general provisions
157.05 Definitions
157.06 Prohibited discharges
157.07 Prohibited illicit connections
157.08 Authorized discharges
157.09 Storage of materials in drainage way
157.10 Inspection and sampling
157.11 Storm water monitoring facilities
157.12 Accidental discharges
157.13 Record-keeping requirement
157.14 Sanctions for violation
157.15 Failure to comply; completion
157.16 Emergency measures
157.17 Cost recovery for damage to storm water drainage system
157.18 Collection of costs; lien
157.19 Suspension of access to the storm water drainage system
157.20 Appeals
157.21 Judicial relief
157.22 Cumulative remedies
157.23 Responsibility to implement best management practices
157.24 Interpretation
157.25 Catch-line headings
Cross-reference:
Control of storm water runoff, see Ch. 158
§ 157.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY AND TITLE.
This chapter is adopted in accordance with the Home Rule City Act, as amended, being M.C.L.
117.1 et seq.; the Drain Code of 1956, as amended, being M.C.L. 280.1 et seq.; the Land Division Act, as
amended, being M.C.L. 560.1 et seq.; the Revenue Bond Act, as amended, being M.C.L. 141.101 et seq.;
the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, as amended, being M.C.L. 324.101 et seq.;
Section 401(p) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the Clean Water Act), as
amended, being 33 U.S.C. 1342(p) and 40 C.F.R. parts 9, 122, 123, and 124; and other applicable state
and federal laws.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.02 FINDINGS.
The City Council finds that:
(A) Illicit discharges contain pollutants that will significantly degrade the water bodies and
water resources of the city, thus threatening the health, safety and welfare of the citizenry;
(B) Illicit discharges enter the storm water drainage system through either direct
connections (e.g., wastewater piping either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the storm drains) or
indirect connections (e.g., infiltration into the storm drain system or spills connected by drain inlets);
(C) Establishing the measures for controlling illicit discharges and connections contained in
this chapter and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of illicit discharges;
and
(D) Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.03 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum storm water management requirements
and controls to accomplish, among others, the following objectives:
(A) To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the storm water drainage system and
water bodies by means of storm water discharges by any user;
(B) To prevent illicit discharges and connections to the storm water drainage system and
water bodies;
(C) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter; and
(D) To provide appropriate remedies for failure to comply with this chapter.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.04 APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
This chapter shall apply to all discharges entering the storm water drainage system and water
bodies in the city.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.05 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The City Manager and/or any persons or agencies
designated in writing by the City Manager to act as the AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Structural devices or nonstructural practices that are
designed to prevent pollutants from entering storm water flows, to direct the flow of storm water, or to
treat polluted storm water flows. BMPs may include, but shall not be limited to, those described in the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Guidebook of Best Management Practices for Michigan
Watersheds. Equivalent practices and design criteria that accomplish the purposes of this chapter
(including, but not limited to, minimizing storm water runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants
into storm water) shall be as determined by the City Engineer.
CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as
amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated thereunder.
DISCHARGE. The introduction (intentionally or unintentionally, and directly or indirectly) of any
liquid, substance, pollutant, or other material into a storm water drainage system or water body.
DISCHARGER. Any person who directly or indirectly discharges storm water from any premises.
DISCHARGER also includes any employee, officer, director, partner, contractor, or other person who
participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission that is, or results in, a
violation of this chapter.
DRAIN. Any and all conduits, facilities, measures, areas, and structures that serve to convey,
catch, hold, filter, store, and/or receive storm water or groundwater, either on a temporary or
permanent basis.
DRAINAGE. The collection, conveyance, or discharge of groundwater.
DRAINAGE WAY. A drain, water body or floodplain.
EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
FLOODPLAIN. The area, usually low lands, adjoining the channel of a river, stream, or
watercourse or lake, or other body of standing water, that has been or may be covered by floodwater.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any solid, liquid, semisolid, or gaseous substance or material that
because of its quantity, quality, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may
cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible illness
or serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health or the environment if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise
managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any method, means, or conduit for conveying an illicit discharge into a
water body or a storm water drainage system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a water body or a storm water drainage system that does
not consist entirely of storm water, that is not authorized by the terms of an NPDES permit, and that is
not an authorized discharge as defined by this chapter.
MDEQ. Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit issued by
the EPA or a state under authority delegated pursuant to the Clean Water Act that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm water drainage system or a water
body that is not composed entirely of storm water.
PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation, public
agency, instrumentality or other legal entity.
POLLUTANT. Includes, but is not limited to, the following: any dredged spoil, solid waste,
vehicle fluids, yard wastes, animal wastes, agricultural waste products, sediment, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological wastes, radioactive materials,
hazardous materials, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal,
commercial, and agricultural waste, or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant
under the Clean Water Act. POLLUTANT also includes properties or characteristics of water, including,
but not limited to, pH, heat, total suspended solids (TSS), turbidity, color, biological oxygen demand
(BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, and odor.
PREMISES. Any building, structure, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land or property, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PROPERTY OWNER. Any person having legal or equitable title to premises or any person having
or exercising care, custody, or control over any premises.
STATE OF MICHIGAN WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. All applicable state rules, regulations, and
laws pertaining to water quality, including the provisions of § 3106, part 31, 1994 P.A. 451, as amended.
STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Storm sewers, conduits, curbs, gutters, catch basins, drains,
ditches, pumping devices, parking lots, roads, or other man-made channels that are designed or used,
singly or together in combination with one another, for collecting or conveying storm water.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document that describes the BMPs and
activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at
a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, a storm water
drainage system, and/or a water body to the maximum extent practicable.
STORM WATER RUNOFF (or STORM WATER). The runoff and drainage of precipitation resulting
from rainfall, snowmelt, or other natural event or process.
TOXIC MATERIAL. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants that is or can potentially be
harmful to the public health or the environment, including, without limitation, those listed in 40 C.F.R.
401.15 as toxic under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, or listed in the Critical Materials Register
promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or as otherwise provided by local,
state, or federal laws, rules, or regulations.
WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged
from a premises. WASTEWATER includes any water that has in any way been used and degraded or
physically or chemically altered.
WATER BODY. A river, lake stream, creek, or other watercourse or wetlands.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.06 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, to a storm water
drainage system or water body any substance or material, including, but not limited to, hazardous
materials, pollutants, toxic materials, wastewater, or waters containing any such materials that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water or an authorized
discharge. This prohibition includes the commencement, conducting, or continuance of any illicit
discharge by any person to a storm water drainage system or water body.
(B) Any person discharging storm water shall effectively prevent hazardous materials,
pollutants, toxic materials, and wastewater from being discharged with the storm water, except in
accordance with BMPs.
(C) The authorized enforcement agency is authorized to require dischargers to implement
pollution prevention measures, using storm water pollution prevention plans and BMPs, as determined
necessary by the authorized enforcement agency to prevent or reduce the discharge of hazardous
materials, pollutants, toxic materials, and wastewater to a storm water drainage system or water body.
(D) The discharge prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any non-storm water
discharge authorized under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger
and administered under the authority of the EPA, provided the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided
that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm water drainage system.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.07 PROHIBITED ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to construct, use, or maintain (or to allow the construction,
use, maintenance or continued existence of) an illicit connection.
(B) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made prior to
the effective date of this chapter, and regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law
or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.08 AUTHORIZED DISCHARGES.
The following non-storm water discharges are permissible, but only if they do not result in a
violation of State of Michigan water quality standards and provided that they are undertaken in
compliance with any applicable or required BMPs and do not contain hazardous materials, pollutants,
toxic materials, or wastewater:
(A) Water supply line flushing;
(B) Landscape irrigation runoff;
(C) Diverted stream flows;
(D) Rising groundwater;
(E) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
(F) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(G) Discharges from potable water sources;
(H) Foundation drains;
(I) Air conditioning condensate;
(J) Irrigation water;
(K) Springs;
(L) Water from crawl space pumps;
(M) Footing drains and basement sump pumps;
(N) Lawn watering runoff;
(O) Waters from non-commercial car washing;
(P) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(Q) Residential swimming pool water and other dechlorinated swimming pool water,
provided that any filter backwash water that is present is treated;
(R) Residual street wash water;
(S) Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities; and
(T) Discharges specifically authorized in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as
being necessary to protect public health, welfare, and safety or the environment.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.09 STORAGE OF MATERIALS IN DRAINAGE WAY.
Except as permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to store or stockpile within a
drainage way hazardous materials, pollutants, toxic materials, or wastewater, unless adequate
protection and/or containment has been provided so as to prevent any such materials from entering a
storm water drainage system or water body.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.10 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
The authorized enforcement agency may inspect and/or obtain samples from any discharger’s
premises as necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Upon request,
the discharger shall allow properly identified representatives of the authorized enforcement agency to
enter the premises of the discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or
investigation, including, but not limited to, smoke/dye testing, televising pipes, sampling, and
excavation. The authorized enforcement agency shall provide the discharger reasonable advance notice
of the need for such access, if possible and consistent with protection of public health and safety and
the environment. The properly identified representatives may place on the discharger’s premises the
equipment or devices used for such sampling or inspection. Unreasonable delays in allowing access to a
premises is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.11 STORM WATER MONITORING FACILITIES.
If directed in writing to do so by the authorized enforcement agency, a discharger of storm
water runoff from any premises used for commercial or industrial purposes shall provide and operate
equipment or devices for the monitoring of storm water runoff to provide for inspection, sampling, and
flow measurement of each discharge to a water body or storm water drainage system, as specified by
the authorized enforcement agency. The authorized enforcement agency may require a discharger to
provide and operate such equipment and devices if it is necessary or appropriate for the inspection,
sampling, and flow measurement of discharges in order to determine whether adverse effects from, or
as a result of, such discharges may occur. All such equipment and devices for the inspection, sampling,
and flow measurement of discharges shall be installed and maintained at the discharger’s expense in
accordance with applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.12 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a storm water drainage system or a water body
any substance other than storm water or an authorized discharge shall immediately notify the
authorized enforcement agency of the discharge. If the notification is given orally, a written report
concerning the discharge shall be filed with the authorized enforcement agency within five days. The
written report shall specify all of the following:
(A) The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof;
(B) The exact date, time and estimated volume of the discharge;
(C) All measures taken to clean up the discharge, all measures taken or proposed to be
taken to mitigate any known or potential adverse impacts of the discharge, and all measures proposed
to be taken to reduce and prevent any recurrences; and
(D) The names and telephone numbers of the individual making the report, and (if different)
the individual who may be contacted for additional information regarding the discharge.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.13 RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENT.
Any person that violates any requirement of this chapter or that is subject to monitoring under
this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any and all books, drains, plans, prints,
documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence, and records, including records on magnetic or
electronic media, and any and all summaries of such records relating to monitoring, sampling, and
chemical analysis of any discharge or storm water runoff from any premises connected with the
violation or subject to monitoring.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.14 SANCTIONS FOR VIOLATION.
(A) Except as provided by division (E) of this section, a person who violates any provision of
this chapter (including, without limitation, any notice, order, permit, decision or determination
promulgated, issued or made by the authorized enforcement agency under this chapter) is responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $1,000 for each
infraction and not more than $2,500 for each infraction, plus costs and other sanctions. Each day of a
violation is subject to a separate citation.
(B) Subject to the maximum and minimum fine amounts specified in division (A) of this
section, the following factors shall be considered by a court in determining the amount of a municipal
civil infraction fine following the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation for a violation of this
chapter: the type, nature, severity, frequency, duration, preventability, potential and actual effect, and
economic benefit to the violator (such as delayed or avoided costs or competitive advantage) of a
violation; the violator’s recalcitrance or efforts to comply; the economic impacts of the fine on the
violator; and such other matters as justice may require. A violator shall bear the burden of
demonstrating the presence and degree of any mitigating factors to be considered in determining the
amount of a fine. However, mitigating factors shall not be considered unless it is determined that the
violator has made all good faith efforts to correct and terminate all violations.
(C) The following persons are designated as the authorized local officials to issue municipal
civil infraction citations: the City Manager and any police officer.
(D) Except as otherwise provided by this section, the requirements and procedures for
commencing municipal civil infraction actions; issuance and service of municipal civil infraction citations;
determination and collection of court-ordered fines, costs and expenses; appearances and payment of
fines and costs; failure to answer, appear or pay fines; disposition of fines, costs and expenses paid; and
other matters regarding municipal civil infractions shall be as set forth in Act No. 236 of the Public Acts
of 1961, as amended.
(E) Any person who (1) at the time of a violation knew or should have known that
hazardous materials, pollutants, toxic materials, wastewater, or substance was discharged contrary to
any provision of this chapter, or contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or determination
promulgated, issued or made by the authorized enforcement agency under this chapter; or (2)
intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or certification in an application for or form
pertaining to a permit, or in a notice, report, or record required by this chapter, or in any other
correspondence or communication, written or oral, with the authorized enforcement agency regarding
matters regulated by this chapter; or (3) intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any
sampling or monitoring device or record required to be maintained by this chapter; or (4) commits any
other act that is punishable under state law by imprisonment for more than 90 days; shall upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500 per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both in the discretion of the court.
(F) Any person who aids or abets another person in a violation of this chapter shall be
subject to the sanctions provided in this section.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.15 FAILURE TO COMPLY; COMPLETION.
The authorized enforcement agency is authorized, after giving reasonable notice and
opportunity for compliance, to correct any violation of this chapter or damage or impairment to the
storm water drainage system caused by a discharge and to bill the person causing the violation or
discharge for the costs of the work to be reimbursed. The costs reimbursable under this section shall be
in addition to fees, amounts or other costs and expenses required to be paid to the authorized
enforcement agency under other sections of this chapter.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.16 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
If emergency measures are necessary to respond to a nuisance, to protect public safety, health,
and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life, injury, or damage to property, the authorized enforcement
agency is authorized to carry out or arrange for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be
responsible for the cost of such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this chapter, and
shall promptly reimburse the city of such costs.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.17 COST RECOVERY FOR DAMAGE TO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
Any person who discharges to a storm water drainage system or a water body, including, but
not limited to, any person who causes or creates a discharge that violates any provision of this chapter,
produces a deposit or obstruction or otherwise damages or impairs a storm water drainage system, or
causes or contributes to a violation of any federal, state, or local law governing the city, shall be liable to
and shall fully reimburse the city for all expenses, costs, losses or damages (direct or indirect) payable to
incurred by the city as a result of any such discharge, deposit, obstruction, damage, impairment,
violation, exceedence or noncompliance. The costs that must be reimbursed to the city shall include,
but shall not be limited to, all of the following:
(A) All costs incurred by the city in responding to the violation or discharge, including
expenses for any cleaning, repair or replacement work, and the costs of sampling, monitoring, and
treatment, as a result of the discharge, violation, exceedence or noncompliance;
(B) All costs to the city of monitoring, surveillance, and enforcement in connection with
investigating, verifying, and prosecuting any discharge, violation, exceedence, or noncompliance;
(C) The full amount of any fines, assessments, penalties, and claims, including natural
resource damages, levied against the city, or any city representative, by any governmental agency or
third party as a result of a violation of applicable laws or regulations that is caused by or contributed to
by any discharge, violation, exceedence, or noncompliance; and
(D) The full value of any city staff time (including any required overtime), consultant and
engineering fees, and actual attorney fees and defense costs (including the city legal counsel and any
special legal counsel), associated with responding to, investigating, verifying and prosecuting any
discharge, violation, exceedence or noncompliance, or otherwise enforcing the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.18 COLLECTION OF COSTS; LIEN.
Costs which may be recovered by the city pursuant to § 157.15 shall constitute a lien on the
premises, which shall be enforceable in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as
amended from time to time, or as otherwise authorized by law. Any such charges that are delinquent
for six months or more may be certified annually to the City Treasurer, who shall enter the lien on the
next tax roll against the premises, the costs shall be collected, and the lien shall be enforced in the same
manner as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of a lien
for taxes. In addition to any other lawful enforcement methods, the city shall have all remedies
authorized by Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended, and by other applicable laws.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.19 SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
(A) Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The authorized
enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend access to the storm water drainage system to
any person or premises when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or
welfare of persons, or to the storm water drainage system or a water body. If the person fails to comply
with a suspension order issued in any emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such
steps as deemed necessary to prevent or to minimize damage to the storm water drainage system or
the environment, or to minimize danger to persons, and bill the person for the costs to the city in taking
such steps.
(B) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the storm
water drainage system in violation of this chapter may have their access to the system terminated, if the
authorized enforcement agency determines that such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its
access. It shall be unlawful for any person to reinstate access of the storm water drainage system to a
premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior written approval of the authorized
enforcement agency.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.20 APPEALS.
(A) Any person to whom any provision of this chapter has been applied may appeal in
writing to the Ottawa County Circuit Court not later than 30 days after the action or decision being
appealed. Such appeal shall identify the matter being appealed, and the basis for the appeal. The
Circuit Court shall review the record and decision of the Board of Appeals to ensure that the decision:
(1) Complies with the constitution and laws of the state;
(2) Is based upon proper procedure;
(3) Is supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the record;
and
(4) Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by law to the Board of
Appeals.
(B) The Circuit Court shall make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects, or modifies the action
being appealed or may remand to the city.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.21 JUDICIAL RELIEF.
With the approval of the city, the authorized enforcement agency may institute legal
proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek all appropriate relief for violations of this
chapter or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this chapter. The
action may seek temporary or permanent injunctive relief, damages, penalties, costs, and any other
relief, at law or equity, that a court may order. The authorized enforcement agency may also seek
collection of fines, penalties and any other amounts due to the city that a person has not paid.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.22 CUMULATIVE REMEDIES.
This imposition of a single penalty, fine, order, damage, or surcharge upon any person for
violation of this chapter, or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued, or entered into under this
chapter, shall not preclude the imposition by the city, the authorized enforcement agency, or a court of
competent jurisdiction of a combination of any or all of those sanctions and remedies or additional
sanctions and remedies with respect to the same violation, consistent with applicable limitations on
penalty amounts under state or federal laws or regulations.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.23 RESPONSIBILITY TO IMPLEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
The owner or operator of a premises used for commercial or industrial purposes shall provide,
at the owner or operator’s own expense, reasonable protection from an accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other wastes into the storm water drainage system or water body through the
use of structural and nonstructural best management practices (BMPs). Further, any person responsible
for a premises that is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge may be required to implement, at the
person’s expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants to the storm water drainage system or water body. Compliance with all terms and conditions
of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to
the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04) Penalty, see § 157.14
§ 157.24 INTERPRETATION.
Words and phrases in this chapter shall be construed according to their common and accepted
meanings, except those words and phrases defined in § 157.05 shall be construed according to the
respective definitions given in that section. Technical words and technical phrases not defined in this
chapter, but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in technical usage, shall be construed
according to such meanings.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
§ 157.25 CATCH-LINE HEADINGS.
The catch-line headings of the articles and sections of this chapter are intended for convenience
only, and shall not be construed as affecting the meaning or interpretation of the text of the articles of
sections to which they may refer.
(Ord. 215, passed 9-7-04)
CHAPTER 158: CONTROL OF STORM WATER RUNOFF
Section
General Provisions
158.01 Statutory authority and title
158.02 Findings
158.03 Purpose
158.04 Applicability, exemptions and general provisions
158.05 Definitions
158.06 Interpretation
158.07 Catch-line headings
158.08 Other ordinances not affected
Storm Water Permits
158.15 Permit required
158.16 Storm water permit review procedures
158.17 Drainage plan
158.18 Storm water permit review fees
158.19 Construction site runoff controls
158.20 Financial guarantee
158.21 Certificate of occupancy
158.22 No change in approved facilities
158.23 Terms and conditions of permits
Storm Water System; Floodplain and Other Standards; Soil Erosion Control
158.30 Management of and responsibility for storm water system
158.31 Storm water system
158.32 Storm water discharge rates and volumes
158.33 Floodplain standards
158.34 Soil erosion and sedimentation control
158.35 Building openings
158.36 Public health, safety and welfare
Prohibitions and Exemptions
158.45 Interference with city drains
Inspection, Monitoring, Reporting and Recordkeeping
158.55 Inspection and sampling
158.56 Storm water monitoring facilities
158.57 Accidental discharges
158.58 Recordkeeping requirement
Enforcement
158.65 Sanctions for violation
158.66 Stop work order
158.67 Failure to comply; completion
158.68 Emergency measures
158.69 Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system
158.70 Collection of costs; lien
158.71 Suspension of MS4 access
Storm Water Easements and Maintenance Agreements
158.80 Applicability of requirements
158.81 Storm water management easements
158.82 Maintenance agreements
158.83 Establishment of county drains
Cross-reference:
Storm water; illicit connections and discharges, see Ch. 157
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY AND TITLE.
(A) This chapter is adopted in accordance with the Home Rule City Act, as amended, being
M.C.L.117.1, et seq.; the Drain Code of 1956, as amended, being M.C.L. 280.1, et seq.; the Land Division
Act, as amended, being M.C.L. 560.1, et seq.; the Revenue Bond Act, as amended, being M.C.L. 141.101,
et seq.; and the Natural Resources. and Environmental Protection Act, as amended, being M.C.L.
324.101, et seq.; Section 401(p) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the Clean
Water Act), as amended, being 33 U.S.C 1342(p) and 40 C.F.R. Parts 9, 122, 123 and 124; and other
applicable state and federal laws.
(B) This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Ferrysburg Control of Stormwater
Runoff chapter.”
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.02 FINDINGS.
The city finds that:
(A) Water bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within, and downstream of the
city are potentially subject to flooding;
(B) Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is also a danger to the
natural resources of the city and the region;
(C) Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds, resulting in increased
storm water runoff rates and volumes, increased flooding, increased stream channel erosion, and
increased sediment transport and deposition;
(D) Storm water runoff produced by land development contributes to increased quantities
of waterborne pollutants;
(E) Increases of storm water runoff, soil erosion, and non-point source pollution have
occurred as a result of land development, and cause deterioration of the water resources of the city and
downstream municipalities;
(F) Storm water runoff, soil erosion, and non-point source pollution due to land
development within the city, have resulted in a deterioration of the water resources of the city and
downstream municipalities;
(G) Increased storm water runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments and pollutants
associated with storm water runoff from future development projects within the city will, absent
reasonable regulation and control, adversely affect the city’s water bodies and water resources, and
those of downstream municipalities;
(H) Storm water runoff, soil erosion and non-point source pollution can be controlled and
minimized by the regulation of storm water runoff from development;
(I) Adopting the standards, criteria and procedures contained in this chapter and
implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of storm water runoff; and
therefore
(J) Adopting these standards is necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety
and welfare.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.03 PURPOSE.
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum storm water management requirements
and controls to accomplish, among others, the following objectives:
(A) To reduce artificially induced flood damage;
(B) To minimize increased storm water runoff rates and volumes from identified new land
development;
(C) To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts and bridges, and other
structures;
(D) To encourage water recharge into the ground where geologically favorable conditions
exist;
(E) To prevent an increase in non-point source pollution;
(F) To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological functions, as well as for
drainage and other purposes;
(G) To minimize the impact of development upon stream bank and stream bed stability;
(H) To reduce erosion from development or construction projects;
(I) To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources by means of
controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion, and runoff pollution;
(J) To reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and non-point source
pollution, wherever practicable, from lands that were developed without storm water management
controls meeting the purposes and standards of this chapter;
(K) To reduce the adverse impact of changing land use on water bodies and, to that end,
this chapter establishes minimum standards to protect water bodies from degradation resulting from
changing land use where there are insufficient storm water management controls; and
(L) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and
enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.04 APPLICABILITY, EXEMPTIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
(A) This chapter shall apply to any development which requires approval of a site plan by
the Planning Commission or the City Council pursuant to the Ferrysburg Zoning Ordinance.
(B) This chapter shall apply to all discharges entering the storm drain system generated on
any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.05 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. The Building Inspector and the City Manager, or either
of them.
BASE FLOOD. A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (using
Bulletin 71).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The high water elevation of the base flood, commonly referred to as
the 100-YEAR FLOOD ELEVATION.
BASE FLOOD PLAIN. The area inundated by the base flood.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS). A practice, or combination of practices and design
criteria that comply with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality’s Guidebook of Best
Management Practices for Michigan Watersheds, or equivalent practices and design criteria that
accomplish the purposes of this chapter (including, but not limited to minimizing storm water runoff and
preventing the discharge of pollutants into storm water) as determined by the City Engineer, and, where
appropriate, the standards of the Ottawa County Drain Commissioner.
BUILDING OPENING. Any opening of a solid wall such as a window or door, through which
floodwaters could penetrate.
CITY. The City of Ferrysburg.
CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as
amended, and the applicable regulations promulgated thereunder.
CONSTRUCTION SITE STORM WATER RUNOFF. Storm water runoff from a development site
following an earth change.
DESIGN ENGINEER. Registered and licensed professional engineer in the State of Michigan
responsible for the design of a drainage plan.
DETENTION. A system which is designed to capture storm water and release it over a given
period of time through an outlet structure at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPED or DEVELOPMENT. The installation or construction of impervious surfaces on a
development site that requires the approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission or the City
Council as provided by the Ferrysburg Zoning Ordinance.
DEVELOPER. Any person proposing or implementing the development of land.
DEVELOPMENT SITE. Any land that is being or has been developed, or that a developer
proposes for development.
DISCHARGER. Any person or entity who directly or indirectly discharges storm water from any
property. DISCHARGER also refers to any employee, officer, director, partner, contractor or other person
who participates in, or is legally of factually responsible for, any act or omission which is or results in a
violation of this chapter.
DRAIN. Any drain as defined in the Drain Code of 1956, as amended, being M.C.L. 280.1, et.
seq., other than an established county or intercounty drain.
DRAINAGE. The collection, conveyance, or discharge of ground water and/or surface water.
DRAINAGEWAV. The area within which surface water or ground water is carried from one part
of a lot or parcel to another part of the lot or parcel or to adjacent land.
EARTH CHANGE. A human-made change in the natural cover or topography of land, including
cut-and-fill activities that require either approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission or the City
Council as provided by the Zoning Ordinance or the granting of a soil erosion and sedimentation permit
by the Ottawa County Drain Commissioner. EARTH CHANGE does not include the practice of plowing
and tilling soil for the purpose of crop production.
EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EROSION. The process by which the ground surface is worn away by action of wind, water,
gravity or a combination thereof.
EXEMPTED DISCHARGES. Discharges other than storm water as specified in § 158.45.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency of the federal government
charged with emergency management.
FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of water bodies or the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface water runoff from any source.
FLOODPLAIN. Any land area subject to periodic flooding.
FLOOD-PROOFING. Any structural and/or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures or property that reduce or eliminate flood damage to land, improvements, utilities and
structures.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The base flood elevation plus one foot at any given
location.
FLOODWAY. The channel of any watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved
to carry and discharge abase flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than 1/10 of a foot due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage.
GRADING. Any stripping, clearing, stumping, excavating, filling, leveling and stockpiling of soil or
any combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste or combination thereof,
which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may
cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise
managed.
ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any method or means for conveying an illicit discharge into water bodies
or the city’s storm water system.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to water bodies that does not consist entirely of storm water,
discharges pursuant to the terms of an NPDES permit or exempted discharges as defined in this chapter.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface, such as a paved or gravel driveway, roof, parking area or road
that prevents the infiltration of water into the soil.
LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION FACILITIES. An agricultural activity in which 100 or more livestock are
fed, bred and/or raised within a confined area, other than an open pasture, either inside or outside an
enclosed building.
LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor or the lowest enclosed area (including a basement), but not
including an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure which is usable solely for parking of vehicles or
building access.
MDEQ. Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A publicly owned conveyance system
designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342 (b))
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
NPDES. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of storm water.
OCDC. Ottawa County Drain Commissioner.
OVERLAND FLOW-WAY. Surface area that conveys a concentrated flow of storm water runoff.
PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation, public
agency, instrumentality or any other legal entity.
PLAN. Written narratives, specifications, drawings, sketches, written standards, operating
procedures or any combination of these which contain information pursuant to this chapter.
POLLUTANT. A substance discharged which includes, but is not limited to the following: any
dredged spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids, yard wastes, animal wastes, agricultural waste products,
sediment, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
wastes, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and
industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste, or any other contaminant or other substance
defined as a POLLUTANT under the Clean Water Act.
PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or
unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PROPERTY OWNER. Any person having legal or equitable title to property or any person having
or exercising care, custody or control over any property.
RETENTION. A system which is designed to capture storm water and contain it until it infiltrates
the soil, or evaporates or drains.
SOIL EROSION. The stripping of soil and weathered rock from land creating sediment for
transportation by water, wind or ice, thereby enabling formation of new sedimentary deposits.
STATE OF MICHIGAN WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. All applicable state rules, regulations and
laws pertaining to water quality, including the provisions of § 3106, Part 31, of 1994 P.A . 451, as
amended.
STORM DRAIN. A system of open or enclosed conduits and appurtenant structures intended to
convey or manage storm water runoff, ground water and drainage.
STORM WATER PERMIT. A permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN. A document which describes the Best
Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of
pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Storm
Water, Storm Water Conveyance Systems and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent Practicable.
STORM WATER RUNOFF. The runoff and drainage of precipitation resulting from rainfall or
snowmelt or other natural event or process.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY. The method, structure, area, system or other
equipment or measures which are designed to receive, control, store or convey storm water.
STREAM. A river, STREAM or creek which may or may not be serving as a drain, or any other
water body that has definite banks, a bed and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued
occurrence of water.
WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged
from a facility.
WATER BODY. A river, lake, stream, creek or other watercourse or wetlands.
WATERSHED. A region draining into a water body.
WETLANDS. Land characterized by the presence of hydric soils and water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation or aquatic life.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.06 INTERPRETATION.
Words and phrases in this chapter shall be construed according to their common and accepted
meanings, except that words and phrases defined in § 158.05 shall be construed according to the
respective definitions given in that section. Technical words and technical phrases that are not defined
in this chapter but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in technical usage shall be
construed according to such meanings.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.07 CATCH-LINE HEADINGS.
The catch-line headings of the subchapters and sections of this chapter are intended for
convenience only, and shall not be construed as affecting the meaning or interpretation of the text of
the subchapters or sections to which they may refer.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.08 OTHER ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED.
This chapter shall be in addition to other ordinances of the city, and shall not be deemed to
repeal or replace other ordinances or parts thereof except to the extent that such repeal is specifically
provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
STORM WATER PERMITS
§ 158.15 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) A developer shall not engage in any development without first receiving a storm water
permit from the city pursuant to § 158.16.
(B) The granting of a storm water permit shall authorize only such development for which
the permit is required, subject to the terms of the permit, and it shall not be deemed to approve other
development or other land use activities.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.16 STORM WATER PERMIT REVIEW PROCEDURES.
The city shall grant a storm water permit, which may impose terms and conditions in accordance
with § 158.23, and which shall be granted only upon compliance with each of the following
requirements:
(A) The developer has submitted a drainage plan complying with § 158.17.
(B) The drainage plan contains a description of an adequate, temporary storm water
retention system to prevent construction site storm water runoff, satisfying the requirements of §
158.19, and the developer has obtained a soil erosion permit, if necessary.
(C) The developer provides:
(1) A permanent on-site storm water management system complying with the
OCDC Standards and Specifications; and
(2) Written construction plan approval from the OCDC.
(D) The developer has paid or deposited the storm water permit review fee pursuant to §
158.18.
(E) The developer has paid or posted the applicable financial guarantee pursuant to §
158.20.
(F) The developer provides all easements necessary to implement the approved drainage
plan and to otherwise comply with this chapter. All easements shall be acceptable to the city in form
and substance and shall be recorded with the Ottawa County Register of Deeds.
(G) The drainage plan is designed in conformity with city or OCDC design and performance
standards for drains and storm water management systems, as set forth in this chapter.
(H) All storm water runoff facilities shall be designed in accordance with the then-current
BMPs.
(I) The developer provides the required maintenance agreement for routine, emergency
and long-term maintenance of all storm water management facilities. This agreement shall be in
compliance with the approved drainage plan and this chapter including, but not limited to, § 158.82. The
maintenance agreement shall be acceptable to the city in form and substance and shall be recorded
with the Ottawa County Register of Deeds.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.17 DRAINAGE PLAN.
The developer shall provide a drainage plan to the city that has been approved by the Ottawa
County Drain Commissioner.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.18 STORM WATER PERMIT REVIEW FEES.
(A) All expenses and costs incurred by the city directly associated with processing, reviewing
and approving or denying a storm water permit application shall be paid (or reimbursed) to the city from
the funds in a separate escrow account established by the developer, as provided in division (B) below.
The city may draw funds from a developer’s escrow account to reimburse the city for out-of-pocket
expenses incurred by the city relating to the application. Such reimbursable expenses include, but are
not limited to, expenses related to the following:
(1) Services of the City Attorney directly related to the application;
(2) Services of the City Engineer directly related to the application;
(3) Services of other independent contractors working for the city which are
directly related to the application; and
(4) Any additional public hearings, required mailings and legal notice requirements
necessitated by the application.
(B) At the time a developer applies for a storm water permit, the developer shall deposit
with the City Clerk, as an escrow deposit, an initial amount as determined by resolution of the City
Council for such matters and shall provide additional amounts as requested by the city in such
increments as are specified in said resolution. Any excess funds remaining in the escrow account after
the application has been fully processed, reviewed, and the final city approval and acceptance of the
development has occurred will be refunded to the developer with no interest to be paid on those funds.
At no time prior to the city's final decision on an application shall the balance in the escrow account fall
below the required initial amount. If the funds in the account are reduced to less than the required
initial amount, the developer shall deposit into the account an additional amount as determined by
resolution before the application review process will be continued. Additional amounts may be required
to be placed in the escrow account by the developer, at the discretion of the city.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.19 CONSTRUCTION SITE RUNOFF CONTROLS.
Prior to making any earth change on a development site regulated by this ordinance, the
developer shall first obtain a soil erosion permit from the OCDC issued in accordance with Part 91, Act
451, of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended, if one is required. The developer shall install storm water
management facilities and shall phase the development activities so as to prevent construction site
storm water runoff and off-site sedimentation. During all construction activities on the development
site, the City Engineer or other city representative may inspect the development site to ensure
compliance with the approved construction site runoff controls.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.20 FINANCIAL GUARANTEE.
(A) The City Engineer shall not approve a storm water permit until the developer submits to
the city, in a form and amount satisfactory to the city, a letter of credit or other financial guarantee for
the timely and satisfactory construction of all storm water runoff facilities and site grading in accordance
with the approved drainage plan. Upon certification by a registered professional engineer that the storm
water management facilities have been completed in accordance with the approved drainage plan
including, but not limited to, the provisions contained in § 158.17, the city may release the letter of
credit, or other financial guarantee.
(B) The amount of the financial guarantee shall be determined by the authorized
enforcement agency based upon the estimated cost of completing the work plus 10%.
(C) The authorized enforcement agency may waive the financial guarantee for a
development if the OCDC, as part of their review process, is requiring a letter of credit or other financial
guarantee for the satisfactory construction of all storm water management facilities.
(D) The authorized enforcement agency may reduce or waive the amount of the financial
guarantee for a development that will not increase the percentage of impervious surface of the
development site by more than 10%.
(E) This chapter shall not be construed or interpreted as relieving a developer of its
obligation to pay all costs associated with on-site private storm water runoff facilities as well as those
costs arising from the need to make other drainage improvements in order to reduce a development’s
impact on a drain consistent with adopted design standards.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.21 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until storm water management facilities have been
completed in accordance with the approved drainage plan; provided, however, the city may issue a
certificate of occupancy if an acceptable letter of credit or other financial guarantee has been submitted
to the city or OCDC, for the timely and satisfactory construction of all storm water management facilities
and site grading in accordance with the approved drainage plan.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.22 NO CHANGE IN APPROVED FACILITIES.
Storm water management facilities, after construction and approval, shall be maintained in
good condition, in accordance with the approved drainage plan, and shall not be subsequently altered,
revised or replaced except in accordance with the approved drainage plan, or in accordance with
approved amendments or revisions in the plan.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.23 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF PERMITS.
In granting a storm water permit, the city may impose such terms and conditions as are
reasonably necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. A developer shall comply with such
terms and conditions.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
STORM WATER SYSTEM; FLOODPLAIN AND OTHER STANDARDS; SOIL EROSION CONTROL
§ 158.30 MANAGEMENT OF AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORM WATER SYSTEM.
The design and management of storm water systems, other than the city-operated storm water
system, is within the jurisdiction of the Ottawa County Drain Commissioner and is not regulated by the
city.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.31 STORM WATER SYSTEM.
All storm water management facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
all applicable federal, state and local ordinances, and rules and regulations.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.32 STORM WATER DISCHARGE RATES AND VOLUMES.
The determination of storm water discharge rates and volume is within the jurisdiction of the
Ottawa County Drain Commissioner and is not regulated by the city.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.33 FLOODPLAIN STANDARDS.
Floodplain standards are within the jurisdiction of the Ottawa County Drain Commissioner and
are not regulated by the city.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.34 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.
Soil erosion and sedimentation control are within the jurisdiction of the Ottawa County Drain
Commissioner and are not regulated by the city.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.35 BUILDING OPENINGS.
Building openings are within the jurisdiction of the Ottawa County Drain Commissioner and are
not regulated by the city.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.36 PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE.
Protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall be a primary consideration in the design
of all storm water runoff facilities.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS
§ 158.45 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY DRAINS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, fill, dam, confine, pave, alter the course of, or
otherwise interfere with any city-owned or operated stormwater drain.
(B) Shrubs, trees or other aboveground vegetation shall not be planted over the top of an
underground storm sewer or over the top of the easement within which the storm sewer has been
installed.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
INSPECTION, MONITORING, REPORTING AND RECORDKEEPING
§ 158.55 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
To assure compliance with the standards in this chapter, the city may inspect and/or obtain
storm water samples from storm water management facilities of any discharger to determine
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Upon request, the discharger shall allow the city’s or
OCDC’s properly identified representative to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all hours
necessary for the purposes of such inspection or sampling. The city shall provide the discharger
reasonable advance notice of such inspection and/or sampling. The city or its properly identified
representative may place on the discharger's property the equipment or devices used for such sampling
or inspection.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.56 STORM WATER MONITORING FACILITIES.
A discharger of storm water runoff shall provide and operate equipment or devices for the
monitoring of storm water runoff, so as to provide for inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of
each discharge to a water body or a storm water runoff facility, when directed in writing to do so by the
city. The city may require a discharger to provide and operate such equipment and devices if it is
necessary or appropriate for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges in order to
determine whether adverse effects from or as a result of such discharges may occur. All such equipment
and devices for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.57 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a water body any substance other than storm
water or an exempted discharge shall immediately inform the city and the OCDC concerning the
discharge. If such information is given orally, a written report concerning the discharge shall be filed
with the city and OCDC within five days. The written report shall specify:
(A) The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof;
(B) The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge;
(C) All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all measures proposed to
be taken to reduce and prevent any recurrence; and
(D) The name and telephone number of the person making the report, and the name of a
person who may be contacted for additional information on the matter.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.58 RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENT.
Any person subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for not less than three years any
and all books, drawings, plans, prints, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and records,
including records on magnetic or electronic media and any and all summaries of such records, relating to
monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis of any discharge or storm water runoff from any property.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 158.65 SANCTIONS FOR VIOLATION.
(A) Violation; municipal civil infraction. Except as provided by § 158.70, a person who
violates any provision of this chapter (including, without limitation, any notice, order, permit, decision or
determination promulgated, issued or made by the Authorized Enforcement Agency under this chapter)
is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not more than $500 for
each infraction, plus costs and restitution. Each day of a violation is a separate violation.
(B) Authorized local official. The following persons are designated as the authorized local
officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations: the City Manager or his or her designee, and any
police officer.
(C) Any person who (1) at the time of a violation knew that hazardous materials, pollutants,
toxic materials, wastewater, or substance was discharged contrary to any provision of this chapter, or
contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the
Authorized Enforcement Agency under this chapter; or (2) intentionally makes a false statement,
representation or certification in an application for, or form pertaining to a permit, or in a notice, report
or record required by this chapter, or in any other correspondence or communication, written or oral,
with the Authorized Enforcement Agency regarding matters regulated by this chapter; or (3)
intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any sampling or monitoring device or record
required to be maintained by this chapter; (4) fails to comply with a stop work order; or (5) commits any
other act that is punishable under state law by imprisonment for 90 days or more shall, upon conviction,
be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for up
to 90 days, or both in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.66 STOP WORK ORDER.
Where there is work in progress that causes or constitutes in whole or in part, a violation of any
provision of this chapter, the city is authorized to issue a Stop Work Order so as to prevent further or
continuing violations or adverse effects. All persons to whom the stop work order is directed, or who are
involved in any way with the work or matter described in the stop work order shall fully and promptly
comply therewith. The city may also undertake or cause to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable
protective measures so as to prevent violations of this chapter or to avoid or reduce the effects of
noncompliance herewith. The cost of any such protective measures shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the property upon which the work is being done and the responsibility of any person carrying
out or participating in the work, and such cost shall be a lien upon the property.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.67 FAILURE TO COMPLY; COMPLETION.
In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, the city may, after the giving of reasonable notice and opportunity for compliance, have the
necessary work done, and the owner shall be obligated to promptly reimburse the city for all costs of
such work.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.68 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
When emergency measures are necessary to moderate a nuisance, to protect public safety,
health and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life, injury or damage to property, the city is authorized to
carry out or arrange for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost
of such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this chapter, and shall promptly reimburse
the city for all of such costs.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.69 COST RECOVERY FOR DAMAGE TO STORM DRAIN SYSTEM.
A discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as the result of causing a discharge
that produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to, or impairs a storm drain, or violates any of
the provisions of this chapter. Costs include, but are not limited to, those penalties levied by the EPA or
MDEQ for violation of an NPDES permit, attorney fees, and other costs and expenses.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.70 COLLECTION OF COSTS; LIEN.
Costs incurred by the city and the Drain Commissioner pursuant to § 158.69 shall be a lien on
the premises which shall be enforceable in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933 (M.C.L.
141.101), as amended from time to time. Any such charges which are delinquent for six months or
more may be certified annually to the City Treasurer who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against
the premises and the costs shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as
provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of a lien for taxes. In
addition to any other lawful enforcement methods, the city or the Drain Commissioner shall have all
remedies authorized by Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.71 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
(A) Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent
or minimize damage to the MS4 or the environment, or to minimize danger to persons.
(B) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4
in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. A
person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this
section, without the prior approval of the city.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
STORM WATER EASEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS
§ 158.80 APPLICABILITY OF REQUIREMENTS.
The requirements of this subchapter concerning storm water easements and maintenance
agreements shall apply to all persons required to submit a drainage plan to the city for review and
approval.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.81 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT EASEMENTS.
The developer shall provide all storm water management easements necessary to implement
the approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply with this chapter in form and substance required
by the city and shall record such easements as directed by the city. The easements shall assure access
for proper inspection and maintenance of storm water runoff facilities and shall provide adequate
emergency overland flow-ways.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.82 MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS.
The developer shall provide all storm water maintenance agreements necessary to implement
the approved drainage plan and to otherwise comply with this ordinance in form and substance as
required by the city, and shall record such agreements as directed by the city. The maintenance
agreements shall, among other matters, assure access for proper inspection and maintenance of storm
water runoff facilities and adequate emergency overland flow-ways.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
§ 158.83 ESTABLISHMENT OF COUNTY DRAINS.
Prior to final approval, all storm water management facilities for planned subdivisions and site
condominium developments shall be established as county drains, as authorized in § 433, Chapter 18 of
the Michigan Drain Code (P.A. 40 of 1956, as amended) for long-term maintenance.
(Ord. 233, passed 9-5-06)
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 1
CITY OF FERRYSBURG ZONING ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 TITLE, PURPOSE, SCOPE, AUTHORITY, VALIDITY AND
SEVERABILITY, EFFECTIVE DATE, AND REPEAL OF PRIOR ORDINANCE ........ 1-1
Section 1.10 Title.......................................................................................................... 1-1
Section 1.20 Purpose..................................................................................................... 1-1
Section 1.30 Scope........................................................................................................ 1-2
Section 1.40 Authority.................................................................................................. 1-3
Section 1.50 Validity and Severability ......................................................................... 1-3
Section 1.60 Effective Date .......................................................................................... 1-3
Section 1.70 Repeal of Prior Ordinance and Prior Conditions Attached to Land,
Buildings, or Structures ........................................................................... 1-3
ARTICLE 2 DEFINITIONS..................................................................................................... 2-1
Section 2.10 Construction of Language........................................................................ 2-1
Section 2.20 Definitions................................................................................................ 2-2
ARTICLE 3 GENERAL PROVISIONS.................................................................................. 3-1
Section 3.10 Construction Begun Prior to Adoption of Ordinance .............................. 3-1
Section 3.20 Building to be Moved .............................................................................. 3-1
Section 3.30 Excavation, Removal, and Filling of Land .............................................. 3-1
Section 3.40 Zoning Application Procedures in General.............................................. 3-4
Section 3.50 Required Area or Space ........................................................................... 3-4
Section 3.60 Projection into Yards by Architectural Building Features, Stoops, Decks,
Balconies, and Window Awnings............................................................ 3-5
Section 3.70 Mechanical Equipment - Roof and Ground Mounted.............................. 3-7
Section 3.80 Essential Public Services ......................................................................... 3-7
Section 3.90 Fences, Walls, Gates, Screens, and Landscape - General Requirements and
Intersection Visibility............................................................................... 3-8
Section 3.100 Principal Building, Structure and Use ................................................... 3-11
Section 3.110 Repair and Storage of Vehicles in Residential Districts........................ 3-11
Section 3.120 Use of Yard Spaces and Other Open Areas for Storage of Machinery,
Equipment, Junk, and Wood Impacting Residential Parcels ................. 3-13
Section 3.130 Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses............................................. 3-14
Section 3.140 Satellite Dish Antennas and Antennas and Towers ............................... 3-20
Section 3.150 Temporary Building and Structures....................................................... 3-26
Section 3.160 Streets, Street Frontage, Street Access, Driveway Location, Driveway
Surface Standards, Sidewalks, and Paths............................................... 3-26
Section 3.170 Withholding of Approval Pending Other Local, State, or Federal
Approvals............................................................................................... 3-29
Section 3.180 Standards Applicable to Single-Family Dwellings................................ 3-30
Section 3.190 Outdoor Placement of Motor Homes, Boats, and Recreational Type
Vehicles and Use of Recreational Vehicles for Temporary Living
Purposes ................................................................................................. 3-31
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2
Section 3.200 Plat Violations........................................................................................ 3-36
Section 3.210 Restoring Unsafe Buildings ................................................................... 3-36
Section 3.220 Grade...................................................................................................... 3-36
Section 3.230 Trash Receptacles and Dumpsters - All Districts .................................. 3-37
Section 3.240 Home Occupations................................................................................. 3-38
Section 3.250 Site Condominiums................................................................................ 3-40
Section 3.260 Day Care and Group Homes.................................................................. 3-41
Section 3.270 Basis of Determining Front Yard Requirements and Averaging of Setback
................................................................................................................ 3-41
Section 3.280 Sales on Residentially Zoned Properties................................................ 3-42
Section 3.290 Temporary Uses ..................................................................................... 3-45
Section 3.300 Private Streets ........................................................................................ 3-46
Section 3.310 Wind Energy Conversion Systems ........................................................ 3-49
Section 3.320 Certain Large Scale Residential Developments..................................... 3-53
Section 3.330 Reserved................................................................................................. 3-53
Section 3.340 Beekeeping............................................................................................. 3-53
Section 3.350 Keeping of Farm Animals...................................................................... 3-55
ARTICLE 4 SPECIAL LAND USES....................................................................................... 4-1
Section 4.10 Purpose..................................................................................................... 4-1
Section 4.20 Standards for Approval ............................................................................ 4-1
Section 4.30 Application Procedure ............................................................................. 4-2
Section 4.40 Designated Review Authority and Approval Procedure.......................... 4-2
Section 4.50 Conditions of Approval and Performance Guarantee.............................. 4-3
Section 4.60 Validity of Use Permitted With Special Approval .................................. 4-3
Section 4.70 Amendments/Deviations from Approved Special Land Use Permits...... 4-4
Section 4.80 Special Land Use Specific Standards ...................................................... 4-5
ARTICLE 5 SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS....................................................... 5-1
Section 5.10 Purpose..................................................................................................... 5-1
Section 5.20 Uses Subject to Site Plan Review............................................................ 5-1
Section 5.30 Site Plan/Use Review by Building Official, Fire Chief and Others ........ 5-3
Section 5.40 Site Plan Application - Filing Procedure and Required Number of
Applications and Site Plan Copies........................................................... 5-3
Section 5.50 Required Site Plan Contents .................................................................... 5-4
Section 5.60 Building Appearance ............................................................................... 5-6
Section 5.70 Landscaping ............................................................................................. 5-9
Section 5.80 Site Plan Review Standards ................................................................... 5-13
Section 5.90 Construction in Conformity with Approved Site Plan Required........... 5-14
Section 5.100 Time Limit for Approved Site Plans...................................................... 5-14
Section 5.110 Changes to Approved Site Plans............................................................ 5-14
ARTICLE 6 PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS............................................. 6-1
Section 6.10 Purpose and Application of Requirements .............................................. 6-1
Section 6.20 General Requirements.............................................................................. 6-1
Section 6.30 Parking Units of Measurements............................................................... 6-3
Section 6.40 Parking Space Numerical Requirements (Parking Space Schedule) ....... 6-3
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3
Section 6.50 Barrier Free Parking Requirements ......................................................... 6-8
Section 6.60 Stacking Space Requirements.................................................................. 6-8
Section 6.70 Off-Street Parking Space Design Standards and Setback Requirements. 6-9
Section 6.80 Parking Lot Construction and Maintenance .......................................... 6-12
Section 6.90 Off-Street Loading and Unloading Areas .............................................. 6-13
ARTICLE 7 SIGNS .................................................................................................................. 7-1
Section 7.10 Statement of Purpose ............................................................................... 7-1
Section 7.20 Definitions................................................................................................ 7-1
Section 7.30 General Sign Provisions........................................................................... 7-2
Section 7.40 Nonconforming Signs, Illegal Signs, and Signs Accessory to
Nonconforming Uses ............................................................................... 7-5
Section 7.50 Signs - Units of Measurement.................................................................. 7-6
Section 7.60 Sign Regulations Applicable to all Districts............................................ 7-7
Section 7.70 District Sign Regulations ......................................................................... 7-8
Section 7.80 Billboards............................................................................................... 7-11
ARTICLE 8 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)..................................................... 8-1
Section 8.10 Intent - Planned Unit Development (PUD).............................................. 8-1
Section 8.20 Qualifying Conditions.............................................................................. 8-1
Section 8.30 PUD Development Matrix ....................................................................... 8-1
Section 8.40 Site Development Requirements.............................................................. 8-2
Section 8.50 Residential Density Bonus....................................................................... 8-8
Section 8.60 PUD Application Processing ................................................................. 8-11
Section 8.70 PUD Approval Standards....................................................................... 8-12
Section 8.80 Conformity With Approved PUD Plan and PUD Agreement ............... 8-13
Section 8.90 Changes To An Approved Planned Unit Development......................... 8-13
Section 8.100 Time Limit For Approved Planned Unit Developments........................ 8-13
Section 8.110 Phasing the PUD.................................................................................... 8-14
ARTICLE 9 DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS.......................................... 9-1
Section 9.10 Zone Districts........................................................................................... 9-1
Section 9.20 Zone District Map.................................................................................... 9-1
Section 9.30 Lot Divided by Zone District Boundary Line.......................................... 9-2
Section 9.40 Zone Districts and District Standards ...................................................... 9-2
Section 9.50 RD Zone District - Low Density Dune Residential................................. 9-3
Section 9.60 RG1 Zone District - Low Density Residential......................................... 9-4
Section 9.70 RG2 Zone District - Medium Density Residential .................................. 9-5
Section 9.80 RG3 Zone District - High Density Residential ........................................ 9-6
Section 9.90 MHP Manufactured Home Park District ................................................. 9-7
Section 9.100 S Zone District - Service District............................................................. 9-9
Section 9.110 Zone Districts - Core Commercial (CC) and General Commercial (GC) . 9-
12
Section 9.120 LI Zone Districts - Light Industrial District (LI-1, LI-2, and LI-3)...... 9-16
Section 9.130 PI Zone District - Port Industrial District .............................................. 9-20
Section 9.140 IL-O – Inland Lakefront Overlay District.............................................. 9-21
Section 9.150 Schedule of District Standards, City of Ferrysburg............................... 9-25
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4
ARTICLE 10 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES ..................................... 10-1
Section 10.10 Intent ...................................................................................................... 10-1
Section 10.20 Change of Tenancy of Ownership of Non-Conforming Uses ............... 10-1
Section 10.30 Nonconforming Lots.............................................................................. 10-1
Section 10.40 Nonconforming Uses of Land Not Involving a Building or Structure .. 10-2
Section 10.50 Nonconforming Structures..................................................................... 10-2
Section 10.60 Nonconforming Use of Structure........................................................... 10-4
Section 10.70 Repairs and Maintenance....................................................................... 10-6
Section 10.80 Structures Under Construction............................................................... 10-6
ARTICLE 11 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.................................................................. 11-1
Section 11.10 Creation and Membership...................................................................... 11-1
Section 11.20 Composition and Alternate Members .................................................... 11-1
Section 11.30 Rules of Procedure................................................................................. 11-2
Section 11.40 Jurisdiction and Limitations................................................................... 11-2
Section 11.50 Granting of Variances ............................................................................ 11-2
Section 11.60 Application............................................................................................. 11-3
Section 11.70 Information From Prior Zoning Actions................................................ 11-4
Section 11.80 Submission of Application to the Zoning Board of Appeals................. 11-4
Section 11.90 Applicant Representation....................................................................... 11-4
Section 11.100 Voting Requirements ............................................................................. 11-4
Section 11.110 Time of Hearing and Notice of Hearing ................................................ 11-4
Section 11.120 Conditions on Variance and Other Approvals ....................................... 11-5
Section 11.130 Official Record and Findings of Fact..................................................... 11-5
Section 11.140 Decisions of the Board of Appeals ........................................................ 11-5
Section 11.150 Stay of Proceedings................................................................................ 11-6
Section 11.160 Rehearing and Appeal of Decision to Circuit Court.............................. 11-6
ARTICLE 12 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT............................................. 12-1
Section 12.10 Zoning Administrator Duties ................................................................. 12-1
Section 12.20 Zoning Ordinance Amendments, Initiation ........................................... 12-1
Section 12.30 Amendment Procedure........................................................................... 12-2
Section 12.40 Consideration of Amendment................................................................ 12-2
Section 12.50 Conditional Rezoning ............................................................................ 12-3
Section 12.60 Performance Guarantee.......................................................................... 12-7
Section 12.70 Recording of Site Plans, Planned Unit Developments, and Other
Instruments............................................................................................. 12-8
Section 12.80 Ordinance Violations ............................................................................. 12-8
INDEX TO TERMS/PHRASES....................................................................................... Index-1
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
1
ARTICLE 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, SCOPE, AUTHORITY, VALIDITY AND
SEVERABILITY, EFFECTIVE DATE, AND REPEAL OF PRIOR
ORDINANCE
Section 1.10 Title
This ordinance shall be known as the "City of Ferrysburg Zoning Ordinance" and may be cited
as "this Ordinance".
Section 1.20 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the
City and to provide for a wholesome, serviceable and attractive community by having
regulations and restrictions that are supported by the citizens of Ferrysburg which:
a) Promote compatibility of existing and future land uses.
b) Increase the safety and security of residential neighborhoods.
c) Preserve and create a favorable quality of life for residents.
d) Provide appropriate locations within which the land use needs of residents and commerce
may be efficiently accommodated.
e) Encourage variety in housing type.
f) Protect and enhance property values.
g) Facilitate efficient traffic operations and minimize congestion and accident potential.
h) Provide for convenient vehicular parking.
i) Enhance the environment for pedestrian travel and other non-motorized transportation.
j) Restrict building in floodplain areas as a means of protecting property values.
k) Protect wetlands, dunes, and other unique natural features in recognition of their
environmental value.
l) Encourage preservation of environmental features through flexible design standards.
m) Promote clean air and water and access to sunlight.
n) Promote the City’s aesthetic quality, while minimizing blight.
o) Provide opportunity for parks, recreation, schools, religious institutions and community
facilities.
p) Provide infrastructure and public services consistent with demand.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
2
q) Provide reasonable measures to safeguard the City's economic structure.
r) Provide each property owner with a reasonable and economic use of their land.
s) Lesson congestion, disorder and infringement of property values, safety and quality of
life which are often aggravated due to unregulated development.
t) Prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentrations of populations.
u) Eliminate nonconforming uses and structures.
v) Encourage the redevelopment of those areas of the City experiencing decline.
w) Accomplish the objectives of the City of Ferrysburg Master Plan adopted December 5,
1991, including amendments thereto.
In order to effectively meet this purpose, the City of Ferrysburg is divided into districts of such
number, shape and area, and of such common unity of purpose, adaptability or use, that are
deemed most suitable to provide for the best general civic use, protect the common rights and
interests within each district and the City as a whole, preserve the property owners right to use
their land, and to promote local quality of life and business vitality. The regulations in this
Ordinance accomplish the above objectives by controlling land uses within each district;
acknowledging the unique impacts of special land uses through specific standards for their
development in appropriate locations within selected districts; promoting quality by limiting the
location, height, bulk, occupancy and uses of buildings and other structures; defining maximum
residential density; specifying the percentage of a site available for a building; and, requiring
building and parking setbacks from property lines and public street rights-of-way.
Section 1.30 Scope
a) Application of Regulations - Where any condition imposed by any provision of this
Ordinance upon the use of any lot, building or structure is either more restrictive or less
restrictive than any comparable condition imposed by any other provision of this
Ordinance or by the provision of any ordinance adopted under any other law, the
provision which is more restrictive or which imposes the higher standard or requirement
shall govern.
b) Easements, Covenants, and Private Agreements - This Ordinance is not intended to
repeal, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant or private agreement, provided, that
where any provision of this Ordinance is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or
requirement than the easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the provisions of
this Ordinance shall govern.
c) Uses, Buildings, and Structures Subject to Ordinance - Except as may otherwise be
provided in this Ordinance, every building and structure erected; every use of any lot,
building or structure established; every structural alteration or relocation of an existing
building or structure and every enlargement or addition to, an existing use, building or
structure occurring after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be subject to all
regulations of this Ordinance which are applicable in the zoning district in which the use,
building or structure is located.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
3
d) Use Prohibition (Uses Not Listed) - Unless otherwise indicated, uses not listed within a
zone district classification are prohibited within that classification.
e) Setbacks and Lot Area - No setback or lot area existing at the time of adoption of this
Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at
least the minimum requirements established herein.
f) Minimum Regulations - The regulations herein established shall be the minimum
regulations for promoting and protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
g) Review and Approval Authority - In cases wherein the text of this Ordinance specifies
that the “Zoning Administrator” has been designated as the review and approval body of
a proposed zoning action which is subject to final review and approval by the Planning
Commission or City Council, the decision of the Planning Commission or City Council
on the zoning action shall rule.
Section 1.40 Authority
This Ordinance is enacted in accordance with Act 110 of the Michigan Public Acts of 2006, as
amended, provided, however, the powers and duties of the Zoning Commission have been
transferred to the Planning Commission of the City of Ferrysburg under the provisions of
Michigan Act 33 of the Public Acts of 2008, including any amendments thereto. [Ordinance No.
265, 10/4/2010]
Section 1.50 Validity and Severability
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this Ordinance to be invalid, the
ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this Ordinance not specifically included in the
ruling. Further, if any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any
provision of this Ordinance to a particular parcel, lot, use, building or structure, the ruling shall
not affect the application of a provision to any other parcel, lot, use, building or structure not
specifically included in the ruling.
Section 1.60 Effective Date
This Ordinance shall become effective upon publication as provided by law.
Section 1.70 Repeal of Prior Ordinance and Prior Conditions Attached to
Land, Buildings, or Structures
The City of Ferrysburg Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance adopted August 27, 1975, and all
amendments thereto, and any prior zoning ordinances of the City of Ferrysburg are hereby
repealed effective coincident with the effective date of this Ordinance. The repeal of those
ordinances shall not have the effect of releasing or relinquishing any penalty, forfeiture or
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
4
liability incurred under any prior ordinance, or any part thereof, and the prior ordinance shall be
treated as still remaining in force for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action for
the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or liability.
Conditions which have been attached to land, buildings, structures, and uses resulting from
actions under a prior ordinance shall remain in effect unless specifically waived by this
Ordinance, or through proper amendment, subject to the requirements of this Ordinance.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-1
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS
Section 2.10 Construction of Language
The following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this Ordinance:
a) Headings - Except with respect to the headings contained in Section 2.20, Definitions,
the headings which title a section or sub-section of this Ordinance are for the purpose of
convenience only and are not to be considered in any construction or interpretation of this
Ordinance, or as enlarging or restricting any of its terms and provisions in any respect.
b) Illustrations - The illustrations contained within this Ordinance are intended to describe
hypothetical applications of the provisions which refer to them and shall not have the
effect of enlarging or restricting the terms and provisions which refer to them, nor shall
they be applicable to other provisions of this Ordinance which do not refer to them. In
the event of a conflict between the provisions of the written text of this Ordinance and the
illustrations, the text shall govern.
c) Tense - When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense, words in the singular number shall include the plural number,
and words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
d) Shall and May - The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely discretionary.
The word "may" is permissive.
e) Person - The word "person" shall include a firm, association, joint venture, corporation,
trust, municipal or public entity, or equivalent entity or a combination of any of them, as
well as a natural person.
f) Used or Occupied - The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended",
"designed", or "arranged to be used or occupied".
g) Building - The word "building" includes the word "structure". A building or structure
includes any part thereof.
h) Dwelling - The word "dwelling" includes the word "residence".
i) Lot - The word "lot" includes the words "plot"; "parcel"; and “condominium unit site”.
j) Erected - The words "erected" or "erection" as applied to any building or structure shall
be construed to include the words "built", "constructed", "reconstructed", "moved upon",
or any physical operation or work on the land on which the building or structure is to be
built, constructed, reconstructed or moved upon, such as excavation, filling, drainage or
the like.
k) Connection of Words - Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by
the conjunction "and", "or", "either...or", the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-2
1) "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall
apply.
2) "Or" and "either...or" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events may apply singularly or in any combination.
l) Control - The particular shall control the general.
m) Terms Not Defined - Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
Section 2.20 Definitions
For the purpose of their use in this Ordinance, the following terms and words are hereinafter
defined:
A- Definitions
ABUTTING (lot or parcel) is a lot or parcel which shares a common border with the subject lot
or parcel. Unless otherwise provided for by this Ordinance, parcels separated by a road or alley
right-of-way, utility easement, or similar feature shall be considered abutting parcels.
ACCELERATION LANE is an added roadway lane (segment) that permits vehicles to pass on
the right, or to merge with the main vehicle stream after achieving a vehicular speed approaching
that of the main stream.
ACCESS MANAGEMENT (ACCESS CONTROL) is a technique to improve traffic
operations along a roadway and decrease the potential for accidents through the control of
driveway locations and design; consideration of the relationship of traffic activity for properties
adjacent to, and across from, one another; and the promotion of alternatives to direct access.
ACCESS TO PROPERTY, REASONABLE, is a property owner's legal right, incident to
property ownership, to access a public road right-of-way. Reasonable access to property may be
indirect or incorporate certain turning movements normally prohibited if determined necessary
for improved public safety and traffic operations.
ACCESSORY BUILDING is a structure subordinate to, and customarily associated with, a
principal use and located on the same lot as the principal use. An accessory building shall not
include any building used for a dwelling, lodging, or sleeping quarters for human beings. [Refer
to General Provisions - Section 3.130.] .
ACCESSORY USE is a use subordinate to, and customarily associated with, a principal use and
located on the same lot as the principal use.
ADJACENT (LOT OR PARCEL) is a lot or parcel which abuts or is directly across a street
right-of-way or alley from any lot or parcel line of the subject lot or parcel.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-3
ADULT is a person having attained the legal age of adulthood as defined by the laws of the State
of Michigan.
ADULT FOSTER CARE:
a) ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY is a governmental or nongovernmental
establishment that provides foster care to adults. Subject to section 26a(1) of the Adult
Foster Care Facility Licensing Act (PA 218 of 1979), adult foster care facility includes
facilities and foster care family homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill,
developmentally disabled, or physically disabled who require supervision on an ongoing
basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. Adult foster care facility does not
include a nursing home, home for the aged, a or hospital for the mentally ill or a facility
for the developmentally disabled operated by the department of community health, a
county infirmary operated by a county department of social services or family
independence agency or a child caring institution, each as defined by State statute,
b) ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME is a single-family dwelling occupied as
such in which one (1) but not more than six (6) or adults, who are not related to an adult
member of the family occupying the single-family dwelling by blood, marriage, or
adoption, are given care and supervision for twenty four (24) hours per day, unattended
by a relative or legal guardian. The adult foster care family home licensee shall be a
member of the household, and an occupant of the residence.
c) ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME is a single-family dwelling
occupied as such in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) adults, who
are not related to an adult member of the family occupying the single-family dwelling by
blood, marriage, or adoption, are given care and supervision for twenty four (24) hours
per day, unattended by a relative or legal guardian.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE is any use of land, whether vacant or combined with
structures or vehicles thereon, by which the property is devoted to selling, displaying or
exhibiting material for entertainment, a significant portion of which includes matter or actions
depicting, describing or presenting “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical
Areas.” For purposes of this definition, the term significant, as used above and as following,
shall be defined as greater than twenty percent (20%) of the total material displayed or exhibited
for sale or entertainment purposes. Adult entertainment uses shall include, but not limited to the
following: .”
a) ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER is an enclosed building with a capacity of
fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material which has a significant portion of
any motion picture or other display depicting or presenting “Specified Sexual Activities”
or “Specified Anatomical Areas” for observation by patrons therein.
b) ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER is an enclosed building with a
capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material which has a
significant portion of any motion picture or other display depicting, describing, or
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-4
presenting “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas” for
observation by patrons therein.
c) ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE is any place to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still
or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained
to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where a
significant portion of images so displayed depict, describe, or present “Specified Sexual
Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas.”
d) ADULT BOOK STORE is a use which has a display containing books, magazines,
periodicals, slides, pictures, video or audio cassettes, or other printed or recorded material
which has a significant portion of its content or exhibit matter or actions depicting,
describing, or relating to “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas”
or an establishment with a significant segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such material.
e) ADULT CABARET is a nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features live
performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, “go-go” dancers, exotic dancers,
strippers, or similar entertainers, where performances show, depict, or describe
“Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas.”
f) ADULT MOTEL is a motel wherein matter, actions or other displays are presented
which contain a significant portion depicting, describing, or presenting “Specified Sexual
Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas.”
g) ADULT MODEL STUDIO is any place where, for any form of consideration or
gratuity, figure models who display “Specified Anatomical Areas” are provided to be
observed or sketched. This definition shall not include an accredited State licensed
public or private educational institution or bonafide non-profit art’s organization offering
art instruction which may involve the exposure of the human body for purposes of
sketching or photography as part of a bonafide course.
h) ADULT PHYSICAL CULTURE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment, club, or
business by whatever name designated, which offers or advertises, or is equipped or
arranged to provide as part of its services, massages, body rubs, alcohol rubs, physical
stimulation, baths, or other similar treatment by any person, and exposes “Specified
Anatomical Areas” of the customer or of the person providing this treatment,
manipulation or service or which involves real or simulated “Specified Sexual
Activities.” An adult physical cultural establishment may include, but is not limited to,
establishments commonly known as massage parlors, health spas, sauna baths, Turkish
bathhouses, and steam baths. The following uses shall not be included within the
definition of an adult physical culture establishment:
1) Establishments that routinely provide such services by a licensed physician, a
licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a licensed physical therapist, a
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-5
licensed practical nurse practitioner, a therapeutic massage practitioner as defined
in this Ordinance or any other similarly licensed medical professional.
2) Fitness centers.
3) Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis equipment.
4) Continuing instruction in martial or performing arts, or in organized athletic
activities.
5) Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, or medical offices.
6) Barber shops or beauty parlors and salons which offer massages to the scalp, the
face, the neck, or shoulders only.
i) ADULT SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER is any business, agency, or person who,
for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons,
not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble, or associate for the
purpose of engaging in “Specified Sexual Activities” or exposing “Specified Anatomical
Areas
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
AGRICULTURE shall mean general farming, including horticulture, floriculture, dairying,
livestock, poultry raising, farm forestry, and other similar enterprises or uses, provided, however,
agriculture shall not include uses which are industrial in orientation. These include, but shall not
be limited to, sawmills, wood chipping, and commercial composting. (Refer to FARM).
ALLEY is an improved public right-of-way not more than twenty (20) feet in width, nor thirty
(30) feet in right-of-way, and which affords only a secondary means of vehicular access to
abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATION is any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy,
any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams
or girders, or roof, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or
"reconstructed."
ANIMAL, FARM is any animal or fowl customarily raised on a bonafide farm for the
production of income such as goats, rabbits, horses, cows, pigs, chickens, turkeys, sheep, ducks,
and geese or for consumption by the residents of the premises on which the farm is located.
[Ordinance No. 285, 5/4/2015]
ANIMAL, HOUSEHOLD OR DOMESTIC is an animal commonly domesticated as a
companion or pet and kept in a home or yard. Examples include dogs, cats, birds, fish, rabbits,
small rodents and similar animals, and are not used for commercial purposes. Household or
domesticated animals do not present an unusual risk to a person or property and are not
considered farm or wild animals. [Ordinance No. 285, 5/4/2015]
ANIMAL, WILD is any animal not domesticated by humans or any animal which a person is
prohibited from possessing by law. Wild animals shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following: alligator (family); deer (family); opossum (family); badger, wild dog, coyote, wolf
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-6
(family); primate excluding humans (family); bear, raccoon, ferret, skunk, cat (wild family);
lemur, spider (poisonous); lizard (poisonous); and, weasel and marten (family).
APIARY is the assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single location. [Ordinance No.
284, 1/19/2015]
APPEAL is a request or demand for a hearing or review of facts and/or actions in connection
with the public enforcement of this Ordinance as provided for by Act 110 of the Michigan Public
Acts of 2006, as amended. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
ANTENNA shall mean any structure or device used for collecting, receiving, or transmitting
electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to: directional antennas, such as panels,
microwave dishes, satellite dishes; omni-directional antennas, such as whip antennas; and, other
similar devices.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE is that feature of a building generally described as a cornice,
eave, gutter, sill, lintel, bay window, chimney, and/or decorative ornament.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION is a building and premises wherein gasoline, oil,
grease, tires, batteries and other automobile supplies and accessories may be sold at retail and
installed, and where minor vehicle repair services may be rendered; however, major vehicle
repair is not permitted. An automobile service station may include the retail sale of convenience
food items typically consumed on a daily basis, newspapers, and sundry goods. See VEHICLE
REPAIR. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
B- Definitions
BAR (LOUNGE and PUB) is a commercial establishment in which the sole or primary activity
is the on-site sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. Secondary activities include the
preparation and sale of food for on-site consumption. Subordinate activities may, with the
consent of the City Council as required by the Liquor Control Act, include provisions for a live
band or singer, recorded music, video presentations, dance floor, or similar activities. [Refer to
RESTAURANT.]
BASEMENT (CELLAR) as defined by the City’s Building Code is that portion of a building in
which more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter of the floor level is more than four (4)
feet below grade, or a floor that at any point is more than eight (8) feet below grade.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT is a single family dwelling in which transient
guests are provided a sleeping room, breakfast, and access to bathing and lavatory facilities in
return for payment.
BEDROOM is a room in a dwelling unit used, or intended to be used, for sleeping purposes by
human beings.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-7
BERM is a mound of earth graded, shaped, and improved with landscaping in such a fashion as
to be used for visual and/or audible screening purposes.
BILLBOARD - Refer to Article 7, Section 7.20, for definition of billboard.
BOARD OF APPEALS - Refer to ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS (ZBA).
BOAT LOT is a small, water oriented parcel traditionally related by legal description and/or
ownership to an adjoining (parent) parcel, but physically separated from the parent parcel by a
public or private street or street right-of-way. Notwithstanding the above, boat lots may be sold
or otherwise transferred such that they are no longer connected to a parent parcel. Boat lots are
used by the residents of the parent parcel or other owner for access to the adjoining body of
water. [Ordinance No. 202, 8/18/03]
BREEZEWAY is a covered structure attached to and connecting an accessory building
(typically a garage) with the principal building. A breezeway may be unenclosed or enclosed.
For purposes of determining yard requirements, the connected structure shall be considered an
integral unit of the principal building.
BUFFER ZONE is a strip of land required between certain zoning districts or land uses reserved
for plant material, berms, walls, or fencing to serve as a transition area or barrier between zoning
districts or land uses. Buffer zones are employed to:
a) Mitigate negative impacts between zoning districts or land uses involving, but not limited
to, such impacts as noise, excessive glare, surface water drainage, snow storage, fugitive
dust emissions, visual concerns, trespass, pedestrian and vehicular safety, and property
values.
b) Enhance the visual and aesthetic quality of specific developments and the City as a whole
through placement of landscape, maintenance of view corridors, preservation of light and
air, and similar factors which result in an improved quality of life.
BUILDING is any structure which is used or erected for the supporting, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, or personal property, or for carrying on business activities or other similar uses.
This shall include tents, sheds, garages, greenhouses, accessory buildings, or vehicles situated on
private property and used for purposes of a building. When a building is divided into separate
parts by one (1) or more unpierced walls extending from the ground up, each part is deemed a
separate building, except as regards minimum requirements for side yards as hereinafter
provided. Pursuant to this definition, all buildings shall meet the requirements of this Ordinance
and appropriate building and health codes based on the use of the building.
BUILDING, EXISTING - Refer to EXISTING BUILDING
BUILDING HEIGHT (Including MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT FOR SINGLE AND
TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS) is the vertical distance from the finished grade at the perimeter
of the building to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-8
roof, and to the midpoint between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof subject to
the following standards (see Figure 2-1):
a) Finished grade for height purposes shall be based on the average of the finished grade of
each building wall. Minor filling is permitted when establishing a finished grade when
accomplished in compliance with Section 3.30, h).
b) When calculating roof height, the highest point of the roof shall be used.
c) When eaves are not of the same height throughout the building, the average eave height
of the building as a whole shall be determined and used for purposes of measuring
permitted building
height. The
average eave
height of the
building as a whole
shall be calculated
based on the height
of the longest eave
per each wall. In
the event the eaves
along a wall are of
similar length, the
lowest eave height
shall be used for
purposes of
averaging.
d) Gable ends, dormers, or eyebrow window eaves shall not be used in calculating average
eave height.
e) No single-family or two-family dwelling shall contain more than 2.5 stories.
f) No portion of a single-family or two-family dwelling possessing a mansard, gable, hip,
gambrel or other roof with a peak ridge shall exceed a maximum, constructed, height
(from the finished grade to the highest point of the roof) of forty-two feet and six inches
(42'6"). Chimneys, vents, and other minor items, as approved by the Zoning
Administrator, may extend above the height of the built roof by two feet and six inches
(2'6").
BUILDING INSPECTOR shall mean the Building Inspector of the City of Ferrysburg, or
his/her authorized representative.
BUILDING LINE is a horizontal line generally parallel to a front, rear, or side lot line which is
located at the point of the foundation of a principal building nearest to the front, rear, or side lot
line.
Figure 2-1: Building Height
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-9
BUILDING, MAIN (also referred to as BUILDING, PRINCIPAL) is a building in which the
principal or main use of the lot on which it is situated occurs.
BUILDING PERMIT FOR ZONING COMPLIANCE (also referred to as a CERTIFICATE
of ZONING COMPLIANCE) is a document signed by the Zoning Administrator as a condition
precedent to the commencement of a use or the construction and/or reconstruction of a structure
or building which acknowledges that the use, structure, or building complies with the provisions
of this Ordinance. In lieu of a separate instrument, and at the discretion of the City, a Building
Permit for Zoning Compliance may be combined as part of a bonafide building permit.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE - Refer to SETBACK LINE.
BUSINESS CENTER – A development with two or more attached or detached businesses, on
one or more lots, designed as a unit with identifiable boundaries, and served by common features
such as shared access and/or parking facilities and signs. Configuration and design shall include
such features as: identification by a single name or consistent architectural style, and the
appearance or public impression that the center acts as a single facility. This definition includes
the term “shopping center.”[Ordinance No. 232, 8/21/06; Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
CDefinitions
CANOPY TREE is a deciduous tree whose mature height and branch structure provide foliage
primarily on the upper half of the tree. The purpose of a canopy tree is to provide shade to
adjacent ground areas.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE -See BUILDING PERMIT FOR ZONING
COMPLIANCE.
CHILD CARE CENTER - See DAY CARE CENTER.
CHURCH (TEMPLE, SYNAGOGUE) is a building used principally for religious worship, but
the word "church" shall not include or mean an undertaker's chapel or funeral building or a
school providing pre-school or K through 12th grade instruction.
CLINIC-See MEDICAL CLINIC
CLUB is a nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues and
are organized for some common purpose, but not a group organized solely or primarily to render
a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS – The S, Service, CC Core Commercial and GC General
Commercial zoning districts. [Ordinance No. 273, 12/19/11]
COMMERCIAL USE is a use which relates to the use of property in connection with the
purchase, sale, barter, display, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or personal services or
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-10
the maintenance of offices or recreational or amusement enterprises, or garage, basement,
moving, or estate sales conducted on residential premises for more than six (6) calendar days
during a given one (1) year period. Commercial use shall not include a public recreational use
even though a fee may be charged for the use.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES shall mean licensed
commercial telecommunication services, including cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR),
paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public.
COMMISSION shall mean the City of Ferrysburg Planning Commission, also referred to as
"the Commission".
COMMON LAND is a parcel or parcels of land with the improvements thereon, the use,
maintenance, and enjoyment of which are intended to be shared by the owners and/or occupants
of individual building units in a subdivision, condominium, planned unit development, or similar
land development arrangement.
COMMON OPEN SPACE is an unoccupied area within a development which is reserved
primarily for the leisure and recreational use of all the development residents, owners, and
occupants, and generally owned and maintained in common by them, often through a
homeowners, or similar, association.
COMMUNICATION TOWER (Also referred to as BROADCAST TOWER and TOWER)
is a public or private ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof taller
than fifteen (15) feet, including supporting lines, cables, wires, braces, and masts, intended
primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna, meteorological device, broadcast device, or
similar apparatus above grade. A communication tower may or may not be regulated by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). A Single-User Tower is a tower to which are
affixed only the antennas of a single user, although the tower may be designed to accommodate
the antennas and/or devices of multiple users as required by this Ordinance. A Multi-User
Tower is a tower to which are affixed the antennas of more than one (1) commercial wireless
telecommunication service provider or governmental entity.
COMMUNICATION TOWER BUILDING is a building accessory to a communication tower
and used to house equipment necessary for the operation of the tower and associated antenna or
other device.
CONDOMINIUM DEFINITIONS [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
a) CONDOMINIUM ACT refers to Michigan Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended.
b) CONDOMINIUM, GENERAL COMMON ELEMENT means the common elements
other than the limited common elements. General common elements are for the use of all
condominium owners.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-11
c) CONDOMINIUM, LIMITED COMMON ELEMENT means a portion of the
common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the
condominium owners.
d) CONDOMINIUM, MASTER DEED is the condominium document recording the
condominium project as approved by the City Council to which is attached as exhibits
and incorporated by reference the approved bylaws for the project and the approved
condominium subdivision plan for the project (See also Condominium, Consolidating
Master Deed).
e) CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN is the site, survey, and utility plans, and
sections showing the existing and proposed structures and improvements including the
location thereof on the land. The plan shall follow and show all aspects as required under
the Condominium Act and this Ordinance.
f) CONDOMINIUM UNIT is that portion of the condominium project designed and
intended for separate ownership as described in the Master Deed, regardless of whether it
is intended for residential, office, industrial, business, recreational, use as a time-share
unit, or any other type of use.
g) CONDOMINIUM UNIT SITE is the area designating the perimeter within which the
condominium unit must be built. After construction of the condominium unit, the
balance of the condominium unit site shall become a limited common element. The term
"condominium unit site" shall be equivalent to the term "lot," for purposes of determining
compliance of a site condominium subdivision with provisions of this Ordinance
pertaining to minimum lot size, minimum lot width, maximum lot coverage, and
maximum floor area ratio.
CONSTRUCTION is the building, erection, alteration, repair, renovation, demolition, or
removal of any building, structure, or structural foundation; or the physical excavation, filling,
and grading of any lot other than normal maintenance.
CONVALESCENT HOME (NURSING HOME) is a home for the care of the aged, infirm, or
a place of rest for those suffering serious bodily disorders necessitating twenty four (24) hour
care, wherein three (3) or more persons are cared for. The home shall also conform to, and
qualify for license under, applicable State law (Act No. 139 of the Public Acts of 1956, as
amended, being sections 331.651 to 331.660 of the Compiled Laws of 1948).
COUNCIL shall mean the City Council of the City of Ferrysburg.
CUL-DE-SAC is a dead end public or private street, generally short in distance, which
terminates in a circular or semi-circular section of street allowing for vehicle turnaround.
CURB LEVEL is the grade elevation of the curb in front of the center of a building, or proposed
building, or the elevation of the traveled street in the event no curb exists.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-12
DDefinitions
DAY CARE CENTER (CHILD CARE CENTER) is a facility, other than a private residence,
licensed by the State of Michigan, in which one (1) or more preschool or school age children are
given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, and where a
parent or legal guardian is not immediately available to the child. Day care center includes a
facility which provides care for not less than two (2) consecutive weeks, regardless of the
number of hours of care per day. [Refer also to ADULT FOSTER CARE and FOSTER
CARE.]
Day care center does not include:
a) A Sunday school, a vacation Bible school, or a religious class that is conducted by a
religious organization where children are in attendance for not greater than four (4) hours
per day for an indefinite period, or not greater than eight (8) hours per day for a period
not to exceed four (4) weeks, during a twelve (12) month period, or a facility operated by
a religious organization where children are cared for not greater than four (4) hours,
while persons responsible for the children are attending religious classes or services.
b) A commercial enterprise, such as a grocery store, wherein temporary child care is
provided on-site for the children of the parents or guardians who are conducting business
within the confines of the commercial enterprise coincident with the period of child care.
c) A place of employment wherein temporary child care is provided for the children of the
parents or guardians who are working for the place of employment coincident with the
hours of employment for those parents or guardians.
The above definitions do not preclude compliance of child care operations with other applicable
local, state, and federal regulations.
DAY CARE HOME, FAMILY is a single-family dwelling occupied as such in which one (1)
but less than seven (7) children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than
twenty four (24) hours per day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children or
adults related by blood, marriage, or adoption to an adult member of the family occupying the
single-family dwelling.
DAY CARE HOME, GROUP is a single-family dwelling occupied as such in which seven (7)
but less than twelve (12) children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than
twenty four (24) hours per day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children and/or
adults related by blood, marriage, or adoption to an adult member of the family occupying the
single-family dwelling.
DECELERATION LANE is an added roadway lane that permits vehicles to slow down and
leave the main vehicle stream before turning.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-13
DENSITY, unless otherwise stated, is the number of dwelling units situated on or to be
developed per gross acre of land.
DETENTION FACILITY is a facility designed for holding storm water runoff for a short
period of time and then releasing it to the natural watercourse where it returns to the hydrologic
cycle.
DEVELOPMENT is any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including,
but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, or drilling operations.
DISTRICT is a portion of the City within which a certain use or uses of land and/or buildings
are permitted and within which certain regulations, standards, and requirements apply under the
provisions of this Ordinance. District may also be referred to as a Zone District. The location of
zone districts shall be as depicted on the Official Zone District Map of the City of Ferrysburg.
DRAINAGEWAYS AND STREAMS are existing permanent or intermittent water courses.
DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESS is a business establishment so developed that its retail or
service character is wholly or partially dependent on providing a driveway approach and service
windows or facilities for vehicles in order to serve patrons while in the vehicle.
DRIVEWAY is an improved public or private passageway providing vehicular ingress to, and
vehicular egress from, a public or private road to or from a lot, parcel, or building on abutting
grounds.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY is a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units
designed for exclusive use and occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of
each other.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY is a building designed for exclusive use and occupancy as a
dwelling unit by one (1) family.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE is a series of three (3) or more attached dwelling units sharing a
common wall and designed in row (linear) fashion with all units having a ground floor location
and no units above or below. Each unit is designed with an individual entry for exclusive use
and occupancy by a household or family living independently of each other. The dwelling units
within townhouses may function as apartments and/or as owner-occupied units. Townhouses
may also be referred to as ROW HOUSING or GARDEN APARTMENTS. [Ordinance No.
265, 10/4/2010]
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY (DUPLEX) is a building containing two (2) dwelling units
designed for exclusive use and occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT is a building, or part thereof, providing complete living facilities, including
provisions for sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation, for exclusive use by one (1) family, with
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-14
no ingress or egress through any other dwelling unit. In no case shall a recreational vehicle,
trailer coach, automobile chassis, tent or portable building be considered a dwelling unit. In
cases of mixed occupancy where a building is used in part as a dwelling unit, the part so used
shall be deemed a dwelling unit for purposes of this Ordinance and shall comply with the
provisions thereof relative to dwellings.
DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED is a dwelling unit attached to one or more dwelling units by
common major structural elements or features such as a wall, garage, carport, breezeway, deck,
or like feature.
DWELLING UNIT, DETACHED is a free-standing dwelling unit which has no attachment to
any other dwelling unit.
EDefinitions
EASEMENT is a grant of one or more of the property rights by a property owner to and/or for
use by the public, or another person or entity.
EFFICIENCY UNIT is an attached residential living unit consisting of one (1) room, exclusive
of bathroom (but having access to a shared bathroom), kitchen, hallway, or dining area, and
providing not less than the minimum floor area required by this Ordinance (Section 9.150 b)).
ELDER CARE ASSISTED HOUSING (HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY) is a residential
facility that provides room, board and supervised care to unrelated, non-transient individuals 60
years of age or older or couples where either the husband or wife is 60 years of age or older. The
facility shall be licensed as a “Home for the Aged” by the State Department of Public Health
under Article 17 of the Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978
(MCL 333.20101 et seq., MSA 14.15 (20101)), as amended. This does not include a
development that contains a convalescent or nursing home as licensed under Act No. 139 of the
Public Acts of 1956, as amended, being sections 331.651 to 331.660 of the Compiled Laws of
1948; or a mental hospital for mental patients licensed under sections 51 and 52 of Act No. 151
of the Public Acts of 1923, as amended, being sections 330.61 and 330.62 of the Compiled Laws
of 1948. [Refer to CONVALESCENT HOME (NURSING HOME).]
ERECTED shall mean built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical
operations on the premises which are required for construction purposes. Excavation, fill,
drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection.
ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICE is the erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal departments or commissions, or private entities under public
regulation, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems, or communication systems, including poles, wires, fiber optic systems,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, (but not including
buildings and storage yards) reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by each
public utility, municipal department or commission, or private entity under public regulation for
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-15
the public health, safety, or general welfare. Essential services shall not include communication
towers or antennas or wind energy conversion systems (WECS). [Ordinance No. 265,
10/4/2010]
ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICE BUILDING is a building or structure accessory to an
essential public service, such as a drop-off station for residential recyclables, vehicle garage,
telephone exchange building, electricity transformer station or substation, gas regulator station,
and facilities of a similar nature.
ESSENTIAL PUBLIC SERVICE STORAGE YARD is an outdoor storage area accessory to
an essential public service.
EXCAVATION is any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground
care.
EXISTING BUILDING is a building existing, or a building for which a legal building permit
has been issued and the foundations are in place prior to the adoption of this Ordinance.
EXISTING USE is the use of land, the use of waters adjacent to land, and the use of buildings
and structures existing prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, or for which use approval has
been granted according to the provisions of this Ordinance.
FDefinitions
FAMILY
a) An individual or group of two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, including those related as foster children, who are domiciled together as a
single, domestic, non-profit housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or,
b) A collective number of individuals domiciled together in one dwelling unit whose
relationship is of a continuing, non-transient, distinct domestic character and who are
cooking and living as a single, non-profit housekeeping unit. This definition shall not
include a penal institution, halfway house, correctional facility, society, club, fraternity,
sorority, association, lodge, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose
domestic relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for an anticipated limited
duration of a school term, jail or prison term, or terms of other similar determinable
period.
FARM means the land, plants, animals, buildings, structures, including ponds used for
agricultural or aquacultural activites, machinery, equipment, and other appurtenances used in the
commercial production of farm products. [Ordinance No. 285, 5/4/2015]
FARM OPERATION means the operation and management of a farm or a condition or activity
that occurs at any time as necessary on a farm in connection with the commercial production,
harvesting, and storage of farm products, and includes, but is not limited to:
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-16
a) Marketing produce at roadside stands or farm markets.
b) The generation of noise, odors, dust, fumes, and other associated conditions.
c) The operation of machinery and equipment necessary for a farm including, but not
limited to, irrigation and drainage systems and pumps and on-farm grain dryers, and the
movement of vehicles, machinery, equipment, and farm products and associated inputs
necessary for farm operations on the roadway as authorized by the Michigan vehicle
code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being sections 257.1 to 257.923 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws.
d) Field preparation and ground and aerial seeding and spraying.
e) The application of chemical fertilizers or organic materials, conditioners, liming
materials, or pesticides.
f) Use of alternative pest management techniques.
g) The fencing, feeding, watering, sheltering, transportation, treatment, use, handling and
care of farm animals.
h) The management, storage, transport, utilization, and application of farm by-products,
including manure or agricultural wastes.
i) The conversion from a farm operation activity to other farm operation activities.
j) The employment and use of labor.
[Ordinance No. 285, 5/4/2015]
FARM PRODUCT means those plants and animals useful to human beings produced by
agriculture and includes, but is not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, field
crops, dairy and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, cervidae, livestock, including
breeding and grazing, equine, fish, and other aquacultural products, bees and bee products,
berries, herbs, fruits, vegetables, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, trees and tree products,
mushrooms, and other similar products, or any other product which incorporates the use of food,
feed, fiber, or fur, as determined by the Michigan Commission of Agriculture. [Ordinance No.
285, 5/4/2015]
FENCE is an accessory structure intended for use as a barrier to property ingress or egress; a
screen to block views or noise; a screen serving to separate incompatible uses; a screen to
provide a barrier or buffer between uses; and/or, a screen for decorative use. In addition to man
made material, a fence may include hedges, shrubs, or other similar plant material if so arranged,
designed, and of a character suitable to accomplish the intended purpose of a fence. Fence shall
also include any associated gate.
FILLING is the depositing or dumping of any matter onto, or into, the ground, except common
household gardening and ground care. Filling shall not constitute a hazard to the receiving soils
or groundwater.
FINANCIAL SERVICES shall mean banks, savings and loan institutions, credit unions,
brokerage houses, and similar financial establishments.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-17
FLOOD OR FLOODING is a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
a) The overflow of inland waters.
b) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA is land which on the basis of available floodplain information is
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) is an official map of the City of Ferrysburg on
which the Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the flood risk premium zones applicable to the City.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Administration (FEMA) containing local flood profiles, the base flood water
surface elevation, and may include a Flood Hazard Boundary - Floodway Map.
FLOODPLAIN is any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
also Flood).
FLOODWAY is the channel of a river, creek, or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
which must be reserved in order to
discharge a flood.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS shall be
the sum of the horizontal areas of
each story of a building, measured
from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls, exclusive of uninhabitable
attics or basements having headroom
of seven (7) feet or less. (See Figure
2-2)
FLOOR AREA, RESIDENTIAL
shall be considered for the purpose
of computing the floor area of a
residential dwelling unit, the sum of
the horizontal areas of each story of a
dwelling unit, measured from the
interior faces of the exterior walls,
exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, carports, breezeways, and
enclosed or unenclosed porches. (See Section 9.150 b)).
FLOOR AREA, USABLE shall be that area used for the sale of merchandise and services, or
for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers. The floor area which is used or intended to be
Figure 2-2: Floor Area
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-18
used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, stairways, elevator
shafts, restrooms, mechanical areas, or for utilities for sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from
the computation of usable floor area. Usable floor area shall be measured from the interior faces
of the exterior walls, and shall include total usable floor area for all floors. (See Figure 2-2)
FOOD shall include any substance taken into and assimilated by an animal to keep it alive and
enable it to grow and repair tissue.
FOSTER FAMILY HOME is a private home in which 1 but not more than 4 minor children,
who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or marriage, or who are not
placed in the household under the Michigan Adoption Code (chapter X of the probate code of
1939, 1939 PA 288), are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for 4 or more days a
week, for 2 or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
FOSTER FAMILY GROUP HOME means a private home in which more than 4 but fewer
than 7 minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or
marriage, or who are not placed in the household under the Michigan Adoption Code (chapter X
of the probate code of 1939, 1939 PA 288), are provided care for 24 hours a day, for 4 or more
days a week, for 2 or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
FRONTAGE is the continuous linear distance along which a parcel of land fronts on a public or
private street, measured along the line where the property abuts the public street right-of-way or
private road easement.
FRONTAGE (SERVICE) DRIVE (ROAD)
is a public or private drive which generally
parallels a public street between the right-ofway
and the front building setback line.
Frontage roads can be one-way or bidirectional
in design. The frontage road
provides specific access points to private
properties while maintaining separation
between the street and adjacent land uses. A
road which is directly connected to parking or
is used as a maneuvering aisle within a
parking area is not considered a frontage road.
(See Figure 2-3)
GDefinitions
GARAGE is the part of a main building or an accessory building used primarily for the parking
or storage of vehicles necessary in connection with the permitted use of the main building, and
customarily associated therewith. A garage, as defined herein, shall not involve vehicle
servicing for compensation. [Refer to VEHICLE REPAIR.]
GARAGE, PUBLIC - Refer to VEHICLE REPAIR
Figure 2-3: Frontage Drive
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-19
GARAGE SALE - The sale of miscellaneous used items commonly associated with residential
use, conducted on a residential property. Garage sales shall not include the sale of a single item
or commodity. The term “garage sale” includes “yard sale,” “rummage sale” and similar terms
commonly used to describe sales of used items conducted on a residential property. [Ordinance
No. 265, 10/4/2010]
GARBAGE - Any decomposed, rotting, rotten, putrid, or similar organic matter including, but
not limited to, animal or vegetable waste, animal or vegetable by-products in a decomposed or
rotting state, or other similar organic matter and materials.
GARDEN CENTER (NURSERY) is a non-farm commercial establishment primarily
associated with the retail sale of trees, fruits, vegetables, shrubbery, plants, seeds, topsoil, humus,
fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment and other home garden supplies and
equipment.
GASOLINE STATION is a business that primarily sells vehicle fuels to the motoring public
and which does not provide other vehicle-related services except as may be permitted by this
Ordinance. A Gasoline Station may include the sale of convenience food items and sundry
commodities. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
GATE - Refer to FENCE.
GENERALLY ACCEPTED AGRICULTURAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES means
those practices as defined by the Michigan Commission of Agriculture. The commission shall
give due consideration to available Michigan Department of Agriculture information and written
recommendations from the Michigan State University College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources Extension and the Agricultural Experiment Station in cooperation with the United
States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service and the Consolidated
Farm Service Agency, the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, and other professional
and industry organizations. [Ordinance No. 285, 5/4/2015]
GLARE is the effect produced at the lot line by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance,
discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
GRADE (GRADIENT) is the rate of incline or decline expressed as a percent. For example, a
rise of twenty-five (25) feet in a horizontal distance of one-hundred (100) feet would be
expressed as a grade of twenty-five (25) percent.
GRADE, (FINISHED GRADE) is the average finished ground elevation at the center of all
walls of a building established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height
of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the
building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be
determined by averaging the lowest and highest grade elevations in an area within five (5) feet of
the foundation line of a building or structure. [Refer to BUILDING HEIGHT].
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-20
GRADE, NATURAL is the elevation of the ground
surface in its natural state, before construction begins.
GREENBELT is a vegetated strip of land no less than
five (5') feet in width (or greater if required by other
provisions of this Ordinance) which, except for
plantings and fencing, shall not be used for placement
of structures. In certain instances, greenbelts shall
contain landscaping of such type and density to screen
adjacent properties from either complete or partial
view. A greenbelt is often referred to as a Landscape
Screen (see Figure 2-4). [Refer to LANDSCAPE
SCREEN].
HDefinitions
HIVE is a honeybee hive, being a nucleus colony or a standard size colony. [Ordinance No. 284,
1/19/15]
HOME OCCUPATION is a gainful occupation conducted in a dwelling unit as an activity
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the building as a dwelling unit and meeting the
required Home Occupation Requirements of this Ordinance.
HOSPITAL is a state licensed medical establishment whose facilities provide in-patient and outpatient
accommodation and care, a wide range of medical and surgical care, and other in-patient,
out-patient, and emergency health services for sick, ailing or injured persons; and including those
related facilities as examination rooms, rehabilitation facilities, laboratories, outpatient
departments, training facilities, central services and staff offices and residences which are
integral with and accessory to the principal use of the establishment.
HOTEL is a building in which transient lodging or boarding are offered to the public for
compensation. The design of a hotel is typically such that all patrons enter the building via a
central or main lobby area and move to respective sleeping rooms without having to exit the
building. Unlike a motel, patron parking is often concentrated to a confined location rather than
dispersed throughout the site. A hotel may contain restaurants, gift and specialty shops, and
lounges provided these uses are clearly accessory to the hotel. A hotel shall not be considered or
construed to be a bed and breakfast establishment, multiple family dwelling, motel, or similar
facility.
I Definitions
INDOOR RECREATION ESTABLISHMENT is a privately owned facility designed and
equipped for the conduct of sports, amusement or leisure time activities and other customary
recreational activities indoors (within an enclosed building) and operated as a business and open
Figure 2-4: Greenbelt
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-21
for use by the public for a fee, such as fitness centers, bowling alleys, billiard establishments, and
racquetball and tennis clubs. Indoor recreation establishments do not include video
establishments or video arcades. [Refer to VIDEO ESTABLISHMENTS.]
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS – The LI Light Industrial zoning districts (LI-1, LI-2, and LI-3)
and the PI, Port Industrial District. [Ordinance No. 273, 12/19/11]
INOPERABLE VEHICLE is a motor vehicle which is no longer able to propel itself, fails to
comply with the laws of the State of Michigan regulating safety equipment for motor vehicles, is
significantly dismantled, or is unlicensed.
INSTITUTIONAL USES are churches, synagogues, temples, schools, hospitals, libraries,
museums, governmental uses (e.g. City Hall, Police Department, Fire Department, etc.) and
other similar public or semi-public uses. Institutional uses do not include nursing homes,
convalescent homes, elder care facilities, adult foster care facilities, and half-way houses. [Refer
to PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND
USES.]
J Definitions
JUNK (SALVAGE MATERIAL) shall mean any worn out or discarded materials including,
but not necessarily limited to, yard debris, scrap metal, scrap paper, scrap lumber, other scrap
and discarded materials, and any inoperable motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, or products.
Junk includes the above materials whether they are to be landfilled, recycled, sold, or used in
some other way. Junk shall not include garbage. [Refer to GARBAGE.]
JUNK YARD (RECYCLING/SALVAGE YARD) is any land or building used for the storage,
sorting, dismantling, baling, salvaging, recycling, and/or sale of junk. Junk yard shall not
include residential or municipal garden or leaf composting, a municipal dump or municipal
landfill, or drop-off stations for residential recyclables.
KDefinitions
KENNEL is any land, building, or structure where four (4) or more cats and/or dogs, including
any combination of the two animals, over six (6) months of age are either permanently or
temporarily boarded, housed, bred, or sold.
KEYHOLE is the condition in which one shoreline lot or parcel serves as a water body access
point for several backlots (lots which do not abut the shoreline) or for the funneling of
pedestrians and water craft originating from locations other than the shoreline lot over which
access to a water body will occur. [Ordinance No. 202, 8/18/03]
LDefinitions
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-22
LANDSCAPE SCREEN is a greenbelt used to filter or block the internal views of a site, or site
feature, from the public right-of-way or adjoining properties. A landscape screen may also
function as a transitional buffer between land uses and/or adjoining parcels. [Refer to
GREENBELT].
LOADING SPACE is an off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings,
for the temporary parking of a vehicle while loading and unloading people, merchandise, or
material.
LOT is a parcel of land separated from other parcels of land by description on a recorded plat or
by metes and bounds description, including a condominium unit site in a site condominium
subdivision; having frontage upon a public or private street and having sufficient size to comply
with the requirements of the Ordinance for minimum area, setbacks, coverage, and open space.
A lot shall be specifically designated as part of the public record. (See Figure 2-5).
LOT AREA is the total horizontal area
included within lot lines. Where the front
lot line is the centerline of a public or
private street, the lot area shall not include
that part which is in the public right-ofway
or governed by easement.
LOT, CORNER is a lot where the
interior angle of two adjacent sides at the
intersection of two streets is less than one
hundred and thirty five (135) degrees. A
lot abutting upon a curved street or streets
shall be considered a corner lot if the
curve is of less radius than one hundred
and fifty (150) feet, and tangents to the
curve, at the two points where the side lot
lines meet the curve, form an interior
angle of less than one hundred and thirty
five (135) degrees. (See Figure 2-5)
LOT COVERAGE is the percent of a lot
occupied by buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH is the arithmetic average of the shortest and longest distances from the front lot
line to the rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE (THROUGH LOT) is a lot, other than a corner lot, having
frontage on two (2) more or less parallel streets. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, one
(1) street shall be designated as the front street for all lots in the plat (see Figure 2-5). If there are
existing buildings in the same block fronting on one or both of the streets, the required minimum
Figure 2-5: Lot Types
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-23
front yard setback shall be observed on those streets where buildings presently front. [Refer to
LOT, WATERFRONT].
LOT, FLAG is a lot so called due to its resemblance to that of a flag (flag shape). The street
frontage of a flag lot, and width, are undersized and nonconforming (this being referred to as the
“pole” portion of the flag lot). Eventually, the width of the interior portion of the lot expands to
a size which normally equals or exceeds lot width requirements (this is the “flag” portion of the
lot). [Ordinance No. 283, 10/6/14]
LOT FRONTAGE is the length of the front lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR is a lot other than a corner lot or double frontage lot having only one lot line
fronting on a street (see Figure 2-5).
LOT LINE is the line bounding a lot or parcel.
LOT LINES [Refer also to definitions of
REQUIRED SETBACKS and YARDS] (See Figure
2-6)
a) Front lot line: In the case of an interior lot,
abutting upon one (1) public or private street,
the front lot line shall mean the line
separating the lot from the street right-ofway.
[Refer also to Paragraph d), following.]
b) Rear lot line: That lot line which is opposite
and most distant from the front lot line. In the
case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a
line at least ten (10) feet in length, entirely
within the lot, and generally parallel to and
most distant from the front lot line.
c) Side lot line: Any lot line not a front or rear lot
line. A side lot line separating a lot from a
public or private street is a side street lot line.
A side lot line separating a lot from another lot
or lots is an interior side lot line. (See
definition of Required Setback.)
d) Building Orientation for Lots with Multiple Street Frontage or Flag Lots - [Refer
also to SETBACK, REQUIRED] - In the case of a lot fronting on public or private
right-of-way on two or more sides, flag lots or other cases in which the above definitions
do not apply, the Zoning Administrator shall designate front, rear, and side lot lines for
building and fence orientation purposes, based on the following considerations:
Figure 2-6: Lot Lines
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-24
1) Location and orientation of existing or proposed buildings on the lot in question
in relation to existing buildings on properties in the same general neighborhood.
2) Location and impact of existing vegetation, water, or other natural features
affecting the location of buildings or structures on the lot in question.
[Ordinance No. 283, 10/6/14]
LOT, NONCONFORMING is a lot of record which does not meet the dimensional
requirements of this Ordinance.
LOT OF RECORD is any parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or
map on file with the Ottawa County Register of Deeds records as of the date of adoption of this
Ordinance or any relevant amendment thereto which would affect the subject lot, which actually
exists as shown or any part of a parcel held in record ownership separate from that of the
remainder.
LOT, THROUGH (also called a double frontage lot) is an interior lot having frontage on two
(2) more or less parallel streets.
LOT, WATERFRONT is a lot with one or more of its lot lines adjoining a stream, river, or
lake. [Ordinance No. 273, 12/19/11]
LOT WIDTH is the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the front lot
line at the front lot line and at the required front setback line. For lots fronting on a cul-de-sac,
lot width shall mean the horizontal distance between side lot lines measured parallel to the front
lot line at the at the required front setback line. See SETBACK LINE.
MDefinitions
MANUFACTURED HOME is a mobile home, residential building, dwelling unit, dwelling
room or rooms, or a building component which is designed for long-term residential use and is
wholly or substantially constructed at an off-site location, transported to a site, and erected.
[Refer also to Section 3.200, Standards Applicable to Single-Family Dwellings.]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK (MOBILE HOME PARK) is a parcel or tract of land
under the control of a person upon which three (3) or more manufactured homes are located on a
continual non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of
whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street,
equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a manufactured
home. [Refer to Section 3.200, Standards Applicable to Single-Family Dwellings.]
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME SUBDIVISION is a platted or site condominium
residential development consisting of manufactured or mobile homes located on individual,
separately-owned lots or condominium units. [Refer to Section 3.200, Standards Applicable to
Single-Family Dwellings.]
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-25
MAP - Refer to ZONING MAP.
MASSAGE is the rubbing or kneading of body parts, usually with the hands, in order to
stimulate circulation and make muscles or joints supple and/or to relieve tension. Massage shall
not include any touching or other stimulation of male or female genitals or female breasts.
Massage does not preclude necessary medical treatments performed on any part of the human
body if carried out by, or under the direction of, medical practitioners including physicians,
chiropractors, and associated medical professionals licensed by the State of Michigan.
MASSAGE CLINIC (Not to include Adult Massage Parlor) is an establishment where for any
form of consideration or gratuity, massage services are provided by a licensed medical
practitioner including physicians, chiropractors, or persons under the direction of a licensed
medical practitioner, and massage therapists who are certified members of the American
Massage Therapy Association, International Myomassethics Federation, or any other recognized
massage association with equivalent professional membership standards.
MASTER DEED, AND CONSOLIDATING MASTER DEED - (See CONDOMINIUM,
MASTER DEED).
MASTER PLAN shall refer to the City of Ferrysburg Master Plan adopted by the City
according to the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (Act 33 of 2008). and shall include any
amendments or updates thereto. [Ord. No. 265, 10/4/2010]
MEDICAL CLINIC is an establishment where human patients are admitted for examination
and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, chiropractors, or similar professionals on an
out-patient basis. A medical clinic may incorporate customary laboratories and pharmacies
necessary or incidental to its operation.
MINI-WAREHOUSE (SELF STORAGE WAREHOUSE) is a building or group of buildings
in a controlled-access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual,
compartmentalized, and controlled-access stalls or lockers strictly for the in-door storage of a
customer's non-hazardous goods or wares.
MOBILE HOME is a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical system contained in the structure. Mobile home does not include a recreational vehicle
or motor home. For purposes of this Ordinance, those structures which are called variously
"modular" or "prefabricated", and are preconstructed in some other location and transported to
the housing site, but are built under the standards of a national building code, referred to in the
Michigan State Construction Code, under Act 230 of the P.A. of 1972, are not included in this
definition of mobile home. Such "modular" and "prefabricated" housing, however, shall meet
the general housing standards of this Ordinance and other applicable City codes and ordinances.
[Refer to Section 3.200, Standards Applicable to Single-Family Dwellings.]
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-26
MOBILE HOME PARK- Refer to MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
MOBILE HOME SITE OR SPACE is a portion of the mobile home park set aside and clearly
designated for use by a specific mobile home.
MODULAR HOUSING UNIT (PREFABRICATED) is a dwelling unit constructed solely
within a factory, as a single unit, or in various sized modules or components, which are then
transported by truck or other means to a site where they are assembled on a permanent
foundation to form a dwelling unit, and meeting all codes and regulations applicable to
conventional single-family home construction. [Refer to Section 3.200, Standards Applicable
to Single-Family Dwellings.]
MOTEL (MOTOR COURT) is a series of attached, semi-detached, or detached rental units
each containing a bedroom, bathroom, and closet space in which transient, overnight, lodging or
boarding are offered to the public for compensation. The design of a motel is oriented to the
public traveling by motor vehicle with individual sleeping rooms exiting directly to the outside
with patron parking located at or near each room exit. A motel may contain restaurants, gift and
specialty shops, and lounges provided these uses are clearly accessory to the motel.
MOTOR HOME is a self-propelled, licensed vehicle prefabricated on its own chassis, intended
for recreational activities and temporary occupancy.
MUNICIPAL PARK [Refer to PUBLIC PARK] is a park owned and/or operated by the City
of Ferrysburg, Ottawa County, or other governmental entity.
NDefinitions
NON-CONFORMING USE is the use of a building or of land lawfully existing at the time this
Ordinance, or amendments thereto, became effective but which does not conform with the use
regulations of the district in which it is located.
NON-CONFORMING LOT OF RECORD (SUBSTANDARD LOT) is a lot lawfully existing
at the time this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, became effective and which fails to meet the
minimum area requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE is a structure, or portion thereof, lawfully existing at the
time this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, became effective and which fails to meet the
minimum requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
NURSERY, PLANT MATERIAL (See GARDEN CENTER)
ODefinitions
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-27
OBSCURING SCREEN is a visual barrier between adjacent areas or uses. The screen may
consist of structures, such as a wall or fence, or living plant material. [Refer to LANDSCAPE
SCREEN and GREENBELT].
OCCUPANCY LOAD is the number of individuals who may safely occupy a building or
structure based on the Building Code Standards of the City of Ferrysburg.
OCCUPIED includes the terms arranged, designed, built, altered, converted to, rented, leased,
or intended to be inhabited; not necessarily for dwelling purposes.
OFFSET is the distance between the centerline of driveways or streets across the street from one
another.
OFF-STREET PARKING LOT is a facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with
adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide safe and efficient access for
entrance and exit for the parking of more than two (2) vehicles, provided, however, a driveway
serving a single-family detached dwelling or duplex which is capable of holding more than two
(2) vehicles shall not be considered an off-street parking lot.
OPEN AIR BUSINESS is a retail sales establishment operated substantially in the open air (out
of doors).
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK is the line between upland and bottom land which
persists through successive changes in water levels below which the presence and action of the
water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is markedly distinct from the
upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface soil, and the vegetation.
OUTDOOR FURNACES: Any equipment, device or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is
installed, affixed or situated outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce
heat or energy used as a component of a heating system providing heat for any interior space or
water source. [Ordinance No. 223, 6/6/05]
OUTDOOR RECREATION ESTABLISHMENT is a privately owned facility designed and
equipped for the conduct of sports, amusement, or leisure time activities and other customary
recreational activities outdoors (outside of an enclosed building) and operated as a business and
open for use by the public and/or through membership, including guests thereof. Outdoor
recreational activities include, but are not necessarily limited to, tennis courts, archery ranges,
golf courses, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, marinas, and children's amusement
parks. A user fee may or may not be charged.
PDefinitions
PAD is the disturbed or leveled area on the slope of a dune upon which a portion of a structure
exists. The term includes the areas adjacent to the structure itself used for walkways, driveways,
and other features.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-28
PARAPET WALL is an extension of a building wall above the roof which may serve to screen
roof-mounted mechanical equipment.
PARCEL is a lot described by metes and bounds or described in a recorded plat.
PARKING SPACE (AREA) is a designated stall, open or enclosed, for parking of motor
vehicles.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) is a form of land development comprehensively
planned as an entity via a unitary site plan which permits flexibility in building, siting, usable
open spaces, and the preservation of significant natural features. A planned unit development
may contain a single type of use or mix of uses if provided for by the underlying zone district.
PLANNING COMMISSION is the City of Ferrysburg Planning Commission as duly created
under Act 33 of the Public Acts of 2008, as amended. By official action of the City Council of
the City of Ferrysburg, the powers and duties of the Zoning Board/Commission, as delineated
under Act 110 of the Michigan Public Acts of 2006, as amended, have been transferred to the
Planning Commission. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
PLAT is a map of a subdivision of land.
PONDS AND LAKES are natural or artificial impoundments that retain water year round.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE is a building or structure in which is conducted
the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated.
PRINCIPAL USE is the main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose
for which the premises exist.
PRINCIPAL USE PERMITTED is a use permitted in each zoning district by right.
PRIVATE CLUB is an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of
sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit.
PRIVATE STREET is any street, road or thoroughfare for vehicular traffic which is privately
owned and maintained and which provides the principal means of access to abutting properties.
A private street shall meet the design and construction standards of the City of Ferrysburg.
PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC INSTITUTIONAL BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND
USES are buildings, structures, and uses of governmental agencies and non-profit organizations
including but not limited to office buildings, municipal parking lots, post offices, libraries, and
community centers. [Refer to INSTITUTIONAL USES.]
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE is any primarily undeveloped land, intended for passive recreational
pursuits, within the jurisdiction and control of a governmental agency.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-29
PUBLIC PARK [Refer also to MUNICIPAL PARK] is any undeveloped park, natural area, or
parcel used for passive recreational purposes [e.g. hiking, nature photography, etc.] and any
developed park; playground; beach; outdoor swimming pool; and, other facilities intended for
active recreational pursuits, within the jurisdiction and control of a governmental agency.
PUBLIC PARKING AREA is an open area, other than a street or other public way used for the
parking of automobiles and available for public use whether for a fee, free, or as an
accommodation for clients or customers.
PUBLIC STREET is a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property.
PUBLIC UTILITY is any person, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized
to furnish and furnishing under state or municipal regulations to the public: gas; steam;
electricity; sewage disposal; land line telephone service, telegraph, and cable; transportation; or,
water. Commercial wireless telecommunication service facilities shall not be considered public
utility uses, and are defined separately.
QDefinitions
Reserved for future use.
RDefinitions
RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS are materials defined as radioactive under Michigan
Department of Natural Resources, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or the
United States Environmental Protection Agency regulations for transportation of radioactive
materials or under Ottawa County Health Department regulations, whichever is determined to be
applicable.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is a vehicle intended and designed primarily for recreational
use, such as motor homes, camper trailers, travel trailers, boats, snowmobiles, off-road and all
terrain vehicles, and similar vehicles or trailers. The term "recreational vehicle" shall not include
motorcycles or motorbikes or other similar means of transportation intended primarily for daily
on-street use.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS – The RD, Low Density Dune Residential, RG1, Low Density
Residential, RG2; Medium Density Residential, RG3 High Density Residential and MHP
Manufactured Home Park zoning districts. [Ordinance No. 273, 12/19/11]
RESTAURANT is an establishment in which the sole or primary activity is the preparation and
sale of food for on-site consumption or take-out. Subordinate activities may, with the consent of
the City Council as required by the Liquor Control Act, include provisions for the sale of
alcoholic beverages, including the brewing thereof, for on-site consumption, provided, however,
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-30
the sale of any beverages shall clearly be incidental to the preparation, sale, and consumption of
food.
Subordinate activities may, with the consent of the City Council as required by the Liquor
Control Act, include provisions for a live band or singer, recorded music, video presentations,
dance floor, or similar activities. [Refer to RESTAURANT.]
RETAIL STORE is any building or structure in which the indoor (inside) sales of goods, wares,
or merchandise are sold to the consumer for direct consumption and/or use and not for resale.
RIGHT-OF-WAY is a street, alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established
for passage of persons or vehicles and under the legal authority of the agency having jurisdiction
over the right-of-way.
S Definitions
SALVAGE - Refer to JUNK.
SALVAGE YARD - Refer to JUNK YARD.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA is a device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open
mesh, or bar configured; is in the shape of a shallow dish, parabola, cone or horn. Such a device
shall be used to transmit and/or receive television, radio, or other electromagnetic
communication signals between terrestrially or extraterrestrially-based sources. This definition
includes, but is not limited to, devices commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVRO's
(Television Reception Only satellite antennas), and satellite microwave antennas.
SCREEN is a structure such as a fence, wall, landscape screen, or combination of same,
providing enclosure and a visual barrier between the area enclosed and the adjacent property.
SERVICE DRIVE is a drive which generally parallels the public right-of-way but runs along
the back of a land use which fronts on the public street. A service drive may provide access to
properties on both sides, and vary in width and design. Service drives as defined above are often
used for the delivery and pick-up of goods and merchandise, but may also be used for other
vehicular movement. [Refer to FRONTAGE DRIVE].
SETBACK is the horizontal distance between a front, rear, or side lot line and a building line.
[Refer to SETBACK, REQUIRED and YARD.]
SETBACK LINE is a line, generally parallel to a front, rear, or side lot line, which reflects the
minimum REQUIRED SETBACK for a lot or parcel as specified by underlying zone district
standards. The setback line for a yard abutting a street shall be measured from the street right-ofway
line.
SETBACK, REQUIRED is the required minimum horizontal distance between a front, rear, or
side lot line and a building line, provided, however, this horizontal distance shall be measured
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-31
from the street right-of-way line whenever a yard abuts a public or private street. On lots with
multiple street frontage, such as corner lots, all sides of the lots abutting a street shall be
considered front yards pursuant to required setback. [Separate definitions for condominium
projects are listed under "CONDOMINIUM, SETBACKS." Refer also to LOT LINE. Refer
also to ARTICLE 3, GENERAL PROVISIONS, for information regarding setback from
certain easements.]
SETBACK, PARKING LOT is the required horizontal distance between the improved portion
of a parking lot (e.g. area on which vehicles circulate and park) and the adjacent property line,
excluding necessary and approved driveways.
SHOPPING CENTER See BUSINESS CENTER. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
SHORELINE is the edge of a body of water measured at the ordinary high water mark.
SIGHT DISTANCE is the length of roadway visible to the driver. Generally related to the
distance or time (perception/reaction time) sufficient for the driver to execute a maneuver (turn
from driveway or side street, stop or pass) without striking another vehicle or object in the
roadway.
SIGN - Refer to Article VII, SIGNS, Section 7.20.
SIMILAR shall mean a use or service that is comparable, consistent, corresponding, or
equivalent to the range of uses and services provided for within a zone district in which the use
or service may be placed.
SITE PLAN is a scaled drawing(s) illustrating existing and proposed conditions and containing
the elements required herein as applicable to the proposed development to ensure compliance
with this Ordinance.
SPECIAL LAND USE is a use of land not permitted by right, but, which is permitted within a
particular zoning district after demonstration of compliance with specific special land use
standards. A special land use requires that a special use permit be obtained.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS for purposes of this Ordinance shall be defined as
follows:
a) Less than completely and opaquely covered: (1) human genitals or pubic region; (2)
buttock; and, (3) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely
covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES for the purposes of this Ordinance shall be defined as
follows:
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-32
a) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
b) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy.
c) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female
breast.
STACKING (VEHICULAR) refers to occupied vehicles positioned in a line, either idling or
moving at very slow speeds, while awaiting service at a drive-up window, entry into a wash bay,
entry into a bay for vehicular service, movement as part of a procession, entry to or from a
driveway or roadway, or other function resulting in a line of vehicles awaiting movement.
Vehicular stacking is also referred to as QUEUING.
STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY (6 OR FEWER PERSONS) is a structure
constructed for residential purposes that is licensed by the State pursuant to the Adult Foster
Care Facility Licensing Act (Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1979; MCL 400.701
et seq., as amended) or the Child Care Organizations Act (Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1973; MCL 722.111 et seq., as amended), which provides resident services or care
for six (6) or fewer persons under twenty-four (24) hour supervision for persons in need of that
supervision or care. A “state licensed residential facility (six or less persons)” as defined by this
section shall not include an establishment commonly described as an alcohol or substance abuse
rehabilitation center, a residential facility for persons released from or assigned to adult
correctional institutions, a maternity home, or a hotel or rooming house that does not provide or
offer to provide foster care.
STORY is that portion of a building, other than a basement or mezzanine, included between the
upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above it, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the
topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a usable or
unused space is more than six (6) feet above grade, this usable or unused under-floor space shall
be considered a story.
STREET is a public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property.
STRUCTURE is anything constructed, assembled or erected, the use of which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. This term shall
include, but is not necessarily limited to, buildings, pads, parking lots, fences, tanks, towers, dish
antennae, advertising devices, tents, trailers, or similar structures on wheels or other support used
for business or living purposes. The word "structure" shall not apply to wires and their
supporting poles or frames, electrical or telephone utilities (poles and wires), or to service
utilities below the ground.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS are any changes in the supporting members of a building
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial changes in the roof and
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-33
exterior walls or any expansion or addition to the floor space of a building by the addition of
bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
SUBDIVISION is the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land in accordance with the
requirements of Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, the State of Michigan Subdivision Control
Act and this Ordinance.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure either; (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or, (2) if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For purposes of this definition,
"substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either; (1) any
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or, (2) any
alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory
of Historic Places. For purpose of this definition, market value shall be based on the assessment
records of the City of Ferrysburg or, if records are not available, the City Assessor’s
determination of estimated market value.
SWIMMING POOL is any outdoor structure or container whether located above or below
ground designed to hold water to a depth of greater than twenty four (24") inches, intended for
swimming, relaxation, therapeutic purposes, or bathing. A swimming pool shall be considered
an accessory building for purpose of determining required yard setbacks.
TDefinitions
TEMPORARY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE is a building, structure, or use
authorized for a specific period of time according to the provisions of this Ordinance.
TEMPORARY USES - Parades, carnivals, outdoor concerts, rodeos, block parties utilizing
public streets, seasonal or holiday-themed events or productions, or designer showcases or any
similar use of event occurring on a temporary or sporadic basis in any zoning district where fifty
(50) or more persons will attend or may be expected to attend. A temporary use shall not include
residential social events such as family gatherings, reunions, wedding and other similar events
not generally open to the public. Temporary uses shall not include uses of a permanent nature for
which zoning approval has been obtained, or uses which are necessary to and normally
associated with a lawful permanent use or structure. [Ordinance No. 220, 12/20/04]
TENT shall mean a shelter of canvas, plastic, or the like supported by poles and fastened by
cords or pegs driven into the ground and shall not include those types of tents used solely for
children's recreational purposes.
UDefinitions
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-34
USE is the purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which
land or a building is or may be occupied.
VDefinitions
VARIANCE is a relaxation or modification of the requirements of this Ordinance as authorized
by the Board of Zoning Appeals under the provisions of this Ordinance and Act 110 of the
Public Acts of 2006, including any amendments thereto. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
VEHICLE is any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported
or drawn upon any street or highway, excepting devices exclusively moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
VEHICLE REPAIR is a building or land used for caring for, servicing, repairing, refinishing,
equipping, adjusting or otherwise working on vehicles for compensation. For the purposes of this
Ordinance, there shall be two classes:
Vehicle Repair, Minor includes but is not limited to sale and installation of oil and other
fluids (other than fuel); installation of tires, batteries, brakes, exhaust and other
components that are manufactured elsewhere; interior upholstery; and other repairs and
refurbishing of a minor nature.
Vehicle Repair, Major includes, but is not limited to, major engine, mechanical and body
work, painting and rustproofing, and other vehicle repair work creating noise, glare,
fumes, or smoke, not including wrecking, junking, or salvaging of vehicle parts.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
VETERINARY CLINIC is a building, or any portion thereof, used for the treatment of animals
as outpatients. Kenneling of animals shall be indoors and shall be limited to those requiring
overnight care due to medical reasons.
VIDEO ARCADE (VIDEO ESTABLISHMENT) is a gallery, mall, or space used for the
installation and commercial operation of electronic recreational game equipment (machines),
including computerized game equipment. This equipment incorporates images, or images and
sound combined, which may or may not be partially administered through hand controls.
Normally, each machine in a video arcade is used by only one (1) or two (2) patrons at any one
(1) time. [Refer also to ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.]
WDefinitions
WATERFRONT refers to that portion of a lot or parcel abutting a body of water (e.g. lake,
stream, creek, etc.). For purposes of this Ordinance, the yard on the street side of a lot with
water frontage shall be considered the front yard.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-35
WETLAND is land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life
and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh.
WETLAND, REGULATED is certain wetlands regulated by the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources or Michigan Department of Environmental Quality under the provisions of
Act 203 of the Public Acts of 1979, as amended, and generally defined as land characterized by
the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a
bog, swamp, or marsh.
WHOLESALE STORE is any building or structure in which goods, wares, or merchandise are
sold to a retailer for resale and not direct consumption.
XDefinitions
Reserved for future use.
YDefinitions
YARD (See Figure 2-7)
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-36
a) A space open to the sky and unoccupied or unobstructed, except by encroachments
specifically permitted by this Ordinance, on the same lot with a building or structure. A
yard is measured between the applicable lot line and the nearest foundation line of a
building or structure.
b) Front yard: A yard extending across the full
width of the lot, the depth of which is the distance
between the front lot line and foundation line of the
building or structure. In the case of a waterfront
lot, the yard on the street side shall be the front
yard.
The Required Front Yard shall mean the yard to
be established as a result of compliance with the
Required Front Yard Setback.
c) Rear yard: A yard extending across the full width
of the lot, the depth of which is the distance
between the rear lot line and rear foundation line of
the main building.
The Required Rear Yard shall mean the yard to
be established as a result of compliance with the
Required Rear Yard Setback.
d) Side yard: A yard between the foundation line of
the main building and the side lot line extending
from the required front yard to the required rear
yard.
The Required Side Yard shall mean the yard to be established as a result of compliance
with the Required Side Yard Setback.
e) Waterfront Yard: Any yard on a waterfront lot, other than a front yard, lying between
the water’s edge and the principal structure and extending the full width of the lot. A
yard separated from the waterfront only by a public or private beach or pedestrian access
easement (but not a street right-of-way) shall be a waterfront yard. [Ordinance No. 243,
03/03/08]
ZDefinitions
ZONING ACT is Michigan Act 110 of 2006, including any amendments thereto, provided,
however, the powers and duties of the Zoning Commission have been transferred to the Planning
Commission of the City of Ferrysburg under the provisions of Michigan Act 33 of the Public
Acts of 2008, including any amendments thereto. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Figure 2-7: Yards
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 2-37
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR is an individual appointed by the City Manager of the City
Ferrysburg delegated to administer the City Zoning Ordinance.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS is the City of Ferrysburg Zoning Board of Appeals created
under Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
ZONING DISTRICT is a portion of the City within which certain regulations and requirements
or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Ordinance.
ZONING MAP is the Official Zoning Map of the City of Ferrysburg, approved by the
Ferrysburg City Council, upon which the zone districts and zone district boundaries as specified
by this Ordinance are depicted, including pertinent information associated therewith. The
Official Zoning Map shall be considered a part of this Ordinance.
ZONING PERMIT - Refer to BUILDING PERMIT FOR ZONING COMPLIANCE
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-1
ARTICLE 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 3.10 Construction Begun Prior to Adoption of Ordinance
The adoption of this Zoning Ordinance shall not require:
a) A change in the intended use of land where there has been work of a substantial nature in
reliance upon prior approval by the City under the provisions of a former ordinance.
b) Compliance with the location and design requirements of this Ordinance to the extent that
there has been actual material commencement of construction of a structure pursuant to a
building permit issued by the City of Ferrysburg.
Any conditions or other requirements imposed under the provisions of a prior ordinance shall
remain in effect, even though this Ordinance may not provide for same. However, a property
owner subject to conditions or requirements not provided for by this Ordinance may request the
Planning Commission to remove or modify same by filing a site plan application and fee
consistent with the Site Plan Review requirements of this Ordinance. In the event the conditions
or requirements were established by action of the City Council, the Council shall have the
authority to remove or modify same, after receipt of a recommendation from the Planning
Commission.
Section 3.20 Building to be Moved
Any building or structure which has been wholly or partly erected on any premises shall not be
moved to and be placed upon any premises in the City unless the Building Inspector shall have
made an inspection of the building or structure to be moved and has found it structurally safe and
the Zoning Administrator has made a positive determination of site suitability pursuant to
compliance with the underlying zone district standards and impact on the character and use of
surrounding buildings and structures. Any building or structure to be placed upon a lot in the
City and to be used in connection with a special land use, whether existing or proposed, shall be
subject to the Special Land Use and Site Plan Review requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 3.30 Excavation, Removal, and Filling of Land
The use of land for the excavation, removal, filling, or depositing of any type of earth material,
topsoil, sand, gravel, or similar material shall be accomplished in accordance with the following
provisions:
a) Sand Mining (and similar) Operations. Sand mining operations shall adhere to the
regulations of Chapter 152 of the City Code of the City of Ferrysburg. The excavation
of other natural materials, such as topsoil, gravel, peat, and the like, shall also be
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-2
accomplished in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 152 whenever an
excavation is proposed to exceed ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards of material, whether
singularly or in combination.
b) Review and Approval Agency. The review and approval of applications to excavate or
fill which are not governed by Chapter 152 shall be processed by the following:
1) Zoning Administrator. Excavation or fill operations not exceeding four hundred
(400) cubic yards.
2) Planning Commission. Excavation or fill operations greater than four hundred
(400) cubic yards, but less than ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards, and all
excavation or earth movement projects designed to result in the creation of a
pond, lake, or similar water retaining feature. The project shall be processed by
the Planning Commission under the Site Plan Review requirements of this
Ordinance, including any applicable standards of this section.
c) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control. All operations shall adhere to the provisions
of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, Public Act 347 of the Michigan
Public Acts of 1972, including any amendment thereto.
d) Excavation and Filling of Land. No use of land for filling (deposition) with soil, sand,
gravel, industrial by-products, cinders, dredging spoils, or any material in any form shall
be allowed without a fill permit. In no case shall a fill product represent an
environmental hazard or be classified by the State or Federal Government as
environmentally unsafe. All fill materials shall meet or exceed the minimum “clean”
levels identified by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (the more stringent levels thereof) necessary
pursuant to the intended use of the site and the range of uses provided for by the
underlying zone district. In no instance shall fill material represent a hazard to those
properties adjacent to the site to be filled, nor to the groundwater and local surface
waters. In all instances, the City may require written analysis and certification regarding
the full composition and potential health hazard of any material regulated by this Section,
provided, however, this analysis and certification shall be required for the use of dredge
material, industrial by-products, and cinders. All analysis and certification shall be
completed by a bonafide testing laboratory meeting the testing certification requirements
of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
e) Excavation and Fill Standards. The excavation and filling of land which is not
governed by the requirements of Chapter 152 shall comply with the following standards:
1) Shall not cause surface water to collect or to run off onto adjoining lands contrary
to normal and natural drainage patterns.
2) Shall not result in off-site fugitive dust, grime, fumes, or odors above the levels
existing prior to the excavation or filling operation.
3) All fill shall be properly compacted to ensure a stable surface and to prevent
settling which may be disruptive to buildings and structures.
4) Shall not result in a situation or condition such that the use of the land as
designated by this Ordinance is no longer viable.
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-3
5) Shall not reduce the stability, nor bearing capacity, of soils on adjoining property.
All fill and excavation operations, including the use and temporary parking of
equipment, shall be conducted a minimum of fifty (50) feet from adjoining lot
lines, provided, however, the Zoning Administrator may authorize a reduction in
the required setback based on the determination that a reduction will not represent
a harm to surrounding properties.
6) Shall not degrade groundwater quality, nor result in negative impacts on
groundwater quantity.
7) Shall not result in a reduction of light and air to adjoining properties.
8) Shall not result in the spread of dirt, mud, or other debris on the public road
system resulting from vehicles entering or leaving the site of the excavation or
fill.
9) Shall only be accomplished between the hours of 7 a.m. and 7 p.m., unless it can
be demonstrated that hours beyond these are necessary due to emergency
purposes. Approval for extended hours of operation shall rest with the Zoning
Administrator. Normal hours shall be resumed upon elimination of the
emergency situation.
10) Shall not represent a fire or other safety hazard.
11) Excavation projects shall require an approved restoration plan indicating the full
scope of site restoration and use. The plan shall incorporate detail on final grades,
surface water drainage, vehicular and pedestrian access, buildings and structures,
proposed infrastructure, landscape, signage, lighting, sidewalks, and/or other such
information as applicable to the proposed use, as required under normal site plan
review.
f) Conditions and Performance Guarantee. In approving an excavation or filling
operation, the approving party may establish conditions and/or require a performance
guarantee which are determined necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of Ferrysburg and to ensure compatibility of the operation with the surrounding
neighborhood.
g) Permit as Part of a Building Project. Application for earth moving or filling operations
to be completed as a component of a building project, such as the construction of a
residential subdivision, may be submitted for review and approval concurrent with the
application for the building project. Moreover, the applicant may file a comprehensive
(combined) application containing the information necessary for review of all project
elements.
h) Permit Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this
Section, but shall be required to adhere to the standards of Section 3.30, e), 1) - 6) and 8):
1) The removal of soil (earth materials) necessary for the placement of a building
foundation or basement which has received a bonafide building permit.
2) The movement of material from a lot or parcel, or onto a lot or parcel, provided
the quantity of the material does not exceed three hundred (300) cubic yards, does
not raise or lower the existing natural grade by more than twelve (12) inches over
an area encompassing more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total lot or parcel,
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-4
and does not cause surface water to collect or to run-off on to adjoining lands
contrary to normal and natural drainage patterns.
3) Normal lawn maintenance.
4) Site landscaping which does not circumvent the intent of this section.
5) Permitted commercial and industrial uses which, by the nature of their business,
temporarily stockpile non-hazardous material in excess of three hundred (300)
cubic yards (singularly or combined), but not exceeding one thousand (1,000)
cubic yards (singularly or combined). Such uses include, but are not limited to,
landscape nurseries, lumber yards selling landscape products, and industries
which package for wholesale or retail soil and gardening products. The
temporary stockpiling of material (singularly or in combination) in excess of one
thousand (1,000) cubic yards shall require site plan approval by the Planning
Commission, provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to the stock
piling of materials within the Port Industrial District. The stock piling of
materials within the Port Industrial District shall be subject to the regulations of
that district.
6) The above exemptions do not override the need to also comply with any State
and/or Federal permit requirements.
Section 3.40 Zoning Application Procedures in General
The process for application and review by the City of Ferrysburg for site plan review, special use
permits, planned unit development (PUD), amendments to this Ordinance and rezoning of land,
request for variance, and other zoning actions are set forth in those sections of this Ordinance
dealing with the specific action sought. Application submittal dates, application forms, and fee
requirements are available from the office of the Zoning Administrator of the City of Ferrysburg.
A fully executed application and payment of fees shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
in order to initiate official consideration of any zoning matter.
Section 3.50 Required Area or Space
a) Required Area and Dimensions - No lot, required yard area, required parking area,
required lot width, or other required open space shall be created, divided or reduced in
dimensions or area below the minimum requirements of this Ordinance. The minimum
area for any new lot or parcel shall be no less than the minimum lot size of the underlying
zone district in which the lot or parcel will be located (Refer to Schedule of District
Standards, Section 9.150). If already less than the minimum requirements of this
Ordinance, a lot, required yard, parking area, lot width, or space shall not be divided or
reduced in dimensions or area so as to increase noncompliance with the minimum
requirements of this Ordinance.
b) Double Counting of Designated Space Prohibited - Unless otherwise permitted by this
Ordinance, no space which for purpose of a use or building has been counted or
calculated or included as part of a yard area or other space required by this Ordinance
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-5
may be counted or calculated or included to satisfy the yard or other space requirements
for any other use or building.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 3.60 Projection into Yards by Architectural Building Features,
Stoops, Decks, Balconies, and Window Awnings
a) Projection Into Yards - Provided they do not pose a threat to the public health, safety,
welfare, or damage to adjoining properties, certain architectural features and structures
may project into required yards. The most extreme (outward) point of the feature and/or
structure shall be used when measuring the permitted yard encroachment. In all
instances, projections shall be subject to review and approval by the Zoning
Administrator. In making a determination of approval, the Zoning Administrator may
consult with the Building Inspector, Fire Chief, or other individuals for purposes of
determining potential impacts on the public health, safety, welfare, or damage to
adjoining property.
b) Cornices, Eaves, Gutters, Building Overhangs, Chimneys, Pilasters and Similar
Features - may project into required yards as follows:
1) Three (3) feet into a required front yard.
2) Five (5) feet into a required rear yard.
3) Two (2) feet into a required side yard.
c) Unenclosed Stoop, Deck, Balcony, or Window Awning - may project into required
yards as follows:
1) Five (5) feet into a required front yard.
2) Ten (10) feet into a required rear yard. [See also d) and e) following.]
3) Steps and Landing Only - Steps and an adjoining landing, the landing not to
exceed three (3) by three (3) feet, may project into a side yard if located directly
off a main floor exterior door. The projection shall be at least three (3) feet from
the side lot line.
d) Stoop or Deck Enclosed by Privacy Fencing
- may project up to ten (10) feet into a
required rear yard subject to the following
restrictions (see Figure 3-1):
1) The stoop or deck shall be attached to,
or within twelve (12) inches of, the
principal dwelling.
2) The enclosure shall be designed and
constructed as privacy fencing, as
opposed to an enclosed seasonal or
year round living space such as an
enclosed porch, sunroom, family room,
etc.
Figure 3-1: Privacy Fencing around Stoop or
Deck
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-6
3) The privacy fencing may be covered by a roof type structure or covering,
provided, a minimum gap of two (2) feet between the roof or covering and fence
shall be maintained, except for the exterior wall of the home to which the roof
structure or covering is attached or abuts. No more than twenty (20) percent of
the required gap may be blocked by roof supports or other structural elements.
4) The height of the privacy fence located on deck shall not exceed:
a. Six (6) feet for a deck located off the first floor.
b. Five (5) feet for a deck located off a second story.
c. Four (4) feet for a deck located above a second story.
5) The above projection distance shall include any eve, gutter, or similar device or
feature which may be attached to the stoop, deck, roof, or covering.
e) Low Level Rear Yard Deck - A low level deck located in the rear yard may cover the
yard subject to the following restrictions:
1) The deck shall be subject to site plan review and approval by the following party:
a. Deck covering up to fifty (50) percent of the rear yard - by the Zoning
Administrator.
b. Deck covering more than fifty (50) percent of the rear yard - by the
Planning Commission.
2) The deck surface shall not exceed twelve (12) inches above ground height.
3) The deck shall be at least three (3) feet from any side or rear lot line.
4) No portion of the deck located in a required yard area may contain a roof,
provided, however, a permitted accessory structure located on a deck such as a
pool shower area, changing room, sauna, utility building, and other permitted
accessory building may possess a roof.
5) An accessory building placed on the deck shall be constructed of materials similar
to that of the deck. For determining height, the height of the accessory building
shall include any distance between the building and ground surface.
6) Adequate provisions shall be made to ensure the proper handling of surface water.
The deck shall not result in damage to adjoining properties as a result of
modifications to normal surface water drainage patterns.
7) In granting approval, the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission may
require additional conditions including, but not limited to, perimeter landscaping;
restrictions on the design, placement, and use of an accessory building; and,
reduction in deck height and/or yard area coverage.
f) Building Code Requirements - A yard projection permitted by Section 3.60 shall not
violate any provisions of the City Building Code.
g) Limits of Encroachment - A projection must be at least three (3) feet from any public
right-of-way.
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-7
Section 3.70 Mechanical Equipment - Roof and Ground Mounted
a) Except as noted under Section b), which follows, mechanical equipment, including water
and gas meters; elevator housing; stairways; tanks; heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning equipment (HVAC); and other similar equipment shall comply with the
following standards:
1) General Provision - All such equipment, roof or ground mounted, shall be
screened by a solid wall, fence, landscaping or architectural feature that is
compatible in appearance with the principal building.
2) Roof Mounted - Roof-mounted equipment shall not exceed a height of ten (10)
feet above the surrounding roof surface, and shall occupy no more than fifteen
percent (15%) of the total roof area.
3) Ground Mounted - Shall be placed in a non-required side or non-required rear
yard.
b) The following shall be exempt from the above provisions:
1) Single-family homes.
2) Two-family homes.
3) Window air condition units.
c) No outdoor furnaces shall be installed or operated anywhere in the City of Ferrysburg
[Ordinance No. 223, 6/6/05]
Section 3.80 Essential Public Services
a) The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of essential public services shall be
permitted in any zoning district subject to the following review and approval procedures:
1) Review and Approval by Zoning Administrator - The Zoning Administrator
shall have authority to review and approve essential public services buildings not
exceeding a ground floor area of six hundred (600) square feet nor twelve (12)
feet in height, and which do not possess an outside storage area. A site plan shall
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval. The site plan
shall include those elements required by Article V. of this Ordinance, provided,
however, the Zoning Administrator may waive any required site plan element
which he/she determines is unnecessary to make a determination of conformity of
the essential public services building with the character of the surrounding
neighborhood and this Ordinance.
2) Review and Approval by Planning Commission - Essential public services
buildings having a ground floor area exceeding six hundred (600) square feet or
twelve (12) feet in height, all essential public services outdoor storage areas
including any buildings associated therewith, and all sub-stations shall require site
plan review and approval by the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions
of Article V. of this Ordinance.
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-8
b) All buildings and storage areas used for essential public services shall be designed,
erected, and landscaped to conform harmoniously with the character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
c) Communication towers shall comply with the provisions of Section 3.140 of this
Ordinance.
Section 3.90 Fences, Walls, Gates, Screens, and Landscape - General
Requirements and Intersection Visibility
a) Front Yard - Unless specifically authorized
elsewhere in this Ordinance, no fence, wall or
screen located within the front yard of any zoning
district shall exceed the following height
limitations [Refer also to Paragraph i) of this
Section regarding Clear Vision standards]:
1) Residential Districts - Three (3) feet.
2) Commercial Districts - Four (4) feet.
3) Industrial Districts - Six (6) feet.
[Ordinance No. 187, 3/4/02]
b) Corner Lots. On a corner lot in a residential
district, a fence up to six (6) feet in height may be
allowed upon or behind the required front yard
setback within a secondary front yard only. The
secondary front yard shall be a front yard other
than the yard upon which the house faces. The
Zoning Administrator shall determine which yard
is the secondary front yard for the purposes of
this Section (See Figure 3-2). [Ordinance No.
265, 10/4/2010]
c) Side and Rear Yard Height - Unless specifically authorized elsewhere in this
Ordinance, no fence, wall or screen located within the side yard or rear yard in any
zoning district shall exceed a height of six (6) feet, except that a security fence for a
permitted industrial use may include a maximum of one (1) additional foot of barb wire.
d) Waterfront Yard – A fence, wall or screen in a waterfront yard shall be subject to the
same requirements for front yards, as in Paragraph a), above, except for a swimming pool
enclosure as required in this Section, shall be five (5) feet. [Ordinance No. 243, 03/03/08]
Figure 3-2 Fence Location in
Secondary Front Yard on Corner Lots
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-9
e) Measuring Fence Height - Fence height
shall be measured from the grade
(elevation) of the ground immediately
below the location of the fence (see Figure
3-3) . For purposes of this section, the grade
associated with placement of a fence shall
be defined as:
1) Fence Erected on Site Containing
No Building or Structure - The
grade shall be the naturally existing
grade without modification.
2) Fence Erected on Site Containing
Principal Building or Structure -
The grade shall be the finished grade
existing at the fence site after
construction of the principal
building or structure. For fence
construction purposes, the grade shall be subject to approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
f) Fence Placed on Retaining Wall, Berm, or
Similar Feature (see Figure 3-4). A fence, or
portion thereof, may be erected on a retaining wall,
berm, or similar feature provided the combined
height of the retaining wall, berm, or similar feature
and fence shall not exceed the total allowable fence
height as referenced under Items a) and b) above, or
as noted in the following paragraph.
The Zoning Administrator may allow placement of
a retaining wall and fence which, when combined,
exceed the total allowable fence height as
referenced above. This approval may occur when
the Zoning Administrator determines that additional
height is necessary to permit the placement of a
retaining wall of sufficient height to stabilize a
natural bank against which the retaining wall will be
positioned. In granting approval, the Zoning Administrator shall determine that the
additional height is needed for stabilization, as opposed to erecting an extended base for
purposes of gaining fence height. The combined height of the fence and any portion of
the retaining wall above the finished grade of the principal structure shall not exceed
maximum fence height standards.
g) Placement in Public Right-of-Way. No fence, wall or screen shall be erected within
any public right-of-way unless the placement is approved by the City Council.
Figure 3-4: Fence Placed on Berm
Figure 3-3: Measuring Fence Height
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-10
h) Proximity to Public Right-of-Way. No fence, wall, or screen shall be placed closer
than two (2) feet to a public right-of-way or public easement, provided, however, a
greater distance may be required by the Zoning Administrator if necessary to secure
public safety, provide opportunity for the efficient use and maintenance of infrastructure
located within the public right-of-way, or for a similar public purpose or need.
i) Clear Vision Area. No fence, wall,
screen or planting material greater than
thirty (30) inches in height shall be
erected or maintained in such a way as
to obstruct the vision of motorists
within the triangular area formed by the
intersection of the street right-of-way
lines and a line connecting two points
located on those intersecting right-ofway
lines twenty-five (25) feet from the
point of intersection with the right-ofway
lines. Alley and street
intersections shall comply with the
above standards, provided, however, the dimensional factor shall be ten (10) feet from the
point of intersection with the right-of-way lines (see Figure 3-5).
j) Clear Vision and Driveway Exiting. No fence, wall, screen or planting material shall
be erected or maintained in such a way as to obstruct the vision of motorists exiting
driveways.
k) Property Line Location. A fence may be located on a common property line but may
not encroach onto an abutting parcel without the written consent of the owner(s) of the
abutting parcel, a copy of which written consent shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator.
l) Electric Charge. The use of electric current or charge on any ground surface or above
ground fence or part thereof is prohibited. Electronic fences buried beneath the ground
shall be placed at least three (3) feet from all lot lines and shall be subject to the
provisions of the City Electrical Code.
m) Wall, Fence, and Gate Design/Type and Animal Enclosure. Walls and fences,
including gates, shall be compatible with the neighborhood in which they are placed.
Except as noted below, fence and gate designs and types commonly associated with
agricultural, commercial, and industrial operations are prohibited in residential districts.
Prohibited fencing and gates include, but are not limited to, livestock fencing such as
barbed wire, cattle and horse fencing and gates, chicken wire, woven wire fencing,
commercial and industrial security fencing, and fencing containing barbed wire, electrical
charge, razor/knife blades, or other device.
Animal enclosures (e.g. dog pen) placed in a residential district shall be located in the
rear yard, a minimum of three (3) feet from adjoining lot lines.
n) Construction Material. Walls and fences, including gates, shall be constructed of new,
durable, weather-resistant, rustproof, and easily maintainable materials customarily used
in the construction of walls and fences, provided, however, this provision shall not
Figure 3-5: Clear Vision Area
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-11
preclude the use of decorative architectural materials when consistent with the intent of
this section, the character of the area in which the fence is to be placed, and as approved
by the Zoning Administrator. Used material may be permitted subject to review and
approval by the Zoning Administrator.
o) Fence Posts/Supports. All fences shall be erected with fence posts and supports on the
interior side. The finished side of the fence shall face the exterior of the lot. [Ordinance
No. 265, 10/4/2010]
p) Use of Landscape as Desired Alternative to Walls and Fences. The use of existing
natural vegetation and new vegetative landscape is encouraged in place of constructed
walls and fences, or in combination with walls and fences.
q) Fence Gaps - Walls and fences required by the City for reasons of security and/or
screening, or similar purposes, shall have no openings or discontinuances [e.g., gaps or
other non-secured or non-screened breaks] except as may be approved by the Planning
Commission.
r) Fences for Swimming Pools - All swimming pools shall be provided with a fence and
self-locking gate. The fence and gate shall be no less than five (5) feet in height and shall
be no more than six (6) feet in height. This provision shall not apply to hot tubs and spas,
provided, however, all features shall meet the City of Ferrysburg building code
requirements pursuant to access and safety. [Ordinance No. 186, 12/3/01]
s) Fence Permit and Other Regulations Concerning Fence, Wall, and Landscape
Requirements. Erection of a fence shall require a fence permit and payment of
necessary permit fee. (Refer also to regulations governing landscaping, buffers,
architectural screens, and the like - Section 3.320).
t) Temporary and Seasonal Fencing - The erection of fencing for a temporary period of
time including, but not limited to, construction site fencing, snow fencing, and other
temporary or seasonal fencing shall be subject to review and approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
Section 3.100 Principal Building, Structure and Use
No lot may contain more than one principal building, structure, or use, provided, however, this
provision shall not apply to groups of multiple family dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial buildings or other groups of buildings which have been determined by the Planning
Commission or City Council after review, as based on the requirements of this Ordinance, to be a
principal use collectively.
Section 3.110 Repair and Storage of Vehicles in Residential Districts
a) Repair, Restoration, and Maintenance - The carrying out of repair, restoration, and
maintenance procedures on vehicles in any residential zoning district shall be subject to
the following requirements:
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-12
1) Procedures exceeding forty-eight (48) hours in duration or which require the
vehicle to be immobile or inoperable in excess of forty-eight (48) hours shall be
carried out within an enclosed building such that neither the vehicle nor any
aspect of the repair shall be visible from off-site.
2) No repair shall occur within any portion of a front yard, including driveways, in
excess of twenty four (24) hours, or forty eight (48) hours if located in a nonrequired
side yard..
3) Inoperable and unlicensed vehicles, vehicle parts, packaging material, equipment,
and other materials shall be stored inside an enclosed building such that the
vehicles, vehicle parts, materials, and equipment shall not be visible from off-site.
4) The vehicular repair shall be of a non-commercial nature.
b) Parking and Storage of Trucks and Construction Equipment - It shall be unlawful for
the owner, tenant or lessee of any lot in any residential zoning district to permit the open
storage or outdoor parking of semi-tractor trucks and semi-tractor trailers, bulldozers,
earth carriers, cranes or any other similar equipment or machinery, unless parked thereon
while in use for construction on the lot. This construction shall be based on issuance of a
current building permit. All machinery and equipment shall be removed within one (1)
week of the completion of construction, issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or
expiration of the building permit, whichever occurs first.
c) Parking and Storage of Commercial Vehicles in the Public Right-of-Way - In any
residential zoning district the use of public right-of-way for the parking and storage of
semi-tractor trucks and semi-tractor trailers, bulldozers, earth carriers, cranes or any other
similar equipment or machinery is prohibited, except as noted:
1) Delivery and Moving Operations - The temporary parking of semi-tractor
trucks and semi-tractor trailers and other commercial trucks and vans may occur
when directly associated with the short term delivery and/or pick-up of household
goods and merchandise, mail delivery, moving of household goods, and similar
operations associated with a use permitted in the underlying residential zone
district. The temporary parking of vehicles shall be limited to the time necessary
to complete the delivery and/or moving operation. Temporary parking in excess
of forty-eight (48) hours shall be classified as vehicular storage and shall be
prohibited unless authorization for a longer period of time as been obtained from
the Zoning Administrator.
2) Construction Equipment - Subject to approval of the Zoning Administrator, the
temporary parking and storage of semi-tractor trucks and semi-tractor trailers,
bulldozers, earth carriers, cranes or any other similar equipment or machinery
may be parked in the public right-of-way while in use for construction on a lot or
parcel directly adjacent to the public right-of-way on which vehicles and
equipment are to be parked. Said construction shall be based on issuance of a
current building permit. All machinery and equipment shall be removed
immediately upon completion of construction, issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, or expiration of the building permit, whichever occurs first. Parking
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-13
in the right-of-way shall not result in a vehicular or pedestrian safety hazard, nor
shall said parking disrupt normal traffic and pedestrian flow patterns.
The above exceptions shall not overrule traffic safety and/or parking regulations in force
by the City of Ferrysburg pursuant to the use of public streets and public right-of-way.
Section 3.120 Use of Yard Spaces and Other Open Areas for Storage of
Machinery, Equipment, Junk, and Wood Impacting
Residential Parcels
On any residential parcel no machinery, equipment, lumber piles, crates, boxes, junk, debris, or
other materials shall be stored in any yard or open area that is visible from the street, public
right-of-way, or adjoining residential property; provided, however:
a) Temporary Placement of Machinery and Equipment Used for Building Activities -
Machinery, equipment, and supplies being used for on-site construction activity for
which a current building permit has been issued may be stored on-site. All machinery,
equipment, and supplies shall be removed within one (1) week of the completion of
completion of construction, issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or expiration of the
building permit, whichever occurs first.
b) Wood Used for Home Heating - Cut lumber and wood to be used for the heating of a
home or accessory building may be stored outside in a rear yard, and rear and nonrequired
front yard of a lake front lot, provided, the wood and lumber shall be neatly
stacked, shall not harbor vermin or pests, shall be limited to no more than four full (4)
cords, shall not exceed the maximum fence height for rear yards, and shall be a minimum
of three (3) feet from an adjoining property line. Cut lumber and wood stored in the front
yard of a lakefront lot shall be screened by landscaping, including the use of natural
vegetation. The wood or lumber shall be for the sole purpose of heating a home or
accessory building located on the site at which the wood or lumber is stored. This
provision shall not include, nor permit, the commercial storage, commercial cutting, or
sale of wood and lumber from a residential premises.
c) Non-Commercial Compost Piles - Compost piles may be constructed subject to the
following provisions:
1) The pile shall be confined to the rear yard and at least three (3) feet from any
adjoining lot line.
2) The pile shall not be used for the placement of household garbage and trash and
shall be maintained free of odors and rodents.
3) The pile shall be properly secured to prevent the off-site movement of leaves and
other compost materials.
4) Commercial compost operations shall be restricted to those districts permitting
same.
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-14
Section 3.130 Accessory Buildings, Structures and Uses
a) Accessory to Principal Building, Structure, or Use -
1) Accessory buildings, structures, and uses are permitted only in connection with,
incidental to, and on the same lot with a principal building, structure or use. No
accessory building, structure, or use may be placed on a lot without a permitted
principal building, structure or use.
2) Notwithstanding the above, a detached accessory garage that exists on the date of
the Ordinance amendment implementing these regulations may be located on a lot
directly opposite the street right of way from a waterfront lot of record containing
the principal dwelling served by the garage, provided that both lots are under the
same ownership. A garage that meets the above conditions shall be subject to the
setback requirements of the zoning district for principal structures, but shall in all
other respects be subject to the requirements for a detached accessory structure.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
b) Zone District Requirement - An accessory building, structure, or use must be in the
same zoning district of the associated principal building, structure, or use.
c) When Attached to a Principal Building or Structure - Unless specifically provided
for, accessory buildings or structures structurally attached to a principal building or
structure including, but not limited to, porches enclosed by walls or garages attached to a
dwelling unit or other principal building in a substantial manner, such as a wall or roof,
shall be deemed a part of the main building and shall be subject to all the regulations of
this Ordinance applicable to principal buildings, structures, and uses. [Ordinance No.
265, 10/4/2010]
d) Use Requirement and Construction Standards, Including Temporary Accessory
Buildings and Underground Storage Tanks - No accessory building, structure, or use
shall be utilized unless the principal structure to which it is accessory is occupied or
utilized. Accessory buildings shall be stick-built or of equivalent new building
construction. No mobile home, tank, junk object, salvage materials, trailer, vehicle, or
similar item shall be utilized as an accessory building or storage structure; provided,
however, the above requirements shall not be applicable to:
1) Bonafide agricultural storage buildings or activities.
2) Tool sheds or similar temporary storage structures used pursuant to the
construction of a building, so long as the period of construction does not exceed
two (2) years. All such structures shall be removed prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy.
3) Underground storage tanks accessory to a permitted use. All tanks, including the
operation of same, shall meet all State and Federal permitting and monitoring
requirements.
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-15
e) Flag Pole - Maximum Height. A flag
pole may be located in any yard, provided
that the base is set back a minimum of ten
(10) feet from any lot line. A freestanding
flag pole shall not exceed thirtyfive
(35) feet in height. The height shall
be measured from the point at which the
pole intersects with the ground (at
finished grade) to the uppermost part of
the pole, including any attachments or
embellishments thereto. In the event the
flag pole is placed on a raised foundation
such as a raised cement pad, fence,
constructed berm, architectural feature, or
other constructed structure or feature, the
height of the pole shall include the height
of the raised foundation as measured from the elevation of the finished grade of the
ground surface prior to placement of the raised foundation. (See Figure 3-6) [Ordinance
No. 265, 10/4/2010]
f) Residential Districts - Additional Accessory Building Standards for Residential
Districts (Refer also to Sub-Section “g”, following, for information concerning
waterfront lots) - In addition to the above:
1) Yard Location (see Figure 3-7):
a. Unless otherwise provided
for by this Ordinance, no
detached accessory
building, structure or use
shall be erected or placed
within any front yard, or
within a side yard unless
located behind the rear
dwelling line.
b. An accessory building,
structure, or use shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet
from the principal
dwelling, provided,
however, a breezeway may
be constructed in the
required ten (10) feet
isolation distance
connecting an accessory building with the dwelling
c. An accessory building, structure, or use shall be at least three (3) feet from
any side or rear lot line.
Figure 3-7: Accessory Building Yard Location
Figure 3-6: Flag Pole Height
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-16
d. On corner lots, no accessory building, structure, or use shall encroach on
the required front yard setback of an adjoining property (as though the
setback were extended onto the subject property).
2) Attached Garage - An attached garage may be erected to extend beyond the front
building line of the dwelling if the garage has been designed as an integral part of
the dwelling and will be constructed of materials architecturally and aesthetically
compatible with the dwelling. In no instance, however, shall the garage extend
beyond the required front yard setback line. All other setbacks must be consistent
with those required for the dwelling to which the garage is attached.
3) Number of Buildings - No more than two (2) detached accessory buildings shall
be permitted on any lot, provided, however, dog pens and similar animal
enclosures, swimming pools, satellite dish antennas, towers and antennas, and
decks shall not be counted when determining the maximum number of permitted
buildings or structures.
4) Height - The maximum building height of any detached accessory building shall
be fourteen (14) feet.
5) Area - Unless otherwise provided for by this Ordinance, the total square footage
of all accessory buildings located on a lot shall not exceed forty (40) percent of
the rear yard area or 40% the ground floor area on the largest floor in the principal
building located on the lot, whichever is less. Pursuant to the above calculation:
a. A basement shall not be considered a floor for purposes of this section.
b. The floor area of the principal building shall not include areas devoted to
an attached garage, attached carport, unenclosed porch or deck, or other
similar attached feature which is customarily not considered part of the
dwelling unit living area. [Ordinance No. 210, 5/3/04]
6) Stable or Kennel - A stable or kennel shall not be erected as an integral part of
the principal building.
7) Design and Construction - Accessory buildings shall be designed and
constructed consistent with the character of the principal use.
8) Required Garage – In residential districts, all new single-family and twofamily/
duplex dwelling units shall include a garage on the same property, either
attached or detached, as part of the new construction. The minimum size of the
garage shall be 352 square feet. [Ordinance No. 238, 08/20/07]
g) Residential Waterfront Lots - Due to the unique characteristics of waterfront lots, some
deviation from the standards outlined under Sub-Section “f”, above, shall be permitted
for lots having frontage on a body of water. These are:
1) Front Yard (between the dwelling and the street)
a. Detached Garages- A detached garage, no less than twelve (12) feet by
eighteen (18) feet may be placed in the non-required front yard, between
the dwelling and the street. A detached garage shall be set back from a
side lot line the same distance as required for the principal dwelling.
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-17
b. Other Accessory Buildings One (1) accessory (storage) building (not
including the garage) may be placed in a non-required front yard between
the dwelling and the street if located at least twenty-five (25) feet from the
front yard (street) right-of-way line. Accessory buildings shall be set back
from a side lot line the same distance as required for the principal
dwelling. Accessory buildings so positioned shall be screened in order to
reduce the open views of the buildings from off-site, with particular
attention given to screening that mitigates open views from properties
whose front yards face the street side front yards of waterfront parcels.
The illustrations (Options A-D, see Figure 3-8) depict options associated with
placement of accessory buildings in the front yard of a waterfront lot. In
each case, open views of accessory buildings have been partially shielded through
use of a permitted garage, screening, and/or landscaping. The Zoning
Administrator shall be authorized to review and approve alternative screening
designs, provided that the designs comply with the intent of this section.
2) Waterfront Yard (see Figure 3-9):
a. The maximum building height of any detached accessory building in the
waterfront yard shall be twelve (12) feet.
Figure 3-8: Waterfront Lot Accessory Structure Front Yard Options
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-18
b. The total ground floor area in
square feet of any detached
accessory structure in the
waterfront yard shall not exceed
one-hundred (100) square feet or
two-hundred percent (200%) of
the lot width on the waterfront,
whichever is greater. For
example, a lakefront lot that is 100
feet wide may have a 200 squarefoot
accessory building. In no
case, however, shall the ground
floor area of an accessory structure
be greater than forty percent
(40%) of the ground floor area on
the largest floor of the principal
dwelling, pursuant to Sec. 3.130,
f), 5, above.
c. Accessory buildings shall be a
minimum of thirty (30) feet from the water line, and no less than ten (10)
feet from an adjoining side lot line.
3) Boat Houses: Boat houses are prohibited.
[Ordinance No. 244, 04/21/08]
h) Multiple Front Yards and Accessory Building Setback - Unless otherwise provided
for by this Ordinance, lots with multiple street frontage shall consider each frontage as a
front yard for purposes of determining accessory building setback.
i) Boat lots shall be subject to the following regulations:
1) Owner Use - The use of a boat lot shall be limited to the owners and guests of the
boat lot. Boat lots shall not be used for keyhole purposes or the general public.
2) Parking of Vehicles and Placement of Tents - Except for the temporary loading
and unloading of water craft, boat lots shall not be used for the parking or
placement of vehicles, trailers or tents.
3) Trailers shall not be stored on the boat lot during the boating season or at other
times.
4) Use, Area, Height and Setback Restrictions:
a. Permitted Uses - Boat lots may be used for the placement of open decks,
boat docks, stairs and board walks, and erosion control measures.
b. Lot Area - A boat lot shall possess not less than 1,000 square feet of lot
area.
c. Height - No structure shall exceed a height of twelve (12) inches above
the highest level of the adjoining street or street right-of-way, whichever is
greater, unless approved as a Special Use.
Figure 3-9: Accessory Structure in the
Waterfront Yard
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-19
Decks and other structures exceeding twelve (12) inches in height may be
considered by the Planning Commission as a Special Land Use subject to
the provisions of Article 4 of this Ordinance.
d. Setbacks:
1. Street Side and Side Yards - Along the street side and side yards,
all structures located on land shall maintain setbacks equal to the
setbacks required of the principle structure located on the parent
parcel, unless approved as a Special Use.
The required setbacks of permitted structures may be reduced to
not less than ten (10) feet from the adjoining street right-of-way
and three (3) feet from side lot lines when approved by the
Planning Commission as a Special Land Use subject to the
provision of Article 4 of this Ordinance.
2. All structures may extend to the normal high water mark as
established by the United States Corps of Engineers, provided,
however, a dock and boardwalk serving a dock may extend beyond
the normal high water mark. This boardwalk shall not exceed six
(6) feet in width.
3. No dock or associated boardwalk shall encroach on water related
side lot lines (represented by the imaginary extension of side lot
lines of the boat lot over the water’s surface), provided, however,
adjoining boat lots under separate ownership may share a common
dock and boardwalk resulting in the encroachment.
4. All shoreline and water encroachments as provided for by these
regulations shall not supersede more stringent State or Federal
standards.
5. Erosion control measures may be placed as approved by the
Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment or
United States Corps of Engineers.
5) Fencing - Boat lots shall not possess fencing.
6) Camping - Boat lots shall not be used for overnight camping.
7) Landscaping - All areas of a boat lot not used for the placement of structures
shall be landscaped, provided, however, landscaping shall not prevent water
oriented views through the boat lot from off-site (e.g. from adjacent properties
and public rights-of-way).
8) Dividing of Boat Lots - No boat lot may be divided for purposes of creating
additional boat lots unless all resulting boat lots comply with the provisions of
this Ordinance. [Ordinance No. 202, 8/7/03]
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-20
Section 3.140 Satellite Dish Antennas and Antennas and Towers
a) Satellite Dish Antennas and Towers and Antennas - It is the intent of the following
regulations to accommodate the changing communication needs of residents and
businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City. As
such, these regulations recognize the need to provide opportunity for various forms of
personal and business communication systems, many of which are experiencing change
as a result of technological advances.
b) Design and Application of Standards - The following standards governing satellite dish
antennas and towers and antennas have been divided into two (2) sections. The first
section deals with satellite dish antennas and towers and antennas of a non-commercial
nature which may be found in residential settings. In most instances, these facilities are
for the individual and personal needs of the residents or occupants located on the site at
which the satellite dish antenna or other instrument is found. The second section deals
with towers and antennas for commercial use.
c) Satellite Dish Exemption - A satellite dish having a diameter not exceeding one (1)
meter (39.37 inches) shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, provided,
however, the antenna shall not extend more than thirty-six (36) inches above the highest
point of the roof of the building to which the antenna may be attached. [Ordinance No.
265, 10/4/2010]
d) Permitted Zone District, Dimensions, and Approving Authority - Non-commercial
and commercial dish antennas and non-commercial and commercial towers and antennas
shall comply with the standards detailed under Sections 3.140 e) and 3.140 f), as well as
the other provisions of Section 3.140 and this Ordinance.
e) Note: Sections 3.140 e) and
f) 3.140 f) are provided in table form on the following page [Ordinance No. 265,
10/4/2010]
g) Application Requirements - Applicants shall submit an application and fee prior to
consideration of a request. Application forms and fee schedules shall be available from
the Office of the Zoning Administrator. In addition to the site plan and special land use
information (as applicable) required elsewhere in this Ordinance, applications for
combined towers and antennas one hundred (100) feet in height or greater shall include
the following information, provided, however, the City may require this information for
towers and antennas of less height if necessary to determine compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance:
GENERAL PROVISIONS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
3-21
Section 3.140 e) – Non-Commercial Dish Antennas and Non-Commercial Towers and Antennas [Refer also to Section 3.140 e) and Placement Diagrams – Page 22, following.]
Zone District Number
Permitted
Maximum Height
Permitted
Yards Setbacks Approval Body Notes
Dish Tower
Antenna
RD, RG1,
RG2 and RG3 2 15 Ft. 75 Ft. Rear
Behind rear building
line in non-required
yard
Zoning Administrator Maximum number of all dishes, towers, and antennas (non-commercial and
commercial) not to exceed two (2), of which only one (1) may be a dish antenna.
S, CC and GC 3 15 Ft. 75 Ft. Rear
Behind rear building
line in non-required
yard
Zoning Administrator Maximum number of all dishes, towers and antennas (non-commercial and
commercial) not to exceed three (3)
PI, LI-1, LI-2,
and LI-3 3 15 Ft. 75 Ft. Rear
Behind rear building
line in non-required
yard
Zoning Administrator Maximum number of all dishes, towers and antennas (non-commercial and
commercial) not to exceed three (3)
Section 3.140 f) – Commercial Dish Antennas and Commercial Towers and Antennas [Refer also to Section 3.140 e) and Placement Diagrams – Page 22, following.]
RD, RG1,
RG2 and RG3 1 15 Ft. 75 Ft.
Dish-Rear
?
Others-
See Note
Behind rear building
line in non-required
yard
Dish- Zoning Administrator
?
Others-City Council as
Special Land Use (after PC
recommendation)
1.Commercial towers and antennas shall be limited to :a) Church sites when
camouflaged as an element of the principal building as a steeple or bell tower; and,
b) sites owned by the City of Ferrysburg and public and private school sites when
located to the rear of the principal building.
2. Maximum number of all dishes, towers, and antennas (non-commercial and
commercial) not to exceed two (2), of which only one (1) may be a dish antenna.
3. Towers and antennas not designed and constructed to collapse in a downward
(vertical) fashion shall be set back from all required yard areas a minimum one (1)
foot per each one (1) foot of tower and antenna height.
S, CC, GC,
LI-1, LI-3, PI 3 15 Ft. 75 Ft. Rear
Behind rear building
line in non-required
yard
Zoning Administrator
1. Maximum number of all dishes, towers, and antennas (non-commercial and
commercial) not to exceed three (3).
2. Towers and antennas not designed and constructed to collapse in a downward
(vertical) fashion shall be set back from all required yard areas a minimum one (1)
foot per each one (1) foot of tower and antenna height.
LI-2 3 15 Ft. 300 Ft. All Non-required yard
Dish-Zoning Administrator
?
Towers/Antennas 75 Ft. or
less-Zoning Administrator
?
Towers/Antennas greater
than 75 Ft.- -City Council as
Special Land Use (after PC
recommendation)
1. Maximum number of all dishes, towers, and antennas (non-commercial and
commercial) not to exceed three (3).
2. Maximum of one (1) tower greater than seventy-five (75) feet in height.
3. Any tower, or tower and antenna, in excess of two hundred (200) feet in height
shall be located at least two-thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet away from a
tower of similar or greater height
4. Towers and antennas not designed and constructed to collapse in a downward
(vertical) fashion shall be set back from all required yard areas a minimum one (1)
foot per each one (1) foot of tower and antenna height.

INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-23
1) Engineer’s Report - A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
registered in the State of Michigan which:
a. Describes the tower height and design including a cross section and
elevation.
b. Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for
co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas.
c. Describes the tower’s capacity, including the number and type of antennas
it can accommodate.
d. Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with
established public safety telecommunications.
e. Documents that the tower will comply with City Electrical and Building
Code requirements.
f. Proof that the tower complies with regulations administered by the Federal
Aviation Administration.
g. Includes the Engineer’s professional seal and registration number.
h. For placement of wireless telecommunication antennas on roofs, walls,
and existing towers, the Engineer’s Report shall include detail on the
existing structure or tower’s suitability to accept the antenna, and the
proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure or tower.
Complete details of all fixtures and couplings, and the precise point of
attachment shall be indicated.
i. Other information necessary to evaluate the request.
2) Letter of Intent to Shared Use of Tower - For all commercial wireless
telecommunication service towers in excess of one hundred (100) feet, a letter of
intent committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared
use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms
and conditions for shared use.
h) New Towers and Co-Location Requirements - Any proposed commercial wireless
telecommunication service tower shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all
respects, to accommodate both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at
least four (4) additional users. Towers must be designed to allow for future
rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept antennas mounted at varying
heights. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
i) Tower Construction and Design Requirements - All towers shall comply with the
following construction and design requirements:
1) Building Codes - All towers erected, constructed, or located in the City, and all
structural elements and wiring therefore, shall comply with the Building Codes of
the City of Ferrysburg.
2) Color and Architectural Treatment - Towers and antennas shall be designed to
blend into the surrounding environment through use of color and camouflaging
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-24
architectural treatment, except in instances where the color and treatment is
dictated by federal or state authorities.
3) Monopole Design - Commercial wireless communication service towers shall be
of monopole design unless the City determines that an alternative design would
enhance the blending of the tower with the surrounding environment. Alternative
designs may be approved provided the applicant provides written certification
from a qualified and licensed professional engineer registered in the State of
Michigan detailing the reasons (design, construction, and otherwise) for
replacement of a monopole design with an alternate design.
4) Lighting - Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not
display strobe lights unless the lighting is specifically required by state or federal
authority. When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures
used to illuminate parking lots or similar areas may be attached to the tower.
5) Signs and Advertising - The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than
warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.
6) View Impact - A proposed tower shall not unreasonably interfere with the view
from any public park, natural scenic vista, historic building or district, or major
view corridor.
7) Accessory Utility Building - All utility buildings and structures accessory to a
tower shall be architecturally designed to blend with the surrounding environment
and shall meet the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zone district.
8) Fencing and Landscaping (Commercial Towers):
a. Fencing - Commercial towers shall be properly secured to prevent
unauthorized access. The base of the tower shall be fenced and gated.
The gate shall be locked at all times, except during those periods in which
the tower site is occupied by individuals authorized to enter same. All guy
wire and other supports shall be fenced or otherwise properly shielded to
prevent injury to the public and local fauna. The City may require
additional fencing along the perimeter of the tower site, or any portion
thereof, if determined necessary for the public health, safety, or welfare.
At the discretion of the City, the perimeter fencing may substitute for
fencing to be located at the base of the tower. The fence and gate shall be
six (6) feet in height and of cyclone design, or as approved by the City.
b. Landscaping - Landscaping shall be placed along the exterior side of the
security fence (refer to above sub-section). The landscaping shall consist
of at least two (2) species of hardy evergreen trees which shall be no less
than five (5) feet in height at time of planting and having the potential to
reach a minimum height of twenty (20) feet at maturity. The trees shall be
spaced at intervals no greater than twenty (20) feet on-center, provided,
however, the City may require an increase in density in order to mitigate
the visual impacts of the tower base and any ground mounted equipment
and buildings. Where feasible, natural vegetation shall be maintained and
integrated into the overall landscape design.
c. Alternatives - The City may consider alternatives to the above fence
and/or landscape design criteria, including non-vegetative screening,
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-25
provided, an alternative fence and/or landscape and/or non-vegetative
screen shall equal or exceed the above standards. In all cases, the design
shall reflect and compliment the architectural character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
j) Co-Location Requirements - All commercial wireless telecommunication towers
erected, constructed, or located within the City shall comply with the following colocation
requirements:
1) Search Radius - A request for a new commercial wireless communication service
tower shall not be approved unless the City Council finds that the
telecommunication equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved tower or building within the following
search radius:
Tower Height (Feet) Required Search Radius (Feet)
Under 100 Feet, or Greater than
20 Feet if Located on a Building
1,320 Feet
100 Feet to 200 Feet 2,640 Feet
Greater than 200 Feet 5,280 Feet
2) Required Factors to Demonstrate Inability to Co-Locate - An applicant must
demonstrate that an available existing or approved tower or building within the
above search radius is not capable of supporting the proposed tower due to one (1)
or more of the following reasons:
a. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower or
building cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate
planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
b. The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the
usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
c. Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot
accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer.
d. Other unforseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned
telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
k) Abandoned or Unused Towers or Portions of Towers - Abandoned or unused towers
or portions of towers shall be removed as follows:
1) Removal and Extension Periods - All abandoned or unused towers and
associated facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of the cessation
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-26
of operations at the site, provided, however, an extension of twelve (12) months
may be granted by the City, subject to receipt of a written request by the applicant
outlining the reasons for the extension and detailing the proposed method for
making the tower operational within the extended time frame. The request for
extension and processing fee shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior
to the end of the twelve (12) month cessation period. The Zoning Administrator
shall forward the application to the party responsible for the original approval. At
their next regular meeting, the party may approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the request. In the event original approval was authorized by the Zoning
Administrator, the Administrator shall process the request within seven (7)
working days after receipt of the written request for extension.
2) Removal of Towers on Leased or Rented Sites - For towers located on leased or
rented sites, the signed lease shall include language requiring the applicant (the
lessee) to remove the tower and associated facilities within a period no greater
than twelve (12) months after cessation of operations at the site. The City shall be
provided with the relevant portions of the signed lease which requires the
applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities as required above.
Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent the property owner (lessor) from
requiring a more stringent removal time frame.
3) City Removal of Tower - In the event an abandoned or unused tower is not
removed as provided for by this Ordinance, the tower and associated facilities
may be removed by the City, with the cost of the removal assessed against the
property.
4) Removal of Portion of Tower Previously Holding an Antenna - Unused
portions of towers above a manufactured connection which previously held an
antenna shall be removed within twelve (12) months of the time of antenna
relocation.
l) Interference with Public Safety Telecommunications - No new or existing
telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety telecommunications. The
City may require applications for new service to be accompanied by an Intermodulation
Study which provides a technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmission and
indicates all potential interference problems. In the event this study is required, before
the introduction of new service or changes to existing service, telecommunication
providers shall notify the City at least thirty (30) days in advance of such changes and
allow the City to monitor interference levels during the testing period.
m) Zoning Board of Appeals Relief - The Zoning Board of Appeals shall be authorized to
permit the placement of an antenna, tower, or satellite dish antenna in those locations not
expressly authorized by this Ordinance, provided, an applicant demonstrates thorough
bonafide documentation that adequate reception may only be achieved through relocation
and placement as requested. In approving a request, the Zoning Board of Appeals may
establish reasonable conditions to mitigate potential impacts of the antenna, tower, or
satellite dish location including conditions for screening, fencing, placement, color,
height, and related pertinent items.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-27
Section 3.150 Temporary Building and Structures
Temporary Buildings and Structures - Temporary buildings and structures, including trailers,
incidental to construction work on a lot, may be placed on the lot, subject to the following
restrictions:
a) Use - Temporary buildings and structures may only be used for the storage of
construction materials, tools, supplies and equipment, for construction management and
supervision offices, and for temporary on-site sanitation, solid waste or fuel facilities,
related to construction activity on the same lot.
b) Dwelling Prohibition - No temporary building or structure shall be used for dwelling
purposes.
c) Building Permit Required - A building permit for the building or structure shall be
required prior to the placement of same.
d) Placement - The placement of a temporary building or structure shall be subject to
review and approval by the Zoning Administrator.
e) Removal - Temporary buildings and structures shall be removed from the lot within one
(1) week of the completion of construction, issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or
expiration of the building permit, whichever occurs first.
Section 3.160 Streets, Street Frontage, Street Access, Driveway Location,
Driveway Surface Standards, Sidewalks, and Paths
(Refer also to Parking and Loading - Article 6)
a) Required Street Frontage - Any lot created after the effective date of this Ordinance
shall have frontage upon a public or approved private street which complies with the City
of Ferrysburg requirements. For cul-de-sac lots, minimum required street frontage is 50’.
For all other lots, the minimum street frontage requirement is equal to the minimum
required lot width.
[Ordinance No. 273, 12/19/11; Ordinance No. 283, 10/6/14]
b) Design Requirements - All public and private streets shall meet the road design and
construction standards of the City of Ferrysburg.
c) Driveways:
1) General - The number and location of driveways providing direct access to a
public or private street shall not exceed those which have been determined by the
Zoning Administrator to be necessary for proper and efficient traffic flow and for
the safety of pedestrians and motorists. In making this determination, the Zoning
Administrator shall consider the expected trip generation of the use served by the
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-28
driveways, the posted speed limit on the street, the proximity of intersecting
streets and driveways, and other applicable circumstances. [Ordinance No. 265,
10/4/2010]
2) Driveway Openings (Curb Cuts) - All driveway openings shall meet the design
and construction standards of the City of Ferrysburg.
3) Driveway Surface Material - Private access driveways providing access to a
public right-of-way shall be surfaced with durable pavement including asphalt or
cement binder or brick paver and be constructed to the City of Ferrysburg
standards, provided, however, a driveway accessing a non-paved road may be
constructed of compacted gravel or stone.
4) Driveway Location and Parking Limitations:
a. Residential (Single and Two Family):
1. Single-Family Detached Dwellings - A driveway shall be
permitted in the front or side yard subject to the following:
i. Unless otherwise provided for, a driveway and any
connected pad shall be at least three (3) feet from a side lot
line.
ii. Any portion of the driveway located in a front yard shall
not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width, provided,
however, that portion of the driveway abutting the front
elevation of a garage or carport may be of a width equal to
the front elevation and of sufficient depth to support
placement of single row of vehicles, plus sidewalk area for
pedestrian circulation.
iii. The driveway may include an attached pad for purposes of
allowing vehicles exiting a garage, carport, or driveway to
back-up (reverse direction) in order to permit forward entry
on to the street.
iv. The driveway shall be positioned on the site such that
access to the garage or carport is direct. In the event a
garage or carport does not exist, the orientation of the
driveway shall be to the rear yard.
v. Unless otherwise provided for by this Ordinance, the onsite
parking of vehicles shall be restricted to the driveway
and, as available, an associated garage or carport.
vi. Deviations to the above requirements may be approved
subject to Site Plan Review and approval by the Planning
Commission.
2. Two-Family Dwelling (Duplex) - A driveway shall be permitted
in the front or side yard subject to the following:
i. Converted Single-Family Dwelling - Single-family
dwellings which have been converted to multiple-family
use shall comply with the provisions of paragraph 1, above.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-29
ii. Duplex:
a) A duplex shall include one (1) driveway in common
use by the occupants of both dwelling units or one
(1) driveway per dwelling unit.
b) Unless otherwise provided for, a driveway and any
connected pad shall be at least three (3) feet from
side lot lines.
c) Any portion of a common driveway located in a
front yard shall not exceed forty (40) feet in width.
Individual unit driveways shall not exceed twenty
(20) feet in width. That portion of a driveway
abutting the front elevation of a garage or carport
may be of a width equal to the front elevation and
of sufficient depth to support placement of a single
row of vehicles, plus sidewalk area for pedestrian
circulation.
d) Multiple driveways shall be at least six (6) feet
apart. The separation area shall be landscaped in
lawn or a combination of lawn and other plantings.
e) The driveways shall be positioned on the site such
that access to the garage or carport is direct. In the
event a garage or carport does not exist, the
orientation of the driveway shall be to the rear yard.
f) Unless otherwise provided for by this Ordinance,
the on-site parking of vehicles shall be restricted to
the driveway and, as available, an associated garage
or carport.
g) Deviations to the above requirements may be
approved subject to Site Plan Review and approval
by the Planning Commission.
b. Multiple-Family, Commercial, and Industrial Uses:
1. Unless specifically provided for by this Ordinance, the designated
travel portion of an approved driveway shall not be used for
vehicular parking.
2. Driveways serving multiple-family (except two-family and
duplexes), commercial, and industrial uses shall be at least twenty
(20) feet from any parcel containing a single or two-family
dwelling unit, or twenty (20) feet from any parcel zoned RD, RG-
1, RG-2, and RG-3.
3. Driveways shall be subject to Site Plan Review and approval. The
Site Plan Review and approval body may require proposed
driveways to be reduced or enlarged in size, relocated, and/or
otherwise modified as determined necessary and appropriate to
ensure public safety.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-30
c. Common Driveway May Overlap Property Lines - A common
driveway providing access to adjoining properties may overlap the
common property line of both properties.
d) Sidewalks and Activity Paths - Sidewalks and paths are structures used for the
conveyance of pedestrians, normally via a walking mode. However, in certain instances,
a sidewalk or path may be designed and constructed to accommodate pedestrians in a
running/jogging mode, for non-motorized bicycling, or for other such purposes.
1) Proximity to Lot Lines - Except for public sidewalks and public paths located in
public right-of-way or other right-of-way or easement providing for public access,
sidewalks and paths shall be at least three (3) feet from all public right-of-way and
lot lines. Public sidewalks and paths may be located per the requirements of the
City after Site Plan Review and approval.
2) Design and Construction Standards.
a. Public Sidewalks and Paths - Shall meet the design and construction
requirements of the City of Ferrysburg.
b. Private Sidewalks and Paths - Private sidewalks shall:
1. Not exceed sixty (60) inches in width nor twelve (12) inches in
height unless a greater width and/or height have been approved by
the Planning Commission after Site Plan Review.
2. Be constructed of hard surfaced material, such as concrete, asphalt,
or brick pavers, or may be constructed of treated wood. Pursuant
to the approval of a private sidewalk or path, the City shall have
the authority to specify the dimensions and material used for
construction purposes.
3. Any sidewalk or path designed and constructed for use by other
than strictly pedestrians walking shall be subject to Site Plan
Review and approval by the Planning Commission.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 3.170 Withholding of Approval Pending Other Local, State, or
Federal Approvals
The Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, City Council, or Zoning Board of Appeals
may withhold granting of approval of any use, site plan, PUD Plan, appeal, or other approval
authorized by this Ordinance pending approvals which may be required by local, state, or federal
agencies. Except for a rezoning request, and if deemed appropriate, the Zoning Administrator,
Planning Commission, City Council, or Zoning Board of Appeals may grant "conditional"
approval of a request based on the applicant's successful receipt of necessary local, state, or
federal agency approval. In the event local, state, or federal agency approval is not forthcoming,
the "conditional" approval granted shall be automatically voided.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-31
Section 3.180 Standards Applicable to Single-Family Dwellings
All single-family dwellings, other than those located in mobile home parks as regulated by the
Michigan Mobile Home Commission, shall comply with the following standards:
a) Mobile Home Certification Requirements - If the dwelling is a mobile home, the
mobile home must be:
1) New and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate inspection agency as
meeting the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, as amended, or any similar
successor or replacement standards which may be promulgated; or,
2) Used and certified by the Building Official to be safe and fit for residential
occupancy.
3) The mobile home shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance to
conventional on-site constructed homes and other homes in the area.
b) Code Compliance - The dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable City building,
electrical, plumbing, fire, mechanical, energy and other similar codes, provided, however,
that where a dwelling unit is required by law to comply with any federal or state
standards or regulations for construction, and where the standards or regulations for
construction are different than those imposed by City codes, then the federal or state
regulations shall apply. Appropriate evidence of compliance with these standards or
regulations shall be provided to the Building Official. Notwithstanding compliance with
federal or state regulations, the dwelling shall comply with the other standards of this
Ordinance.
c) Compliance with Zoning Standards - The dwelling unit shall comply with all
requirements of this Ordinance, including, without limitation, the minimum lot area,
minimum lot width, minimum residential floor area, required yard and yard setbacks, and
maximum building height limitation of the zoning district in which it is located.
d) Removal of Wheels and Tongue - If the dwelling unit is a mobile home, the mobile
home shall be installed with the wheels and tongue removed.
e) Required Building Elevation - A dwelling unit shall have front, rear and side elevations
of a minimum horizontal dimension of twenty-four (24) feet each.
f) Foundation - A dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a permanent continuous
foundation constructed on the building site, which shall have a wall of the same perimeter
dimensions as the dwelling unit and to be constructed of those materials and type as
required by the Building Code for on-site constructed single-family dwellings.
g) Anchoring System - If the dwelling unit is a mobile home, it shall be installed on the
foundation as referenced by Item f), above, pursuant to the manufacturer's setup
instructions. It shall be secured to the building site by an anchoring system or device
complying with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Mobile Home Commission, or
any similar or successor agency having regulatory responsibility for mobile home parks.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-32
h) Steps and Porch - The dwelling shall have permanently attached steps or porch at least
three (3) feet in width where there is an elevation difference greater than eight (8) inches
between the first floor entry of the dwelling unit and the adjacent grade. Railings shall be
provided on the steps or porch in accordance with the City Building Code.
i) Exterior Doors - The dwelling unit shall have no less than two (2) exterior doors. One
(1) door shall be located along a front elevation and one (1) door on a side or rear
elevation.
j) Roof Loading - Roofs shall have a forty (40) pound snow load capacity.
k) Prohibited Dwellings - No garage, accessory structure, damaged or incomplete structure
shall be used as a dwelling. The basement of an incomplete structure may not be used as
a dwelling. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 3.190 Outdoor Placement of Motor Homes, Boats, and Recreational
Type Vehicles and Use of Recreational Vehicles for Temporary
Living Purposes
a) Purpose - The following regulations are intended to restrict the placement of certain
vehicles, trailers and related appurtenances in the front yard and in select locations of side
and rear yards. The restrictions on the placement have been determined necessary and
appropriate in order to:
1. Maintain the integrity of open space areas.
2. Prevent neighborhood blight and ensure the safety of residents.
3. Maintain property values.
4. Ensure access to light and air and fulfill the Purposes of this Ordinance as detailed
under Section 1.20.
In implementing the regulations of this section, it is recognized that residents, and their
vacationing guests, periodically desire opportunity to use certain recreational vehicles
and/or tents for temporary living purposes. Accordingly, this Section also provides
standards governing the temporary use and occupancy of recreational vehicles and tents.
To ensure the health, safety, and welfare of those occupying a recreational vehicle or tent,
as well as to protect neighboring residents, the regulations are intended to be more
stringent than those addressing the placement of non-occupied recreational vehicles and
tents.
b) Regulations - The outdoor placement of motor homes, boats, other recreational vehicles,
recreational vehicle trailers, and utility trailers and appurtenances on any residential lot or
parcel, shall be subject to the following regulations:
1) Number - Except for recreational vehicles identified as exempt under subsection
d), following, the outdoor placement of the above recreational vehicles and
trailers shall be limited to two (2) as based on the following equivalency table:
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-33
Vehicle Type Equivalency
a. One (1) boat on attendant trailer 1
b. One (1) self-propelled motor home 1
c. One (1) fifth wheel motor home 1
d. One (1) travel trailer 1
e. One (1) utility trailer 1
f. One (1) snowmobile on one (1) trailer 1
g. Multiple snowmobiles on one (1) trailer 1
h. One (1) jet ski on one (1) trailer 1
i. Multiple jet skis on one (1) trailer 1
j. One (1) motorcycle (non-licensed) on one (1) trailer 1
k. Multiple motorcycles on one trailer 1
l. One (1) empty boat trailer/R.V. trailer 1
m. Units comparable to the above 1
2) Boat Lifts. In addition to the allowed vehicles and trailers, one (1) boat lift is
permitted on a waterfront lot where boats or jet skis are docked during the boating
season, and shall not be counted toward the number of vehicles permitted. After
boating season, if a boat lift is removed from the water it shall be stored in the
waterfront yard, provided that no boat lift shall be stored less than five (5) feet
from a side lot line.
3) Placement Prohibition - Except as
provided for by this Section, there
shall be no placement in the front
yard.
4) Side and Rear Yard Placement:
a. The placement of all such
vehicles, trailers and
appurtenances in the side and
rear yards shall be subject to
the setback standards of other
accessory buildings,
structures, and uses as
permitted and regulated,
provided, however, in no
instance shall the setback in a
side yard be less than ten (10)
feet (See Figure 3-10).
Figure 3-10: Recreational Vehicle Yard
Placement
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-34
b. Setbacks greater than the above may be required if determined by the
Zoning Administrator to be necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the subject and neighboring properties. Similarly, the
Zoning Administrator may authorize a reduction in a side yard setback,
not less than three (3) feet from the property line, if the Administrator
determines that a reduction is necessary to permit placement of a vehicle.
In authorizing a reduction, the Zoning Administrator shall determine:
1. That placement of the vehicle as normally required is not possible
due to a lack of space between the side lot line and adjoining
structure;
2. That placement in another location on the site consistent with the
standards of this Ordinance may not reasonably be achieved;
3. That the permitted reduction is limited to the minimum extent
necessary to permit reasonable placement of the vehicle; and,
4. That the permitted reduction will not be detrimental to the health,
safety, and welfare of adjacent property owners and residents.
A setback reduction shall only extend to the placement of vehicles
regulated by the provisions of this Section. At any time the Zoning
Administrator determines the conditions of an authorized reduction have
been violated or that a reduction is no longer necessary to achieve
compliance with the provisions of this Section, the Administrator shall
cause the reduction to be rescinded.
c. On a waterfront lot, the vehicle(s) may be stored in the front yard
(between the street and the dwelling) only if fully screened, to a height of
at least six (6) feet, by a garage, accessory structure, or a landscaped
screen meeting the requirements of Section 3.130, g), 1). If located in the
side or rear yard, the vehicle(s) shall meet the requirements of
subparagraphs a and b above, but shall not be placed closer than 30 feet to
the water line.
5) Front Yard Placement – Exception. Placement in the front yard of a nonwaterfront
lot shall be permitted only if the following are met:
a. The vehicle shall be placed a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from the
front lot line.
b. The vehicle shall not encroach on a required side yard setback.
c. The vehicle shall be positioned such that, where reasonably feasible, it
shall be shielded from off-site view by natural vegetation or buildings
existing on the site.
d. The vehicle shall be at least thirty five (35) feet from any dwelling unit
located on an adjacent lot.
Determination of compliance with the above shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator.
6) A suitable covering in good condition shall be placed over all boats and other
unenclosed recreational vehicles in order to deter vandalism or injury to the
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-35
general public. The covering shall be properly secured to prevent unnecessary
movement and/or noise caused by wind or other natural forces.
7) Except as noted in Paragraph e), following, all such vehicles and trailers shall be
duly licensed as required by the State of Michigan to the residents of the parcel on
which the vehicles and trailers are placed.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
c) Temporary Placement in the Front Yard (Refer also to Paragraph e), following) - One
(1) trailer, with attendant recreational vehicle(s) placed thereon, or one (1) recreational
camping unit (e.g. R.V., pop-up camper, etc.) may be temporarily placed in a driveway
subject to the following provisions:
1) No vehicle or trailer shall be placed in a location or manner that restricts the clear
vision area of street intersections, driveway and street intersections, and alley and
street intersections.
2) Vehicles and trailers shall be placed on the driveway serving the residential
parcel.
3) No vehicle shall be placed in a public right-of-way unless the right-of-way legally
authorizes it.
4) The vehicle shall be fully secured to deter unauthorized entry and/or vandalism.
5) The length of placement shall be limited to seven (7) consecutive days, provided,
however, placement may occur at the rate of two (2) seven (7) day periods per
month, but not to exceed six (6) periods per year.
6) The above temporary provisions shall not apply to parcels on which the vehicle is
greater than two hundred (200) feet from the front lot line as regulated by this
Ordinance.
d) Temporary Placement In Front Yard Not Entitled To A Non-Conforming Status -
Temporary placement in the front yard as authorized under Paragraph c, above, shall be
deemed a temporary condition and shall not receive a legal non-conforming status should
this Ordinance be amended such that the provisions of this Section no longer remain
valid. Moreover, should the Zoning Administrator determine that placement of the
vehicle as approved represents a threat to the local health, safety, or welfare of the
occupants of the subject site or occupants of neighboring parcels, the Administrator may,
after written notice to the property owner and the passage of a thirty (30) day period,
require the vehicle to be moved to a fully conforming location.
e) Use and Placement of Recreational Vehicles, Camping (Traveling) Trailers, and
Tents for Temporary Living Purposes.
1) Authorization and Length of Temporary Use - Recreational vehicles, camping
trailers or tents may be used for temporary living purposes when accessory to
single-family or two-family dwellings. Except as permitted under 2), below, the
use shall only be permitted for a three (3) day period and for no more than one (1)
period in any thirty (30) consecutive days.
2) Placement - While in use for temporary living purposes, recreational vehicles and
tents shall be located according to the following:
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-36
a. Recreational Vehicles and Camping Trailer - Shall be located on the
driveway of the lot or parcel of the dwelling to which the vehicle is
accessory, and shall not encroach on a required front yard.
b. Tent - Shall be located in the rear yard of the lot or parcel of the dwelling
to which the tent is accessory.
3) Number of Temporary Dwelling Units - Recreational vehicles, camping trailers,
and tents used for temporary living purposes shall not exceed one (1) recreational
vehicle or one (1) camping trailer, plus one (1) tent at any time. These amounts
may be in addition to those provided for under Paragraph b), 1), of this section.
4) Extension of Use - Use of a recreational vehicle, camping trailer, or tent in excess
of a three (3) day period may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator subject to
the following:
a. Application Form - Application shall be made on a form supplied by the
Zoning Administrator requesting the extension.
b. Inspection and Sanitary Requirements - The Zoning Administrator shall
have the right to inspect the grounds upon which the temporary dwelling
will be placed to ensure that adequate provisions have been made pursuant
to potable water and sanitary needs.
c. Extension Limit - In no case shall the extended period exceed seven (7)
days in any thirty (30) day period, nor shall the number of requests for
extensions exceed two (2) in any one (1) year period.
5) Licensing Requirements - Recreational vehicles and camping trailers used for
temporary dwelling purposes shall possess current license tags, which may
include out-of-state tags.
6) Conditions - The Zoning Administrator reserves the right to place reasonable
conditions on the request including, but not limited to, placement of the temporary
dwelling, parking of associated vehicles, outside storage of camping and other
equipment, noise abatement, trash collection, and other factors.
f) Recreational Vehicles Exempt From Outside Placement Count - Non-motorized
recreational vehicles such as canoes, small sail boats, row boats, and paddle boats
meeting all of the following standards shall not be counted as part of the maximum
number of units that may be placed outdoors:
1) Shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in length.
2) Shall not be located on a trailer.
3) Shall be located in the rear yard.
4) Shall be owned by the individuals residing in the premises upon which the exempt
vehicles are placed.
Recreational vehicles stationed in the water shall also be exempt from the above count.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-37
Section 3.200 Plat Violations
Where the Zoning Administrator determines that an area proposed for subdividing would violate
the Subdivision Control Act, as amended by the Land Division Act; Site Condominium Act; or
the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Ferrysburg, no permit for Zoning Compliance or
building permit shall be issued.
Section 3.210 Restoring Unsafe Buildings
a) Repair of Unsafe Buildings - Except as noted in Section b), following, nothing in this
Ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or repair to a safe condition any part of a
building or structure declared to be unsafe by the Building Inspector. Strengthening or
repair shall not be interpreted as authorizing a use, or continuation of a use, not permitted
by the underlying zone district.
b) Condemned Buildings - A building which has been officially declared as condemned
under the provisions of the City’s building code shall not be repaired unless authorized by
the Building Official. A building which has been officially authorized for demolition by
the City Council shall not be repaired unless authorized by the Council. Provided,
however, the requirements of this section shall not prevent the Building Official from
authorizing building or site repairs or other modifications which, if left undone, would
pose an imminent threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.
Section 3.220 Grade
a) Yards - All yards shall be provided with adequate drainage and shall be graded so as to
drain surface water away from foundation walls.
b) Exceptions to Grade Standards - Exceptions to the above grading standards may be
approved by the Zoning Administrator based on demonstrated evidence that the lot or
parcel contains unique natural features that would be destroyed or significantly altered
based on compliance with the above standards. In considering an exception to the above
standards, the Zoning Administrator shall not be authorized to permit a change contrary
to other local, state, or federal regulations or standards or, if approved, result in
significant negative impact to adjoining properties. In approving an exception, the
Zoning Administrator may attach conditions necessary to protect, and ensure
compatibility with, adjoining properties.
c) Grade Modification Impacts - A grade modification shall not result in negative impacts
on surrounding properties. These impacts include, but shall not be limited to, increases in
the off-site discharge of surface water, flooding, elimination of off-site or through views,
and the like.
d) Specific Grade Requirements - Prior to any permitting, the Zoning Administrator shall
have authority to establish specific grades should it be determined the grades are
necessary for drainage purposes, utility and other infrastructure requirements, to achieve
site design consistency among abutting projects, or for other purposes determined to be
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-38
beneficial for the public health, safety, and welfare. Once established, a grade shall be
used for all design and construction purposes and shall not be modified without Zoning
Administrator approval.
Section 3.230 Trash Receptacles and Dumpsters - All Districts
Except for garbage cans (90 gallons or less) and similar residential trash containers, all trash
receptacles, including dumpsters, shall comply with the following:
a) All persons or businesses that accumulate more than ninety (90) gallons of garbage or
rubbish per week shall place all garbage or rubbish in a dumpster.
b) All trash receptacles, including the enclosure and surrounding ground area, shall be
maintained in a neat and orderly condition, free from rubbish and other debris. No
rubbish or other debris shall be allowed to accumulate on the grounds surrounding the
receptacle.
c) All trash receptacles shall have tight fitting lids which shall be kept completely closed at
all times, except for times of filling and collection.
d) All dumpsters and other trash receptacles shall be emptied as least once per week, and
with sufficient frequency to prevent the unreasonable development of odors and
attraction of rodents and other pests.
e) Adequate vehicular access shall be provided to the containers for truck pick-up via a
public alley or vehicular access aisle which does not conflict with the use of off-street
parking areas or entrances to or exists from principal buildings nearby.
f) No dumpster shall be located in a required yard unless approved by the Planning
Commission as part of site plan review.
g) A solid ornamental screen wall or fencing shall be provided around all sides of the trash
container which shall be provided with a gate for access and be of sufficient height as to
completely screen the container, the maximum height of which shall not exceed eight (8)
feet, but shall always be at least one (1) foot above the height of the dumpster. The
height requirement shall apply to all sides, including the gated side. For purposes of the
above standard, screening materials may consist of any of the following:
1) Wood, provided the wood is cedar, redwood or equivalent of at least 5/8"
thickness or other types of comparable wood which have been treated with
preservatives to ensure longevity.
2) Decorative masonry wall.
3) Evergreen shrubbery consisting of permanent living plant materials which shall be
continually maintained in a sound, healthy, and vigorous growing condition, free
of plant diseases and insect pests, and free of weeds, refuse, and debris. The
shrubbery shall be of a size, and planted at a density, capable of achieving a
continuous, visual, barrier comparable to that of a wood or masonry wall.
4) Other materials as approved by the Planning Commission.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-39
5) At the request of the applicant, the Planning Commission may modify the
screening requirements of this Ordinance pursuant to dumpsters provided the
applicant satisfactorily demonstrates:
a. The modification will not have a negative impact on surrounding
properties;
b. Natural screening or other features exist which will provide screening
comparable to that of Item g), above;
c. The requested modification will be compatible with surrounding uses;
d. The requested modification will not represent a threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare; and,
e. That the request will not provide the applicant with a benefit not made
available to other businesses possessing similar site conditions.
f. No person shall make unauthorized use of a dumpster.
g. All commercial establishments providing food prepared for take-out shall
provide and maintain convenient outside trash receptacles sufficient to
contain rubbish and garbage that is generated by the customers of such
establishments.
h. It shall be the responsibility of the land owner and lessee of the premises
upon which a dumpster is placed to empty the dumpster, maintain the
dumpster and screen, and otherwise comply with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
i. This Ordinance is not intended to require the enclosure of any dumpster
used on a temporary basis for less than sixty (60) days, or in connection
with construction activity for which a bonafide building permit has been
issued. When used in connection with construction activity, the dumpster
shall be removed, or otherwise located in compliance with the enclosure
provisions of this Ordinance, prior to issuance of a final certificate of
building occupancy.
Section 3.240 Home Occupations
A home occupation shall be permitted by right if it meets the below listed requirements. The
home occupation:
a) Shall not involve any activities that are discernible from the exterior and shall not result
in the exterior of the home having other than a residential appearance, except for a wall
sign as permitted by Article 7.
b) No persons other than those who reside within the residence may be employed in the
home occupation.
c) Shall not involve the storage or use of any materials for which there is high risk of
flammability or explosion.
d) Shall not generate more than five (5) client trips to the home during the hours of 8:00 AM
to 8:00 PM. Clients shall not be received during other hours.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-40
e) Shall not involve deliveries by trucks greater than normal U.S. Postal or similar parcel
delivery service step-type vans.
f) Shall not emit noise in violation of the City of Ferrysburg Anti-Noise and Public
Nuisance Ordinance.
g) The home in which the home occupation is proposed must be used principally for
residential purposes. No more than twenty percent (20%) of the residential floor area may
be dedicated to the home occupation.
h) Shall conform to the sign requirements of Article 7.
i) Shall comply with all applicable building and licensing requirements of the City.
j) Instruction in a craft, music, or fine art within a dwelling, by a resident member of the
family residing in the dwelling, shall be considered a home occupation and shall be
subject to the requirements for a home occupation.
k) The occupation of a registered caregiver pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana
Act shall be considered a home occupation and shall be subject to the requirements of
home occupations and shall also comply with the following:
1) The medical use of marihuana shall comply at all times and in all circumstances
with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act and the administrative rules of the
Department of Community Health.
2) A registered caregiver must be located outside of a 1,000 foot radius from any
school or library as defined by the Michigan Public Health Code to insure
compliance with the Federal Drug Free School Zone requirements
3) All medical marihuana shall be grown and contained within the main dwelling in
an enclosed, locked facility inaccessible on all sides and equipped with locks or
other security devices that permit access by the registered primary caregiver or
registered qualifying patient. Marihuana plants may not be visible from the
exterior of the building.
4) All building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical systems shall comply with
applicable building and mechanical codes.
5) If a room with windows is utilized as a growing location, any growing lights used
in cultivation between sunset and sunrise shall employ shielding methods to
prevent ambient light spillage that may intrude on adjacent residential properties.
6) Notwithstanding the above, no sign advertising the business of a registered
caregiver may be erected on the premises or be visible outside the premises.
7) Not more than 1 primary caregiver shall be permitted to operate a home
occupation in a single dwelling.
8) Marihuana may not be consumed in an area visible to the public or occupants of
adjacent properties.
9) Not more than 1 qualifying patient who is not a resident in the home may
consume medical marijuana in the home at any time.
10) Nothing in this section shall be construed to encourage or condone violations of
state or federal law.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-41
[Ordinance No. 269, 2/7/2011]
The allowance of a home occupation by the City, subject to the regulations contained in this
Ordinance, shall not in any way constitute an acceptance of, or give validity to, the introduction
of non-residential uses into any residential zone district.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 3.250 Site Condominiums
Site condominiums shall be processed according to the following procedure:
a) Preliminary Review and Approval Stage.
1) Planning Commission Review. An application and site plan for preliminary
review and approval shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review
and recommendation based on compliance with the Site Plan Review Standards of
Article V. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City
Council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request. In making a
recommendation, the Planning Commission shall provide the City Council with a
statement supporting the reasons for the recommendation.
2) City Council Review. After receipt and review of a recommendation from the
Planning Commission, the City Council shall review the application and site plan
pursuant to the site plan review standards of Article V. The City Council may, at
their discretion, conduct a public hearing on the proposed site condominium
project for purpose of receiving public comment. The City Council may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the site condominium request based on a finding
of compliance with the provisions of this section, Article V., and other applicable
regulations.
b) Final Review and Approval Stage. A final application and site plan shall be submitted
to the City Council incorporating all conditions placed on the preliminary plan. The City
Council shall review the plan for conformity with the approved preliminary plan and
conditions, if any, attached thereto. The final application and site plan shall be approved
based on a finding that all requirements attached to the preliminary plan have been
complied with.
c) Additional Information for Preliminary and Final Review - In addition to the
information required by Article V, the following information shall also be included for
preliminary and final review and approval:
1) A condominium subdivision plan as required by Section 66 of the Condominium
Act.
2) Documented proof of review by other applicable agencies including the Ottawa
County Road Commission, Drain Commissioner, Health Department, Michigan
Department of Transportation, and the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources/Environmental Quality.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-42
d) Zoning Compliance - A site condominium subdivision shall meet the minimum
requirements of the district in which it is located, including minimum lot size, minimum
setbacks, and minimum floor area.
e) Design and Construction Consistency with the Ferrysburg Subdivision Ordinance -
The design and construction of streets, alleys, sidewalks, curb and gutter, easements,
street tree plantings, street signs, water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and other such
systems and utilities shall equal or exceed the design and construction requirements of
subdivisions as regulated by Chapter 155 of the City Code of the City of Ferrysburg.
f) Underground Placement of Utilities - All utilities, including power lines and
communication lines, shall be placed below ground.
g) Master Deed - The Ferrysburg City Clerk shall be furnished with a copy of the recorded
master deed. The master deed must ensure that the City of Ferrysburg will not be
responsible for maintenance or liability of the non-dedicated portions of the site
condominium and that all private roads will be properly maintained, that snow removal
will be provided and that there is adequate access and turnaround capacity for emergency
vehicles. Responsibility for the maintenance of stormwater retention areas, drainage
easements, drainage structures, lawn cutting, and other general maintenance of common
areas must be clearly stated.
h) As-Built Drawings - As construction is completed, the Ferrysburg City Clerk shall be
furnished with two (2) copies of all “as-built” drawings for review by the City Engineer
or compliance with all City ordinances.
Section 3.260 Day Care and Group Homes
To promote the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants and residents of day care homes and
group homes and to ensure compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood, all day care homes
and group homes shall:
a) Meet applicable state and federal regulatory requirements.
b) Meet applicable local building and other safety codes.
c) Demonstrate that adequate provisions have been made to secure the health, safety, and
welfare of those occupying the day care or group home including, but not limited to,
safety fencing around play areas, vehicular drop-off area out of the flow of traffic, and
adequate off-street parking.
Section 3.270 Basis of Determining Front Yard Requirements and Averaging
of Setback
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-43
(See Figure 3-11) The required
front yard shall be measured from
the right-of-way line to an
imaginary line across the width of
the lot which represents the
minimum required front setback
distance for that district, provided,
however, that where an average
setback line less than required has
been established by existing
buildings on the same side of the
street and within two hundred
(200) feet of the proposed
building, the established setback
shall apply. However, this
reduction shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the required
underlying zone district standard, nor permitted on streets or roads which have been identified by
the City for future widening.
Section 3.280 Sales on Residentially Zoned Properties
a) In any residential zoning district established by this Ordinance, outdoor display of items
for sale on any portion of a lot or parcel shall be subject to the standards of this section.
For purposes of this section, a residential lot or parcel shall consist of one (1) or more lots
or parcels of record or one (1) or more metes and bounds descriptions, so long as the lots,
parcels, or descriptions are contiguous and in common ownership. As used herein, the
term “common ownership” shall refer to the ownership of two or more contiguous lots or
parcels by the same person or persons, by spouses, whether jointly or severally; by
parents and children; or by different corporations or partnership where a controlling
interest in both entities is owned by the persons described above.
b) Vehicle Sales.
1) A vehicle sale item shall be defined as any one (1) of the following:
a. car (automobile)
b. truck
c. recreational vehicle
d. motorcycle or motor scooter
e. any other type of motorized passenger vehicle designed and required to be
licensed for operation on public roads
f. boat
g. trailer
h. boat on a trailer
i. recreational vehicle on a trailer
Figure 3-11: Averaging of Front Yards
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-44
j. any other type of vehicle on a trailer
2) An owner or occupant may display not more than one (1) vehicle for sale at any
one (1) time. The vehicle displayed for sale need not be owned by the owner or
occupant of the lot or parcel.
3) The vehicle displayed for sale must be operational, and must not be in violation of
the provisions of any other City ordinance or State law.
4) Vehicle sales may not occur more than three (3) times per calendar year on any
residential lot, nor more than ten (10) consecutive days per time displayed.
5) A minimum of twenty-one (21) calendar days shall transpire between the end of
display of one (1) vehicle for sale and the beginning of display of another vehicle
for sale on the same lot.
6) One (1) non-illuminated “for-sale” sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area,
shall be attached to the vehicle displayed for sale. Any “for-sale” sign which is
not attached to the vehicle displayed for sale is prohibited.
7) No vehicle displayed for sale and no “for-sale” sign, as both are described in this
section, shall be placed in, on, or over any public street right-of-way or any
publicly owned property.
8) Whenever a vehicle for sale is being displayed, except for the display of a car or a
truck, the front yard placement of other recreational vehicles as permitted under
Section 3.210 shall be prohibited.
c) Garage Sales, Estate and Auction Sales, or Outdoor Sales of Individual Items. Any
garage sale, estate, auction or other similar sale, or any outdoor sales of individual items
of personal property, conducted on any property in a residential zoning district, shall
comply with the following:
1) General requirements:
a. All personal property items to be sold on the site shall be owned, utilized,
and maintained by a resident of the dwelling where the sale is to be
conducted.
b. Garage sales, estate and auction sales and other similar outdoor sales of
individual items are prohibited on vacant lots.
c. All merchandise sold and any unsold merchandise remaining on the site
and not within an enclosed building at the conclusion of the sale must be
removed from the site within twenty-four (24) hours of the conclusion of
the sale.
d. All displays of sale merchandise shall be limited to that portion of the
front yard area which is at least five (5) feet back from any adjoining
property line, and at least ten (10) feet back from any sidewalk.
e. The conduct of the sale shall not interfere with the orderly flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or restrict emergency vehicle access.
2) Garage Sales and Estate and Auction Sales:
a. Up to three (3) sales at any given property shall be permitted during a one
(1) year time period.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-45
b. Garage sales and estate and auction sales are limited to forty-eight (48)
consecutive hours.
c. No garage sale or estate or auction sale shall commence before 8:00 A.M.
or continue after 7:00 P.M.
3) Outdoor Sales of Individual Items. Outdoor sales of individual items of personal
property, not including the sale of vehicles as regulated above, shall be subject to
the following:
a. No item may be displayed for a period exceeding fourteen (14)
consecutive days.
b. No more than two (2) items may be sold at any one time.
c. There may be no more than three (3) individual item sales events on any
property during a one (1) year time period.
4) The following are exempt from the time and frequency requirements of this
section:
a. Sales conducted by places of religious worship, schools and other nonprofit
organizations, when held within an enclosed structure.
b. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
d) Small Scale Produce Sales. The sales of produce, conducted on any property in a
residential zoning district, shall comply with the following:
1) General requirements:
a. All produce to be sold on such property shall be planted, grown and
harvested on the same property. Sales of produced planted, grown or
harvested off-site shall be prohibited.
b. Any temporary stand used as a part of this use, shall meet all setback
requirements. A stand may only be viewable on this property during the
dates for which approval has been granted for the sales of produce.
c. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided on-site. At a minimum 2
parking stalls shall be required. No parking shall be permitted on a public
right-of-way. No parking shall be permitted off-site, unless that property is
contiguous with the subject property and is under the same ownership.
d. One on-site sign shall be permitted, only during those hours for which
produce is being sold. The sign shall be no larger than 16 square feet in
size. The sign shall be setback from the right-of-way at minimum 15 feet.
If mounted on a pole or other freestanding base, the sign height shall be no
greater than 6 feet. The sign shall not be permitted to be illuminated.
2) Approval process:
a. Those wishing to engage in small scale produce sales pursuant to the
above, shall submit to the Zoning Administrator an application for a
zoning permit. Included as a part of that application shall be a letter
describing what is to be sold, where the produce was grown, the dates and
time of day for which sale will occur, how off-street parking will be
provided and the size and location of any sign.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-46
b. Upon request of the Zoning Administrator a plan may be required to be
submitted for review. This plan shall provide a graphic depiction of the
general requirements of this section.
c. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application based on the
requirements of this section and any other applicable ordinance of the City
of Ferrysburg and shall either approve, approve with conditions or deny
the application. Approval of an application for small scale produce sales
shall be for the period stated on the application. However, all requests for
small scale produce sales shall be renewed annually.
[Ordinance No. 246, 12/01/08; No. 265, 10/4/2010, No. 280, 04/01/13]
Section 3.290 Temporary Uses
Temporary uses are permitted in any zoning district with the approval of the City Council of the
issuance of a temporary use permit by the Zoning Administrator. The following requirements
shall apply:
a) All applications for a temporary use permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator
at least sixty (60) days prior to the proposed commencement date of the temporary use.
This sixty (60) day period can, however, be shortened in the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator or the City Council, for good cause shown by the applicant. No application
shall be filed less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the City Council meeting at
which a decision is requested.
b) The City Council may authorize the Zoning Administrator to issue a temporary use
permit if all of the requirements of Subsection C are satisfied.
c) A temporary use permit shall not be approved by the City Council unless all of the
following requirements are satisfied:
1) Nuisance, hazardous features. The temporary use shall not result in any hazard or
nuisance to adjacent lands or the uses thereof, nor otherwise be contrary to the
public health, safety or welfare of the City.
2) Traffic and circulation. The temporary use shall not create hazardous vehicle or
pedestrian traffic conditions on or adjacent of the streets serving the property. A
temporary use permit shall not be issued if the City Council determines that the
proposed use will:
a. Unreasonably interfere with the use of a public or private street for
vehicular travel;
b. Unreasonably interfere with the view of access to or use of property
adjacent to the public or private street serving the proposed temporary use;
c. Cause a violation of any State laws or local ordinances;
d. Create any public nuisances related to noise, dust, traffic, or other related
condition; or
e. Reduce the effectiveness of or access to any utility pole, street lighting,
sign or other traffic control device.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-47
3) Public facilities and services. Adequate utilities, drainage, refuse management,
and sanitary facilities shall be assured. Access to emergency services and other
necessary facilities and services shall be available for the proposed temporary use.
4) Natural environment. The proposed temporary use shall not have a substantial
adverse effect on the natural environment or possible flood hazards, or storm
water runoff problems.
5) Suitability of the site. The site of the proposed temporary use shall be suitable for
the temporary use, giving consideration to size of the site, vehicle and pedestrian
access and circulation, parking, effects on adjacent land uses, and other related
conditions.
6) Building, electrical and other codes. The temporary use and all associated
temporary improvements, including, but not limited to tents, stands, temporary
electrical systems, temporary heating systems, and temporary lighting systems
shall comply with all applicable provisions of the City's Building Code, Electrical
Code, and other applicable codes adopted or amended from time to time.
d) A temporary use shall be permitted only the minimum necessary period of time, given all
of the circumstances. In no case shall a temporary use permit be issued for a period in
excess of thirty (30) days during any twelve (12) month period, nor shall any property be
used for a temporary use in excess of thirty (30) days during any twelve (12) month
period.
e) The City may impose additional reasonable terms and conditions in connection with the
approval of any temporary use.
f) The City may revoke or suspend a temporary use permit at any time upon the failure of
the owner or any operator of the use to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance,
the conditions imposed upon the issuance of any temporary use permit, or any other
applicable provisions of State law or local Ordinance. [Ordinance No. 220, 12/20/04]
Section 3.300 Private Streets
a) Where Permitted. Private streets are permitted in any zoning district within the City
and are not permitted to serve fewer than three (3) lots.
b) Internal Drives Exempt. These requirements shall not apply to internal driveways,
internal access drives, parking areas, or other means of secondary access within an
apartment complex, industrial park, business center, or similar unified development.
c) Site Condominium Developments. Single-family site condominium developments shall
be served by a public street, or by a private street meeting the requirements of this
Section.
d) Site Plan Approval Required. Private street applications shall be subject to final site
plan approval in accordance with the requirements and procedures of Article 5. The
private street plan shall contain the applicable information required for site plans by
Article 5, including cross section drawings, which shall be drawn and sealed by a
registered professional engineer.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-48
e) Easement and Maintenance Agreement. A private street easement and maintenance
agreement shall be submitted in recordable form which meets the minimum standards:
1) The City Attorney shall review and approve the easement and maintenance
agreement for the street as submitted by the applicant. The responsibility for the
ownership and maintenance of the street shall be of the property owner(s) served
by the street. The agreement shall include provisions for a performance guarantee,
if required, in accordance with f) below.
2) The agreement shall contain a detailed legal description of the private street
easement.
3) The agreement shall bind the benefiting lots, parcels, and owners to the required
maintenance of the private street, including all succeeding owners.
4) Should the benefiting property owners fail to maintain and repair the private
street, the agreement shall allow the City to make any repairs it deems necessary
to ensure the street is in a condition suitable for travel, as determined by the City
Public Works Supervisor, and passable for emergency vehicles, as determined by
the City Fire Department, and charge the property owners served by the private
street for the repairs. The City may collect unpaid charges via any method
allowed by law.
5) After recording the easements and maintenance agreements, a copy of the
recorded documents shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator.
f) General Requirements. Private streets shall meet the following requirements:
1) Private streets shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with
the provisions of this Section. No site plan, site condominium, land division,
special land use, or other zoning approval shall be granted unless the private street
meets the requirements of this Section.
2) The minimum width of traveled surface of a private street shall be at least
eighteen (18) feet, unless otherwise recommended or required by the Planning
Commission, City Fire Department, or City Engineer.
3) The maximum length of any private street cul-de-sac shall not exceed one
thousand three hundred and twenty (1,320) feet, unless it intersects with another
conforming private street with access to an improved public street, or to another
improved public street.
4) All private streets shall be paved with either asphalt or concrete and constructed
to according to Ottawa County Standards.
5) The private street easement shall not be less than sixty-six (66) feet in width.
Below ground utilities shall be permitted to be located within the private street
easement. All private streets shall be designed to form a safe and efficient street
network.
6) Private streets shall be maintained in a condition suitable for travel, as determined
by the City Public Works Supervisor, and passable for emergency vehicles, as
determined by the City Fire Department.
7) Whenever possible, streets shall be designed to connect or be extended to planned
or anticipated future developments.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-49
8) No private street shall serve more than ten (10) lots, parcels, or dwelling units,
unless a secondary means of access is provided to a public street.
9) The private street shall be given a name that is not the same or similar to any
other street name in the City. A street sign meeting City standards as to design,
location, and maintenance shall be erected and maintained wherever a private
street intersects any other public or private street.
g) Zoning District Requirements.
1) Any lot created on a private street, along with accompanying buildings, shall
comply with all site development standards applicable to the zoning district in
which it is located.
2) All lots on a private street shall have the minimum required lot width on the
private street, except cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of
street frontage, and shall meet the minimum lot width measured at the required
front setback.
3) The easement for the private street shall not be included in the required minimum
lot area or lot width calculation.
h) Performance Guarantee. To assure completion and maintenance of a private street in
accordance with the requirements set forth herein, the City may require the applicant to
provide a performance guarantee in accordance with the requirements of Section 12.60.
i) As-Built Drawings. Upon completion of the private street, the applicant shall submit to
the City two (2) complete sets of “as built” drawings, certified by the applicant's
engineer, for final acceptance.
j) Emergency Access. Private streets may not be gated or otherwise be constructed so as to
prevent or hinder access by emergency vehicles.
k) Existing Private Streets:
1) An existing private street that is nonconforming may not be extended to include
additional lands not taking access from the private street as of the date of this
Ordinance, unless the entire private street is upgraded to meet the requirements of
this Section.
2) A structure may be constructed upon a vacant lot of record that takes its primary
access from an existing nonconforming private street, provided that the structure
and all other development thereon meets the requirements of this Ordinance.
3) Existing lots of record with their primary access on an existing nonconforming
private street may be divided in accordance with the dimensional requirements of
this Ordinance, the City of Ferrysburg land division requirements and the Land
Division Act (PA 288 of 1967, as amended); however, no more than one (1)
additional parcel may be created from any existing lot of record.
4) Existing private streets which are nonconforming due to inadequate easement
width may be improved without requiring the existing easement to be made
conforming to the width requirements, provided that the pavement and any other
improvements meet the requirements of this Section, and that the width of the
easement is not further reduced.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-50
5) Plans to improve an existing private street shall be reviewed in the same manner
as a new private street.
[Ordinance No. 242, 12/03/07]
Section 3.310 Wind Energy Conversion Systems
a) Purpose: This subsection establishes standards and procedures by which the installation
and operation of an On-Site Service WECS shall be governed within the City of
Ferrysburg.
b) Definitions:
1) Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS): Shall mean a combination of:
a. A surface area (typically a blade, rotor, or similar device), either variable
or fixed, for utilizing the wind for electrical power; and
b. A shaft, gearing, belt, or coupling utilized to convert the rotation of the
surface area into a form suitable for driving a generator, alternator, or
other electricity-producing device; and
c. The generator, alternator, or other device to convert the mechanical energy
of the surface area into electrical energy, generally housed in a nacelle;
and
d. The tower, pylon, building mount or other structure upon which any, all,
or some combination of the above are mounted.
e. Other components not listed above but associated with the normal
construction, operation, and maintenance of a WECS.
2) WECS Height: The distance measured between the ground (at normal grade) and
the highest point of a WECS (for a horizontal axis WECS, the measurement shall
be to the tip of the rotor blade when the blade is in the full vertical position).
3) On-site Service WECS : A single WECS placed upon a lot or parcel with the
primary intent to service the energy needs of only the structures and uses on the
same lot or parcel.
c) Only On-site Service WECS shall be allowed. A WECS with the primary purpose of
providing power to the utility grid is not permitted.
d) On-site Service WECS General Requirements:
1) Except as may otherwise be required by this Ordinance, an On-Site Service
WECS shall be allowed as an accessory use in any zoning district, subject to the
requirements of this Section.
2) Review Requirements
a. For a WECS that does not exceed fifty (50) feet in height, review shall be
according the Site Plan Review requirements of Article 5.
b. For any WECS exceeding fifty (50) feet in height, Article 4, Special Land
Uses, shall apply.
3) Power rating of the WECS turbine shall not be greater than 50 kW.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-51
4) The WECS shall provide energy only to the structures and uses on the same
property upon which the tower is located and must be owned or leased by the
owner of the same property; however, this does not prevent the distribution to the
local utility company of any power that is generated beyond the needs of the
structures or uses on the property. Except for the local utility company, power
generated by the WECS may not be provided to any other property or entity.
5) No sound attributed to the WECS in excess of 55 dB(A) shall be discernible at the
property line.
6) There shall be no signs on the WECS other than the name of the manufacturer,
which may only be affixed to the base of the tower or to the nacelle. No sign shall
exceed three (3) square feet in area.
7) There shall be no lighting on or directed to the WECS, unless a beacon is required
by the Federal Aviation Administration.
8) The WECS shall be painted in a neutral matte color, such as gray or light blue, to
blend into the background. A building mounted WECS may be painted in similar
colors to those on the building.
9) A WECS shall have an automatic braking, governing, or feathering system to
prevent uncontrolled rotation or over speeding.
10) A WECS shall not be installed in any location where its proximity to existing
fixed broadcast, re-transmission or reception antenna for radio, television or
wireless phone or personal communication systems would produce
electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or reception.
11) The applicant shall provide written evidence that the WECS complies with all
applicable federal, state and county requirements, in addition to City ordinances.
12) All WECS installations shall comply with applicable ANSI (American National
Standards Institute) standards.
13) A WECS shall be removed when the device or equipment is no longer operating
or when it has been abandoned. A WECS shall be deemed abandoned when it has
not produced electrical energy for twelve (12) consecutive months.
14) An existing and approved WECS may be repaired and maintained; however, a
WECS may only be replaced with a new WECS upon approval of the Zoning
Administrator, provided that the new WECS is of the same height, rotor diameter,
setback, etc. as the WECS it replaces. For the purposes of this paragraph, a “new
or replacement WECS” shall mean all of the WECS, excluding the tower or
support structure.
e) Ground-Mounted On-Site Service WECS (see Figure 3-12)
1) The WECS shall be located on the property so that it is set back from all property
lines a distance equal to the WECS height. The setback shall be measured from
the property line (considered as a plane extending from the ground to the highest
point of the WECS) to the closest extension of the rotor relative to the property
line (see graphic). No part of a single WECS (including guy wire anchors) shall
be located within or above any required setback.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-52
2) The WECS height shall be limited by available setbacks as required in paragraph
1) above; however, no WECS height shall exceed fifty (50) feet on a property less
than 12,000 square feet in area; seventy-five (75) feet on a property at least
12,000 square feet but less than one (1) acre in area; or one hundred (100) feet on
a property one (1) acre in area or greater. Any WECS over fifty (50) feet high is
subject to Special Land Use review, regardless of lot size.
3) The minimum rotor blade tip clearance from grade shall be twenty (20) feet.
4) The minimum rotor blade tip clearance from any structure shall be twenty (20)
feet.
5) The diameter of the rotor shall be dependent upon maximum WECS height and
rotor blade tip clearance, but in no case shall it exceed fifty (50) feet.
6) The tower used to support a WECS shall be adequately anchored meeting ANSI
standards, as certified by an engineer.
f) Building Mounted On-Site Service WECS (see Figure 3-13)
1) The diameter of the rotor shall not exceed twenty (20) feet.
2) The WECS height shall not exceed the maximum height for principal buildings in
the district, plus fifteen (15) feet.
3) The WECS shall be mounted so that it is set back from adjoining property lines a
distance equal to the combined height of the WECS and the height of the portion
of the structure on which it is mounted. The setback shall be measured from the
property line (considered as a plane extending from the ground to the highest
point of the WECS) to the closest extension of the rotor relative to the property
line (see graphic).
4) A building mounted WECS shall not be mounted to the vertical face of a gable
end or dormer that is visible from the street.
Figure 3-12: Ground Mounted On-Site Service WECS
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-53
5) The mount and the structure used to support a building mounted WECS shall
meet ANSI standards, as certified by an engineer.
g) Review Procedure.
1) An application for a WECS that qualifies for site plan review shall be reviewed in
accordance with the requirements of Article 5.
2) An application for a WECS that requires Special Land Use approval shall be
reviewed in accordance with the requirements of Article 4.
h) Discretionary Conditions: The Planning Commission, or in the case of a Special Land
Use, the City Council, may impose other terms and conditions regulating the
construction, installation, use, maintenance, repair and removal of any WECS. Other
terms and conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1) The preservation of existing trees and other existing vegetation not required to be
removed for installation of a WECS.
2) The reasonable replacement of trees or other vegetation removed or destroyed
during the construction or installation of a WECS.
3) Altering the location of the WECS to prevent impacts on neighboring properties,
provided that all other requirements of this Section are met.
4) Requiring a performance bond or letter of credit, in favor of the City, and
conditioned upon the timely and faithful performance of all required conditions of
the special land use, including but not limited to the timely and complete removal
of a WECS, regulated under the terms of the section, when required. The
performance bond or letter of credit shall remain in effect during and after the
operation of a WECS until its operations have ceased and it has been removed.
[Ordinance No. 250, 05/18/09]
Figure 3-13: Building Mounted On-Site Service WECS
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-54
Section 3.320 Certain Large Scale Residential Developments.
Certain large scale residential developments, being those which include twelve (12) or more lots,
parcels, site condominium units or multiple family dwelling units in the RD, RG-1, R-2 or RG-3
districts, shall be developed only as planned unit developments (“PUD”) in accordance with
Article 8 of this Ordinance. The regulating of such development on a PUD basis will enable the
City to control and moderate the size, scope and impact of the development, in accordance with
the Master Plan and the purposes of the Ordinance. The requirements of this section shall apply
whether the development involves simple land divisions, platted subdivisions, site condominium
units or any other type of land division, conveyance or development resulting in twelve (12) or
more lots, parcels, site condominium units or other land divisions, or any multiple family
development resulting in twelve (12) or more dwelling units.
[Ordinance No. 258, 08/03/09]
Section 3.330 Reserved
Section 3.340 Beekeeping
Beekeeping on all properties in the City requires a permit and is subject to the requirements of
this Section. Upon approval of a Beekeeping Permit Application, all property owners within 300’
will be notified of such by City Staff.
a) Hive size shall not exceed 20 cubic feet.
b) Hives must be set back 15 feet from all property lines and at least 25 feet from any
dwelling on a neighboring property (Figure 3-14).
c) A flyway barrier of at least six (6) feet in height shall shield any part of a property line
that is within 25 feet of a hive (Figure 3-14). The flyway barrier shall consist of a wall,
solid fence, dense vegetation or combination of these materials. Walls and fences are
subject to the requirements of Section 3.90. Flyway barriers shall be established prior to
the issuance of a beekeeping permit and shall be permanently maintained while actively
beekeeping.
d) An adequate and constant source of water, as temperatures allow, shall be placed within
20 feet of the location of bee hives prior to the issuance of a beekeeping permit and shall
be permanently maintained while actively beekeeping.
e) The number of hives that may be kept on a single lot or upon contiguous lots under the
same ownership is limited by the maximums noted in following table:
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-55
Lot Size Maximum Number of Hives
Up to 1/4 acre
(1/4 acre = 10,890 sq. ft.)
2
More than 1/4 acre, less than 1/2 acre
(1/2 acre = 21,780 sq. ft.)
4
More than 1/2 acre, less than 1 acre
(1 acre = 43,560 sq. ft.)
6
1 acre or more 8
One additional hive is allowed for each additional whole acre of land
over one (1) acre.
[Ordinance No. 284, 1/19/15]
Figure 3-14: Dimensional Requirements for Beehives
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-56
Section 3.350 Keeping of Farm Animals
a) Farms, farming and farm operations – Farming in general is defined in Chapter 2 and
is regulated by the State of Michigan Department of Agriculture and Rural Development.
Farms are permitted on lands that are classified as Category 1, 2 or 3 and are not
considered “primarily residential” as classified by the latest Generally Accepted
Agricultural and Management Practices for Site Selection and Odor Control for New and
Expanding Livestock Facilities manual.
b) Permitting – Keeping of authorized species of farm animals on residential properties is
allowed under certain circumstances and if conditions of this Section are met. Upon
issuance of a permit to keep farm animals, the City shall inform all property owners
within 300 feet of the subject property. The notice shall include the property address,
summary of permitted activity and a copy of this Section.
1) New permit and renewal applications shall be submitted by the applicant in
complete form to the Zoning Administrator.
2) Landowner authorization shall be submitted in the event a tenant or occupant
other than the landowner is the applicant.
3) Permits are valid for one year (1) and shall be renewed annually.
4) Permits shall be revoked for violations of this Section.
c) General Requirements –
1) All waste, including manure, shall be managed so there are no unsanitary or
unsafe conditions.
2) Any proposed shelter on the site must be, at minimum, a rigid structure, designed
to withstand normal wind and snow loads. Accessory buildings shall meet all
applicable building codes.
3) Keeping of animals within a plat of subdivision or site condominium will be
governed by covenants and restrictions in addition to the Zoning Ordinance. In
cases where both apply, the stricter rule shall apply.
d) Animals and Number –
1) Goats, chickens and rabbits are permitted in the RD, RG1, RG2, RG3 Zoning
Districts, subject to minimum acreages.
2) Male chickens (roosters), peafowl, or guinea fowl, in any number, shall not be
kept by any property owner or occupant on any property in the City.
3) Wild animals shall not be kept by any property owner or occupant on any
property in the City.
4) The maximum number of animals allowed to be kept on a single parcel or lot or
upon contiguous parcels under the same ownership is included in the following
table:
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-57
Keeping of Farm Animals
Type Goats Chickens Rabbits
Zoning District RG1 RD, RG1, RG2 RD, RG1, RG2, RG3
Minimum Acreage 1 1 1
Number permitted at
minimum acreage 2 5 4
Addition for each
whole acre over the
minimum
1 5 4
Combinations of different farm animal types shall not be kept on the same parcel or upon
contiguous parcels under the same ownership.
5) Newly born goats above the minimum requirements may be kept on a property for
one (1) year, provided the number does not increase the permitted number of
animals beyond the limitations by more than 50%. Rabbits or chickens less than
six (6) months of age do not count against total count limitations.
e) Confinement –
1) Goats, chickens and rabbits must be completely enclosed in a fenced pasture or
range area, pen, paddock, coop or other holding area that is of suitable height and
construction to contain the animals. Fences are subject to Section 3.30, Fences,
Walls, Gates, Screens, and Landscape- General Requirements and Intersection
Visibility.
2) Electrical fences are prohibited.
3) Pens and holding areas may not be located within front or side yards.
4) Pasture and outdoor confinement setbacks are subject to the following table.
Setbacks are measured from the outside limits of an area that an animal may roam
to property lot lines and nearby dwellings.
Pasture and Outdoor Confinement Setbacks
Adjacent District RD RG1 RG2 RG3/MHP
Setback (feet) from lot
line (setbacks may vary
with multiple adjacent
zoning districts)
15 15 20 25
Setback (feet) from
existing dwellings on
nearby property
30 30 40 50
f) Manure – Storage areas shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any wellhead, surface water
feature, areas subject to flooding, 50 feet from any on-site dwelling, and 50 feet from all
property lines and 150 feet from pre-existing off-site dwellings under separate ownership.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 3-58
The 50 foot buffer shall be a vegetated buffer. Manure shall be stockpiled on an
impermeable pad with sides to prevent leachate and runoff.
g) Shelter – Shelters are required for farm animals. Shelters, including sheds, coops, barns,
or other buildings accommodating farm animals are subject to Section 3.130, Accessory
Building, Structures and Uses.
h) Commercial Use – Commercial use is prohibited. Farm animals may not kept or raised
for breeding, sale, commercial or agricultural purposes. No person shall sell eggs or
engage in fertilizer production for commercial purposes. The slaughtering of farm
animals is not permitted.
[Ordinance No. 285, 5/4/2015]
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-1
ARTICLE 4
SPECIAL LAND USES
Section 4.10 Purpose
The intent of this Article is to provide regulations for uses which are essentially compatible with
uses permitted by right in a given district, but which, by reason of the special nature of such uses
or their particular location in relation to neighboring properties, require a more detailed level of
review by the city. Because of their unique characteristics, it is often necessary to place
restrictions or conditions associated with the approval of special land uses to ensure their
compatibility with surrounding development.
Section 4.20 Standards for Approval
a) General Approval Standards - Prior to approving a special land use application, the
following general standards, in addition to any specific standards required for an
individual special use shall be satisfied. The proposed use or activity shall:
1) Be compatible and in accordance with the City of Ferrysburg Master Plan.
2) Be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be compatible with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity and so as not to change the
essential character of the area in which it is proposed.
3) Be adequately served by public facilities and services such as streets, police and
fire protection, drainage structures, water and sewage facilities, recreation
facilities, and primary and secondary schools.
4) Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment or conditions of
operation that will be detrimental to the natural environment, public health, safety
or welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, odors or
other nuisance.
5) Promote the public interest through provision of a service, facility, or use
determined to be beneficial to the residents of the city.
b) Specific Approval Standards – In addition to the general approval standards, some
special uses are subject to specific standards, as outlined for the uses listed in Section
4.80.
c) Special Use Subject to Site Plan Review - Properties for which application for a special
land use is made shall also be subject to site plan review and approval in accordance with
the requirements of Article V, Site Plan Review.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-2
Section 4.30 Application Procedure
a) Applicant - Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file a
written application for one or more special land use permits as provided for in this
Ordinance.
b) Application and Fee - The following materials shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator at least forty (40) days prior to the meeting at which the Planning
Commission first considers the special land use application. The applicant shall provide
copies of the application, site plan, and other written and graphic instruments in a number
determined by the Zoning Administrator. Information waived by the Zoning
Administrator may be subsequently requested by the Planning Commission and/or City
Council. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
1) Payment of the required fee.
2) Copies of a site plan meeting the requirements of Article V.
3) Completed and signed application form.
4) Proof of ownership and description of ownership interest.
5) An analysis of the planning and market implications of the proposed use may be
required by the Planning Commission and/or City Council pursuant to the
following impacts:
a. Traffic impacts including analysis of trip generation, impact on existing
and projected traffic capacities, and impact on surrounding traffic patterns.
b. Environmental impacts.
c. Impacts on public facilities and services including, but not limited to,
sanitary sewers, water, storm drainage, police and fire protection, schools
and recreational facilities.
d. Potential for negative economic impact on the neighborhood, surrounding
area, and/or city as a whole.
In presenting the analysis of the planning implications the applicant shall provide
information which describes the methodology used. The analysis shall be carried
out by qualified individuals and verification of same shall be provided by the
applicant.
Section 4.40 Designated Review Authority and Approval Procedure
a) Final Approval by City Council After Receipt of Planning Commission
Recommendation- The Ferrysburg City Council shall have final review and approval
authority for all special land uses. Prior to said review, the City Council shall receive
from the Planning Commission a recommendation concerning approval, approval with
conditions, or denial of the proposed special land use. Receipt of the recommendation
from the Planning Commission shall be as follows:
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-3
1) Following the submission of the required application materials, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the Zoning Act.
2) The Planning Commission shall review the application in terms of the
requirements of Section 4.20, as well as any specific standards required for the
special land use in Section 4.80 and shall recommend to the City Council, in
writing, approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application.
b) City Council Action - Upon receipt of the Planning Commission recommendation, the
City Council shall review the application in terms of the requirements of Section 4.20 and
Section 4.80, and shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application.
c) Special Use Permit - Upon approval of a special land use application, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a special land use permit.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 4.50 Conditions of Approval and Performance Guarantee
a) Conditions - In granting a special land use, the City Council may impose any additional
conditions, limitations, and performance guarantees (see Section 12.60) as in its judgment
may be necessary for protection of the public interest. Such conditions shall be related to
and ensure that the review considerations of Section 4.20 are met.
b) Conditions Attached to Property - Approval of a special land use, including conditions
made as part of the approval, is attached to the property described as part of the
application and not to the owner of the property.
c) Record of Conditions - A record of conditions imposed shall be maintained by the City.
The conditions shall remain unchanged unless an amendment to the special land use is
approved.
d) Record Shall Be Contained in Council Minutes - A record of the decision of the City
Council, the reasons for the decision reached, and any conditions attached to the decision
shall be kept and made a part of the minutes of the City Council.
Section 4.60 Validity of Use Permitted With Special Approval
a) Termination of Special Land Use for Failure to Commence Construction or Secure
Extension - In cases where actual physical construction of a substantial nature of the
structures authorized by a special land use permit has not commenced within one (1) year
of issuance, and a written application for extension of the approval has not been filed as
provided in Subsection b) below, the permit shall automatically become null and void and
all rights thereunder shall terminate.
b) Extension - Upon written application filed with the City Clerk prior to the termination of
the one (1) year period, the City Council may authorize a single extension of the time
limit for a period of not more than one (1) year. This extension shall only be granted
based on evidence from the applicant that the development has a reasonable likelihood of
commencing construction with the one (1) year extension.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-4
c) Cessation of Special Use Resulting in Termination - Any use for which a special land
use permit has been granted and which ceases to continuously operate for a one (1) year
period shall be considered abandoned and may be subject to revocation by the City. The
process of revoking a special land use permit shall be based on the following:
1) Planning Commission Public Hearing - At the expiration of the one (1) year
period, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing regarding
revocation of the special land use permit.
2) Notification of Owner - The owner of the property on which the special land use
permit has been granted shall be notified of the hearing for purposes of providing
evidence as to why the special land use permit should be maintained and to
demonstrate that the use authorized by the permit has a strong likelihood of
commencing within a period of ninety (90) days after final disposition of this
matter by the City Council.
3) Planning Commission Recommendation - The Planning Commission shall
recommend to City Council that the special land use permit shall receive the
ninety (90) extension, the extension with conditions, or that the special land use
permit be terminated.
4) Council Consideration - Upon receipt and consideration of the Planning
Commission recommendation, the City Council shall act to extend the special
land use for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days during which the special use
shall be activated, shall extend the use for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days
with conditions, or shall terminate the special land use permit.
5) Permit Revocation - A special land use which has received the above extension
but which has not been initiated in the required time period or has failed to
comply with any conditions which have been attached to the extension approval
shall become null and void and the special land use permit shall be revoked.
d) Revocation. The City Council shall have the authority to revoke Special Land Use
approval after it has been shown that the holder of the approval has failed to comply with
any of the applicable requirements of this Chapter, other applicable sections of this
Ordinance, or conditions of the Special Land Use approval. Prior to any action, the
Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing that follows the notification
requirements for the original approval, and make a recommendation to the City Council
regarding revocation of the Special Land Use. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
e) Resubmittal of a Special Land Use Request - No application for a special land use
permit which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one
(1) year from the date of the order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or
proof of changed conditions relating to all of the reasons noted for the denial found to be
valid by the City Council.
Section 4.70 Amendments/Deviations from Approved Special Land Use
Permits
Amendments to approved special land use permits shall require submittal of a new application
which shall be subject to all the requirements of this Article.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-5
Section 4.80 Special Land Use Specific Standards
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
In addition to the general standards for special land uses in Section 4.20. the following specific
minimum standards must be met for the listed uses.
a) Accessory drive through facilities for any use other than a restaurant
1) The site shall have at least one lot line on a collector or arterial street.
2) There shall be at least three stacking spaces for each drive through lane. The
Planning Commission may require additional stacking spaces based on the use
and the anticipated traffic volume.
3) There shall be adequate trash and litter policing for the parking lot and the
shoulders of adjacent roadways. These areas shall be completely cleared of
accumulated debris as often as necessary.
4) Only one (1) driveway shall be permitted from each street unless the Planning
Commission determines additional driveways will be necessary to ensure safe and
efficient access to the site.
5) The minimum distance of a driveway into the site from a street intersection shall
be 60 feet measured from the intersection of the street right-of-way to the nearest
end of the curb radius.
6) Drive-through businesses adjacent to or integrated into a business center shall use
the common access with other business establishments in that center.
7) Vehicular circulation patterns into and out of such businesses shall be located and
designed to minimize disruption of and conflicts with through traffic movement
on the site and on abutting streets.
8) Devices for the transmission or broadcasting of voices or music shall be so
directed or muffled as to prevent said sound or music from being audible beyond
the boundaries of the site.
b) Accessory outdoor display and sales
1) The outdoor storage and display area shall be arranged to provide safe pedestrian
and vehicular circulation and safe emergency access. Maneuvering aisles shall be
kept free of all obstruction.
2) No outdoor display or sales shall be permitted in any required yard for the district
in which the commercial outdoor storage use is located.
3) Outdoor storage and display areas located on parking lots shall not reduce the
available parking spaces to fewer than those required by Article 6.
4) No outdoor display area or parking serving an outdoor display area shall be
located within fifty (50) feet of any property line located in a residential district.
5) The storage of soil, sand, mulch, and similar loosely packaged materials shall be
contained and covered to prevent it from blowing into adjacent properties. The
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-6
outdoor storage of fertilizers, pesticides, and other hazardous materials is
prohibited.
6) The Planning Commission may require an obscuring screen around any storage or
display area, according to Section 5.70. Stored materials including loosely
packaged materials shall not be piled or stacked higher than the height of the
obscuring screen.
7) All outdoor display and sales areas shall be paved with a permanent, durable, and
dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water.
8) All loading and truck maneuvering shall be accommodated on-site or on a
dedicated easement.
9) Fencing and lighting for security purposes may be required as determined by the
Planning Commission. All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential
areas.
c) Adult foster care small group homes and foster family group homes
1) One on-site parking space shall be provided for each employee in addition to the
parking required for the dwelling unit.
2) A designated passenger loading/unloading area of adequate dimensions shall be
provided near a barrier-free entrance to the home.
3) A loading/unloading area of adequate dimensions shall be provided for delivery
vehicles servicing the home.
4) A landscaped buffer shall be provided along all property lines that abut a less
intense use and around the visible perimeters of all parking and loading/unloading
areas.
5) All exterior lighting of entryways, parking spaces, or loading/unloading areas
shall not reflect onto adjacent properties and, preferably, should be motion
activated.
d) Adult Entertainment Uses
1) Intent. In the development and execution of these zoning regulations, it is
recognized there are some uses that, because of their very nature, are recognized
as having serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when
several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances, thereby causing a
deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. The proximity of adult entertainment
regulated uses to certain uses considered particularly susceptible to the negative
impacts of the concentration of adult uses tends to erode the quality of life,
adversely affect property values, disrupt business investment, encourage residents
and businesses to move or avoid the community, increase crime, and contribute to
a blighting effect on the surrounding area. This subsection describes the uses
regulated and the specific standards necessary to ensure that the adverse effects of
these uses will not contribute to the deterioration of the surrounding
neighborhood, to prevent undesirable concentration of these uses, and to require
sufficient spacing from uses considered most susceptible to negative impacts.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-7
2) Uses Regulated. The following uses are regulated by this subsection and defined
for purposes of regulating adult entertainment regulated uses:
a. Adult Book Store
b. Adult Model Studio
c. Adult Motion Picture Arcade
d. Adult Motion Picture Theater or Mini-Motion Picture Theater
e. Adult Cabaret
f. Adult Sexual Encounter Center
g. Adult Physical Culture Establishment.
3) No adult entertainment use shall be permitted in a location in which any main
building or accessory structure, including signs, is within one thousand (1,000)
feet of any main building or accessory structure of another sexually oriented
business.
4) No adult entertainment use shall be established on a parcel within five hundred
(500) feet of any Residential District or any parcel used for a single- or multiplefamily
residence, public park, school, child care facility, church or similar place
of worship, public library, city hall, police department or fire department, youth
center, or commercially operated school attended by children such as, for
example, dance schools, gymnastic centers, etc. The distance between a proposed
sexually oriented business and any such zoned area or existing use shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest property line upon which the
proposed sexually oriented business is to be located to the nearest property line of
that zoned area or existing use.
5) Any sign or advertising for the adult entertainment use must comply with the
provisions of this code. Any sign or advertising may not include photographs,
silhouettes, or drawings of any specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities, or obscene representations of the human form and may not include
animated or flashing illumination.
6) The entrances to the proposed adult entertainment use at both the exterior and
interior walls, in a location visible to those entering and exiting the business, must
be clearly marked with lettering at least two (2) inches in height stating:
a. “Persons under the age of eighteen (18) are not permitted to enter the
premises;” and
b. “No alcoholic beverages of any type are permitted within the premises;”
unless specifically allowed pursuant to a license duly issued by the Liquor
Control Commission.
7) No product or service for sale or gift, or any picture or other representation of any
product or service for sale or gift, shall be displayed so as to be visible by a
person of normal visual acuity from the nearest adjoining roadway or a
neighboring property.
8) Hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-8
9) All off street and on-site parking areas shall comply with this Ordinance, based on
the primary use (i.e, retail, assembly, etc.) and shall additionally be illuminated at
all times.
10) Any booth, room or cubical available in any adult entertainment use that is used
by patrons for the viewing of any entertainment shall:
a. Be unobstructed by any door, lock or other entrance and exit control
device;
b. Have at least one (1) side totally open to a public, lighted aisle so that
there is an unobstructed view at all times from the adjoining aisle of any
occupant;
c. Be illuminated such that a person of normal visual acuity looking into the
booth, room or cubical from its entrance adjoining the public lighted aisle
can clearly determine the number of people within;
d. Have no holes or openings in any side or rear wall not relating to utility,
ventilation or temperature control services or otherwise required by any
governmental code or authority.
11) Conditions of Approval. Prior to the granting of approval for the establishment of
any adult entertainment use, the Planning Commission may impose any
conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction,
maintenance, or operation of the adult entertainment regulated use which is
necessary for the protection of the public interest. Any evidence, bond, or other
performance and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions stipulated
in connection therewith will be fulfilled.
12) No person operating an adult entertainment use shall permit any person under the
age of eighteen (18) to be on the premises of the business as an employee,
customer, or otherwise.
e) Automobile service stations including minor vehicle repair, with or without convenience
goods
1) All maintenance and repair work shall be conducted completely within an
enclosed building.
2) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle components and parts,
materials, commodities for sale, supplies, or equipment.
3) Storage of wrecked, partially dismantled, or other derelict vehicles, or overnight
parking of any vehicle except a tow truck shall be permitted in a designated area.
Such area shall be appropriately screened from public view as determined by the
Planning Commission.
4) If the use includes gasoline sales or installation of oil or other automotive fluids,
the applicant shall submit a Pollution Incidence Protection Plan (PIPP). The PIPP
shall describe measures to prevent groundwater contamination caused by
accidental spills or leakage of gasoline or other hazardous materials, such as
special check valves, drain back catch basins, and automatic shut off valves, as
approved by the City of Ferrysburg Fire Department.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-9
f) Bed and breakfast facilities.
1) The total number of bedrooms rented to guests shall not exceed fifty (50) percent
of the total number of bedrooms located in the residence.
2) Rooms utilized for guest sleeping shall not exceed four (4) occupants per room.
Rooms for guest sleeping shall meet or exceed the following room size criteria:
Number of Guests per Sleeping Room Minimum Room Size (Net Square Feet)
1 to 2 100
3 130
4 160
More than 4 guests per room - Not Permitted
3) The Bed and Breakfast facility and operation shall meet all applicable building,
health, and related safety codes.
4) The guest room charge shall include the preparation and serving of breakfast to
overnight guests. No additional breakfast fees shall be charged.
5) No separate or individual cooking facilities shall be provided for the use of guests,
including existing cooking facilities.
6) The Bed and Breakfast operation may include a wall sign, attached flat against the
front face of the dwelling, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area. The sign
shall be non-illuminated and designed and constructed consistent with the
architectural and aesthetic character of the dwelling to which the sign shall be
affixed.
7) No transient guest shall reside on the premises for more than fourteen (14)
consecutive days and not more than thirty (30) days in any one (1) year.
8) Off-street parking shall be provided as required by Article 6, Parking and
Loading.
9) The use of outdoor yard areas, open decks, pools, and the like shall not result in
the production of excessive off-site noise, odor, and other external disturbances.
Approval of a Bed and Breakfast operation may be conditioned upon the
installation of screening, fencing, plantings, and/or other installations and
conditions to help ensure compatibility of the Bed and Breakfast operation with
the surrounding area.
10) Bed and Breakfast facilities proposed for the Commercial District shall be limited
to the placement of such operations within dwellings existing on the effective date
of this Ordinance.
g) Day care centers, profit and non-profit
1) A day care center shall provide a minimum of 50 square feet of indoor play area
for each child cared for. There shall be 100 square feet of outdoor play area for
each child that would be using the play area at any one given time, provided the
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-10
minimum outdoor play area shall be no less than 1,000 square feet. The required
play area shall be fenced.
2) There shall be a designated area where children may be dropped off or picked up
with a designated pedestrian route to the entry to the facility. At least four such
spaces shall be provided for each 20 children of licensed capacity. These spaces
may be counted toward the required minimum parking space requirement.
h) Dwelling units located on the second or above story of a permitted district use
1) Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit, in addition to the
parking requirements for the nonresidential use.
i) Gasoline station, with or without convenience goods
1) There shall be a minimum lot area of one (1) acre and minimum lot width of two
hundred fifty (250) feet.
2) Pump islands shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet from any public right-of-way
or lot line. Tanks, propane, and petroleum products shall be set back at least
fifteen (15) feet from any lot line.
3) Overhead canopies shall be setback at least twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way
and constructed of materials consistent with the principal building. The proposed
clearance of any canopy shall be noted on the site plan. Any signs, logo, or
identifying paint scheme shall be in accordance with Article ,7 Signs. The canopy
shall be no higher than the principal building. Lighting in the canopy shall be
recessed, fully shielded, and directed downward to prevent off-site glare.
4) Only one (1) driveway shall be permitted from each street unless the Planning
Commission determines additional driveways will be necessary to ensure safe and
efficient access to the site.
5) The intensity of lighting within a site shall not exceed twenty (20) footcandles or
one (1) footcandle at the property line, except where it abuts a residentially used
or zoned property, at which a maximum of 0.5 footcandles is permitted.
6) The applicant shall submit a Pollution Incidence Protection Plan (PIPP). The
PIPP shall describe measures to prevent groundwater contamination caused by
accidental gasoline spills or leakage, such as special check valves, drain back
catch basins, and automatic shut off valves.
7) In the event that a gasoline station use has been abandoned or terminated for a
period of more than one (1) year, all underground gasoline storage tanks shall be
removed from the premises, in accordance with State requirements.
8) Any use with gasoline sales shall also meet the standards for gasoline stations.
j) Group day care homes.
1) The property and residence exterior shall be maintained in a manner compatible
with the surrounding neighborhood.
2) All playground equipment and areas for play and exercise shall be in the rear yard
of the property. This area shall be at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet in size.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-11
3) Fencing at least four (4) feet, and no more than six (6) feet in height shall be
provided around all outdoor areas accessible to children.
4) The facility shall be in compliance with all applicable State licensing requirements.
5) The facility shall not be located closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet
to:
a. another licensed group day care home;
b. an adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under
the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act (PA 218 of 1979);
c. a facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services to
seven (7) or more persons licensed by the State;
d. a community correction center, resident home, halfway house or other
similar facility which houses inmates under the jurisdiction of the
Michigan Department of Corrections.
6) Hours of operation shall not exceed 16 hours during a 24-hour period.
7) One (1) non-illuminated sign measuring no more than four (4) square feet may be
permitted if attached to the principal structure.
8) One on-site parking space shall be provided for each employee in addition to the
parking required for the dwelling unit.
9) A designated passenger loading/unloading area of adequate dimensions shall be
provided near a barrier-free entrance to the home.
k) Hotel or motel
1) Minimum floor area of each guest unit shall contain not less than two hundred
fifty (250) square feet.
2) The minimum lot area shall be twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet with a
minimum width of one hundred fifty (150) feet, provided that there shall be at
least five hundred (500) square feet of lot area for each lodging unit.
3) The maximum lot coverage of all buildings, including accessory buildings, shall
not exceed more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the lot.
4) All parking areas shall have direct access to an arterial or collector street.
5) Any accessory use, such as a restaurant, shall be subject to the specific standards
for such uses.
l) Massage clinics, massage services
1) All persons massaging any client or customer must be certified as a massage
therapist by the American Massage Therapy Association or be a graduate of a
School of Massage Therapy that is certified by the State of Michigan, or have
such other similar qualifications which must be submitted to and approved by the
City Council. All massage clinics are subject to inspection from time to time by
the Zoning Administrator and shall be required to file reports as may be required
by the City, at least annually, as to the names and qualifications of each person
who administers massages under the authority or supervision of the massage
establishment.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-12
m) Restaurant, cafes, ice cream shops, retail bakeries with drive-through service
1) Sufficient stacking capacity for the drive-through portion of the operation shall be
provided to ensure that traffic does not extend into the public right-of-way. A
minimum of ten (10) stacking spaces for each service ordering station shall be
provided. Stacking spaces shall be located so as not to interfere with vehicular
circulation and egress from the property by vehicles not using the drive-through
portion of the facility.
2) A minimum of three (3) parking spaces shall be provided in close proximity to the
exit of the drive-through portion of the operation, to allow for customers waiting
for delivery of orders.
3) Public access to the site shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any
intersection or other driveway on the same side of the street, as measured from the
nearest right-of-way line to the nearest edge of said access.
4) Internal circulations and access to and egress from the site shall not substantially
impair the movement of other modes of transportation, such as bicycles and
pedestrians, to and through the site.
5) The parking and maneuvering areas of the site shall be fenced and screened from
the view of any abutting Residential District or use by a decorative fence or wall,
or a landscaped equivalent.
6) Environmental impacts, including, without limitation, noise, air emissions, and
glare are not significant for employees of the facility or the surrounding area.
7) Devices for the transmission or broadcasting of voices or music shall be so
directed or muffled as to prevent said sound or music from being audible beyond
the boundaries of the site.
n) Vehicle repair, minor.
1) Minor vehicle repair facilities that do not sell fuel shall be subject to the same
standards as an automobile service station.
o) Vehicle repair, major
1) All main and accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of one hundred
(100) feet from a single-family residential district.
2) There shall be a minimum lot frontage on a paved road of one hundred (100) feet.
3) No drive or curb opening shall be located nearer than seventy-five (75) feet to any
intersection nor more than twenty-five (25) feet to any adjacent Residential
District property line. No drive shall be located nearer than fifty (50) feet, as
measured along the property line, to any other driveway. A driveway shall not be
permitted where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, it may produce a
safety hazard to adjacent pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
4) A raised curb of six (6) inches in height shall be constructed along the perimeter
of all paved and landscaped areas.
5) Overhead doors shall not face a public street or residential district. The Planning
Commission can modify this requirement upon a determination that there is no
reasonable alternative and the poor visual impact will be diminished through use
of building materials, architectural features and landscaping.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-13
6) Where applicable, vehicle queuing space shall be provided in front of each service
bay for at least two (2) vehicles.
7) Where adjoining a Residential District, a solid decorative masonry wall, six (6)
feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. The wall shall be
continuously maintained in good condition. The Planning Commission may
approve a fence, landscaped berm, or landscaping as an alternative.
8) All maintenance and repair work shall be conducted completely within an
enclosed building.
9) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle components and parts,
materials, commodities for sale, supplies or equipment.
10) Storage of wrecked, partially dismantled, or other derelict vehicles, or overnight
parking of any vehicle except a tow truck shall be permitted up to four (4) weeks
in a designated area. Such area shall be appropriately screened from public view
as determined by the Planning Commission.
11) If the use includes installation of oil or other automotive fluids except for fuel, the
applicant shall submit a Pollution Incidence Protection Plan (PIPP). The PIPP
shall describe measures to prevent groundwater contamination caused by
accidental spills or leakage of gasoline or other hazardous materials, such as
special check valves, drain back catch basins, and automatic shut off valves, as
approved by the City of Ferrysburg Fire Department.
p) Vehicle sales and service (automobiles, light trucks and recreational vehicles), with or
without minor vehicle repair
1) Outdoor storage of automobiles or vehicles for sale shall not be permitted in any
required front or side yard.
2) All parking and outdoor storage areas shall be paved with a permanent and
durable surface. Curb shall be provided around all parking and storage areas.
3) Any use involving the maintenance, service, or repair of vehicles shall also meet
the standards for automobile service stations.
4) Exterior lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site
glare. The intensity within a site shall not exceed twenty (20) footcandles within
the site or one (1) footcandle at the property line, except where it abuts a
residentially used or zoned site, whereby a maximum of 0.5 footcandles is
permitted.
5) Uses that include minor vehicle repair shall also meet the standards for
automobile service stations. Sales of automotive fuel is not permitted.
q) Vehicle wash, automatic or manual
1) Minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet or the minimum required lot area for
the zoning district, whichever is greater
2) All washing activities must be carried on within a building.
3) Vacuuming activities shall be at least 50 feet from any adjoining residential
district.
INDEX CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
Index - 4-14
4) The entrances and exits of the wash facility shall be from within the lot and not
directly to or from an adjoining street. A street shall not be used as maneuvering
or parking spaces for vehicles to be serviced by the subject facility.
5) Provision shall be made for the drying of vehicle undercarriages prior to entering
the public thoroughfare.
6) Two vehicle stacking spaces are required for each self-serve wash stall.
7) Ten stacking spaces are required for each automatic wash lane.
8) All off-street parking areas and maneuvering lanes shall be drained so as to
preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property and public rights-of-way.
9) Measures to minimize noise impacts on adjoining properties shall be employed.
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-1
ARTICLE 5
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS
Section 5.10 Purpose
Site plan review and approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
construction, reconstruction, erection, expansion, or relocation of any building or structure in any
zoning district, and prior to the initiation of any special land use in any zoning district, and prior
to the initiation of any new use of land not requiring a building permit, subject to the provisions
of this Ordinance.
Section 5.20 Uses Subject to Site Plan Review
Except as provided for by this Ordinance, no permit shall be issued for any construction,
reconstruction, erection, expansion, or relocation of any building or structure nor for the
initiation of any new use of land not requiring a building permit until a site plan and site plan
application have been approved by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, or City
Council as required by this Ordinance and detailed as follows:
a) Site Plan Approval by the Zoning Administrator: [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
1) Single-Family and Duplex Dwellings - Construction, reconstruction, erection
and/or expansion of a single family or duplex dwelling on a parcel zoned solely
for residential purposes and classified as a principal permitted use.
2) Reconstruction and/or expansion of a single family detached dwelling located in
the Core Commercial (CC) Zone District. [Ordinance No. 176, 7/19/99]
3) Signs, Walls, Decks, Etc. - Construction or erection of signs of less than threehundred
(300) square feet; retaining walls; fences; buffer screens or walls; refuse
storage stations; sidewalks; antennas; lights; poles; and cooling, heating or other
mechanical equipment when located on a building or occupying a ground area of
less than one-hundred (100) square feet; accessory buildings or structures of less
than two hundred (200) square feet.
4) Building Expansion - Expansion of an existing, permitted, principal building or
structure wherein the size of the expansion does not exceed ten (10%) percent of
the gross floor area of the principal building or structure, to a maximum of one
thousand (1,000) square feet.
5) Essential Services - Certain essential services as provided for by Section 3.80 of
Article III.
6) Specified Elsewhere - Other uses specified by this Ordinance requiring final
review and approval by the Zoning Administrator.
b) Site Plan Approval by the Planning Commission:
1) All residential, recreational, office, commercial, industrial, and other uses except:
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-2
a. Uses subject to final approval by the Zoning Administrator as detailed
under Paragraph a), above.
b. Uses subject to final approval by the City Council as detailed under
Paragraph c), following. However, for these uses, the Planning
Commission shall be responsible for reviewing site plans pursuant to the
formation of recommendation to the City Council.
2) Other uses specified by this Ordinance requiring final review and approval by the
Planning Commission.
c) Site Plan Approval by the City Council (After Planning Commission
Recommendation):
1) Special land uses, including amendments thereto.
2) Site condominiums and subdivisions, including amendments thereto.
3) Planned Unit Development, including amendments thereto.
4) Other uses specified by this Ordinance requiring final review and approval by the
City Council.
d) Optional Pre-Application Conference
1) Site Plan Pre-application Conference - If requested by the applicant, a site plan
pre-application conference may be held with the Planning Commission for the
purpose of establishing general direction and eliciting feedback from the Planning
Commission regarding the general content of a proposed project subject to site
plan review. Application for a pre-application conference shall be made on an
appropriate form provided by the Zoning Administrator. A complete site plan is
not required, but may be presented by the applicant. In lieu of a complete site
plan, the applicant shall submit a basic concept plan which includes the following
information:
a. Site boundaries and lot line dimensions.
b. Layout of the proposed site development, including the location of
1. buildings and parking areas
2. open space areas and natural features - the general location of
wetlands, surface water features, dunes, and tree stands (greater
than 1 acre in area) shall be shown
3. access drives, internal drives and streets, parking areas, and
sidewalks
4. existing and proposed utility, drainage, and other easements
5. surface water drainage measures
6. free-standing signs
c. All buildings, parking areas, open space areas, and other site features
depicted on the concept plan shall be identified.
d. For residential projects, the plan shall detail:
1. dwelling unit density
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-3
2. type of dwelling units (owner/rental, size, and number of
bedrooms)
3. elevation of proposed or comparable building design
e. Estimate of site area (in acres, square feet, and percent of total site area)
devoted to:
1. combined area of buildings and structures (not including streets,
driveways, and parking areas)
2. combined area of streets, driveways, and parking areas
3. open space
f. The plan shall be properly scaled and dimensioned in order to accurately
depict land use relationships. All buildings, building setbacks, access
points, streets and drives, parking areas, and other similar features shall be
dimensioned. A pre-application conference is provided for informational
purposes only and shall not obligate the Planning Commission or City
Council pursuant to the final disposition of the project. In the event an
applicant wishes to forego a pre-application conference and precede
directly to the final site plan review application stage, the applicant shall
submit a complete, fully detailed, site plan as required by this Ordinance.
[Ordinance No. 211, 5/3/04]
Section 5.30 Site Plan/Use Review by Building Official, Fire Chief and
Others
As determined necessary and appropriate by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission,
City Council, or Zoning Board of Appeals, zoning applications may be forwarded to the various
City departments, such as the Departments of Police, Fire, Public Works, Inspections, and the
like for purpose of receiving departmental comment, recommendations, and/or information
regarding City code requirements as pertaining to the nature of the application and impact on
public facilities and services. [Ordinance No 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 5.40 Site Plan Application - Filing Procedure and Required
Number of Applications and Site Plan Copies
All site plan review applications shall be made by submitting the following materials to the
Zoning Administrator at least twenty one (21) days prior to the meeting at which the site plan is
to be considered:
a) Application - One (1) copy of a completed site plan review application on an approved
form provided by the Office of the Zoning Administrator.
b) Site Plan - Twelve (12) copies of a site plan drawing containing all of the information
required in Section 5.50. For projects which are subject to final review by the Zoning
Administrator only (Refer to Section 5.20), three (3) copies of the site plan drawing shall
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-4
be submitted. In all cases, additional site plan copies may be requested by the Zoning
Administrator for any zoning request if he/she determines additional copies are needed
for proper completion of the review process.
Site plans subject to final review by the Zoning Administrator may be filed concurrent
with a building permit application.
c) Fee - Payment of an application fee, which shall be non-refundable, and which shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
Section 5.50 Required Site Plan Contents
a) A site plan submitted in accordance with this Ordinance shall contain all of the
information listed in the Site Plan Checklist - Section 5.50. In the event any of the items
identified in the Site Plan Check list are subject to regulatory control by an agency of
Ottawa County, the State of Michigan, or the United States, the applicant shall provide
the following:
1) The type of regulatory control of which the project is subject to including the
name and address of the agency, identification of the permit or authorization
required, and the status of the permit or authorization.
2) A copy of the agency permit, letter of authorization, or other bonafide evidence
demonstrating compliance with the requirements of the applicable agency, or
proof of application. A copy of any map, report, or other exhibit referenced by the
permit, letter of authorization, or like instrument shall also be provided.
3) Proof of approval of any required permit from another agency shall be a condition
of site plan approval.
[Ordinance No. 211, 5/3/04; No. 265, 10/4/2010]
SITE PLAN CHECKLIST - SECTION 5.50
1 Date, north arrow, and scale. Unless a different scale is approved by the Zoning Administrator, the scale shall
be one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet.
2 Name, address, telephone number, and fax number of the applicant.
3 Name, address, telephone number, and fax number of the person or agency preparing the site plan.
4 Address, legal description, and tax identification number of the subject property.
5 Size of the parcel in acres and square feet.
6 Existing and proposed lot lines with bearings and dimensions, including actual and required setback lines.
7 Location of abutting properties, existing structures, adjacent street(s) and street rights-of-way, pavement,
access drives, and driveways within one-hundred (100) feet of the subject property.
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-5
SITE PLAN CHECKLIST - SECTION 5.50
8 Location and size of existing natural features including, but not limited to, regulated wetlands, water bodies,
critical dune boundaries, and vegetation.
9 Location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property, including but not
limited to all buildings and other structures, signs, fences, walls, accessory buildings, storage sheds,
mechanical and similar equipment, dumpsters, and the method of screening where applicable.
10 Elevation drawings of all buildings, showing all sides, and indicating the type of building materials used and
indicating colors. Percentages of wall materials on each façade shall be shown in accordance with Section
5.60.
11 Location of exterior site lighting shall be shown, including specification of the height, type of fixture, and
light/glare containment capability.
12 Location, dimensions, and completion schedule of all existing and proposed drives, sidewalks, curb openings,
curbing, loading/unloading areas, parking areas and parking spaces, and vehicular and pedestrian circulation
routes. Parking areas shall indicate the number of spaces and the dimensions of a typical space and aisle.
Barrier free parking spaces shall be indicated.
13 The existing zoning and use of all properties abutting the subject property.
14 A landscape plan meeting the requirements of Section 5.70.
15 Location and size of existing and proposed sewer and water supply systems, storm sewers, fire hydrants,
manholes, storm water intakes and clean-outs.
16 Location, size, and method of installation of all other public and private utilities on the site, including but not
limited to natural gas, electric, cable television, fiber optic, and telephone and other voice cable.
17 Proposed method of site surface drainage, including proposed surface and subsurface facilities. The
information must include the design basis (e.g. design criteria and calculations).
18 Boundary of any project area within a 100-year floodplain.
19 Location, size, and use of existing and proposed easements.
20 Existing and proposed site topography at a scale not exceeding five feet (5') contour intervals.
21 Other site plan and project information considered necessary to achieve a determination of Ordinance
compliance. This includes, but is not limited to, environmental impact assessments, traffic studies, market
impact studies, utility impact assessments, and cost-benefit assessments (cost of project to the city based on
provision of city services in return for tax base and other revenue).
b) Accompanying Detail - The following documentation shall accompany the site plan or
may be placed directly on the plan, if applicable:
1) Owner and Petitioner - The name and address of the property owner and
petitioner, if different, and proof of ownership or option to purchase by the
petitioner.
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-6
2) Schedules - Summary schedules with the following information, as applicable:
a. Number, size, and bedroom mix of dwelling units proposed.
b. List of uses proposed and the gross floor area of each.
c. Area and percentage of site coverage by buildings, structures, pavement,
and open space.
c) Sealed Plans –All site plans shall be prepared by a professional surveyor, engineer,
architect or landscaped architect licensed in the State of Michigan and shall bear the seal
of the licensed professional. The Zoning Administrator may waive this requirement
when he/she has determined that there is no exterior effect resulting from the proposed
use or that the site plan is simple enough to be completed by another preparer, provided
that the plan is drawn to an accurate scale and provides the information required in the
checklist above. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
d) Information Waiver - The Zoning Administrator, may waive any of the requirements of
Section 5.50, if, in his/her opinion, this information is not necessary for review of the site
plan and determination of Ordinance compliance. [Ordinance No. 259, 09/08/09, No.
265, 10/4/2010]
Section 5.60 Building Appearance
a) Statement of Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide exterior building wall
materials requirements to enhance the visual environment of the City, thereby improving
property values, stimulating investment in various business districts, encouraging quality
industrial, and research and development projects, and enhancing the quality of life for
City residents. The provisions of this Section are to ensure that development projects
utilize quality materials to ensure that a building protects the investment of adjacent
landowners, blends harmoniously into the streetscape, and creates a positive image for
business and employment districts.
b) Applicability. This Section shall apply to all new construction subject to site plan
review, except single-family detached residential structures, and shall consist of those
materials and combinations of materials as set forth in this Section. Building appearance
shall be reviewed as a part of site plan review under the requirements of this Article.
Calculations for material wall percentages do not include areas of the façade used for
doors and windows.
c) Two-Family Residential. All two-family residential buildings shall be designed to deemphasize
garage entrances. Garages shall be side- or rear-loaded, except:
1) If, because of available access, shape of the lot, or other relevant factors, garages
may only be located on the front façade of the building, they shall not protrude
more than four (4) feet beyond the front wall of the structure that faces the street.
2) If a design requires a garage to extend more than four (4) feet beyond the front
wall of the structure that faces the street, the owner may request site plan review
by the Planning Commission, pursuant to the requirements of this Article. The
Planning Commission shall consider site restrictions, consistency with
neighborhood character, and architectural innovation and quality in determining if
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-7
an increased garage extension is warranted. In this case, the Zoning Administrator
may waive site plan submittal requirements, in accordance with Section 5.50, c).
d) Multiple-Family Residential. All multiple-family residential buildings located in any
district shall meet the following wall material requirements:
Wall Permitted wall materials
Front façade and other walls facing a
street
50% minimum
brick, face brick
or stone
Up to 50% may be wood, vinyl, or fiber cement
(hardy board) siding, stucco or other similar quality
material approved by the Planning Commission.
Side and rear facades that do not face
a street
Brick, face brick, stone, wood, vinyl, or fiber cement (hardy board)
siding, stucco or other similar quality material approved by the Planning
Commission.
Basements and foundations Concrete block, including split face, scored block, precast concrete and
concrete formed in place
e) Commercial, Office and Institutional. All non-residential buildings located in a
residential zoning district and all buildings (except non-conforming residential uses)
located in the CC, GC and S zoning districts shall meet the following wall material
requirements.
Wall Permitted wall materials
Front façade, and other walls facing a
street, a parking lot or an adjacent
residential zoning district
75% minimum
brick, face brick
or stone
Up to 25% may be split face block, scored block,
metal, EIFS, wood, vinyl or fiber cement (hardy
board) siding, stucco or other similar quality
material approved by the Planning Commission.
Side and rear facades that do not face
a street, a parking lot or an adjacent
residential zoning district
Sides: Any suitable fire-resistant material that meets the Building and
Fire Codes and is a color that is compatible with the front façade. No
more than 50% of the side façade may be metal, and any metal wall(s)
must be on that portion of the side façade furthest from the front. Rear:
Any suitable fire-resistant material that meets the Building and Fire
Codes and is a color that is compatible with the front façade
f) Industrial. Buildings located in the LI-1, LI-2, LI-3 and PI zoning districts shall meet the
following wall material requirements:
Wall Permitted wall materials
Front façade and other walls facing a
street or an adjacent residential zoning
district
50% minimum brick, face
brick, stone, cast stone or Cbrick
(1)
Up to 50% may be any other suitable
fire-resistant material that meets the
Building and Fire Codes
Side and rear facades that do not face
a street, or an adjacent residential
zoning district
Any suitable fire-resistant material that meets the Building and Fire
Codes and is a color that is compatible with the front façade
Notes to the above table:
(1) The building material requirements of this section shall not apply to the façade of a building of any size where
it is set back more than three hundred (300) feet from the front lot line and the Planning Commission approves
a landscape plan that provides screening of the building from the front lot line(s).
g) Allowance for Other Materials. The approving body (the Planning Commission or City
Council, as applicable) may waive the materials required by this Section if it finds that a
proposed building design and the materials or combinations of materials are in keeping
with the Purpose of this Section. In making a decision, the approving body shall also
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-8
consider the desired character of the area and design recommendations of the Master
Plan.
h) Design Standards. Buildings shall have architectural variety, but enhance the overall
cohesive community character.
1) Buildings shall provide architectural features, details and ornaments, including
but not limited to, string courses, archways, colonnades, cornices, peaked roof
lines or towers.
2) Building walls that face the street or a parking area that are over one hundred
(100) feet long shall be broken up with one or more of the following:
a. varying building lines;
b. windows;
c. doors;
d. architectural accents;
e. other features that visually provide variety in the wall expanse.
f. Trees may also be used to break up wall expanses, but only if in
combination with the above
3) Building entrances shall utilize windows, side lights, canopies and awnings;
provide unity of scale, texture, and color; and clearly identify the entry.
4) Building-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view at street
level.
i) Site Elements. Signs and other site features shall be designed and located so that they are
aesthetically consistent and harmonious with the overall development. Sign bases and
ground mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened with landscaping. Trash
receptacles and trash collection areas shall be screened in accordance with Section 3.270.
j) Existing Buildings. The following shall apply to additions or remodeling of existing
buildings:
1) Where a new wall material is proposed for an existing building wall, only that
portion of the building being altered shall be subject to this Section. However, in
considering the proposed alteration, the Zoning Administrator or the approving
body (either the Planning Commission or City Council, as applicable) may
modify the material requirements of this Section to ensure consistency with the
architecture of the remainder building.
2) Where an addition is proposed to an existing building, the Zoning Administrator
or the approving body (either the Planning Commission or City Council, as
applicable), may allow the use of existing wall materials for the addition;
provided that the design of the alteration is consistent with the existing building
wall design.
3) A building that is being rebuilt or restored according to its current size and style
and within its existing building footprint may utilize the original building
materials, provided that the cost of rebuilding or restoration does not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the value of the structure prior to rebuilding or restoration. If the
cost exceeds fifty percent (50%), the structure shall be rebuilt or restored in
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-9
accordance with the requirements of this Section; however, the approving official
or body may allow the use of the original building materials if the approving
official or body finds that the original building materials contributed to a
culturally, historically or architecturally significant structure.
[Ordinance No. 259, 09/08/09]
Section 5.70 Landscaping
a) A landscape plan shall be submitted as part of any required site plan review application.
The landscape plan shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following items:
1) Identification of natural features, natural drainage areas, woodlots, existing trees
over twelve (12) inches in diameter, and areas of vegetative cover to be preserved.
2) Location, spacing, size and descriptions for each plant type proposed for use
within the required landscape area.
3) Identification of areas to be grass or other ground cover, and method of planting.
4) For berms or swales, if provided, typical straight cross-section including slope,
height, and width.
5) Height and type of construction of walls or fences, if provided.
6) Significant construction details to resolve specific site conditions, such as tree
wells to preserve existing trees or culverts to maintain natural drainage patterns.
7) The Planning Commission may require the landscape plan to be on a separate
sheet if necessary to discern landscaping details and to meet the requirements of
this Section. The plan must show that the location of landscaping will not have a
negative impact on the location of underground utilities.
b) Required Site Landscaping
1) Site landscaping requirements may be waived if the existing vegetation to be
retained on site meets or exceeds Ordinance requirements for landscaping,
screening or buffering.
2) Front Setback Landscaping
a. All required front yard setbacks shall be landscaped with a minimum ratio
of one (1) canopy or shade tree and four (4) shrubs, for each thirty (30)
lineal feet (or major portion thereof) along front lot lines. Access
driveway ways from public or private rights-of-way shall not be subtracted
from the lineal dimension used to determine the minimum number of trees
and shrubs required.
b. On lots with more than one (1) frontage, the front setback landscaping
requirements shall be met for each frontage.
c. Landscaping may be clustered and distributed throughout the setback.
3) Parking Lot Landscaping
a. Parking lots exceeding fifteen (15) parking spaces shall provide the
equivalent of one (1) landscape island or perimeter bump-out for every
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-10
fifteen (15) parking spaces provided (or fraction thereof equaling one-half
or more).
b. Landscape islands or bump-outs shall be at minimum of one hundred
eighty (180) square feet in size, with a minimum width of three (3) feet.
c. Landscape islands shall be landscaped with a minimum of one (1) canopy
or ornamental tree and two (2) shrubs for every landscaping island or
bump-out.
d. A raised, rolled, or sub-surface curb or curb stops shall protect all
landscape islands and landscaped areas immediately adjacent to parking
spaces.
e. Sunken landscape islands, rain gardens and vegetated swales are
encouraged to manage storm water on site.
4) Additional landscaping may be required adjacent to the front or side of buildings
to break up long building expanses and walls void of windows or significant
architectural features.
c) Screening requirements
1) Screening shall be required for the following uses, except as may be provided
elsewhere in this Ordinance.
a. Around all trash, recycling or grease dumpsters in all districts (see Section
3.230).
b. Around designated outdoor storage areas in the commercial and industrial
districts.
c. Around any loading/unloading area.
d. Around ground-mounted outdoor mechanical equipment.
2) All required screens shall provide one (1) or both of the following:
a. A solid, sight-obscuring fence or wall six (6) feet high.
b. Landscaping consisting of hedges, densely planted trees and shrubs,
trellises and other plantings that create an adequate screen.
c. Berms of adequate height, in combination with landscaping.
3) Screening shall be required on the subject property even if the surrounding area or
adjacent properties are unimproved.
4) When any developed parcel changes to a more intense land use, screening shall be
provided in compliance with this Section.
5) If existing conditions on the subject parcel are such that a parcel cannot comply
with the screening requirements, the Planning Commission may determine the
character of the screen based on the following criteria:
a. Traffic access and circulation.
b. Building and parking lot coverage.
c. Outdoor sales, display, or manufacturing area.
d. Physical characteristics of the site and surrounding area such as
topography, vegetation, etc.
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-11
e. Views and noise levels.
f. Public health, safety, and welfare.
6) Trash Receptacles and Dumpsters. Dumpsters and other trash and recycling
receptacles shall be screened according to the requirements of Section 3.230.
7) Fences or Walls
a. A fence or wall used to meet the screening requirements shall be
constructed of masonry, treated wood or other material approved by the
Planning Commission if determined to be durable, weather resistant, rust
proof, and easily maintained.
b. Fences and walls are subject to the location and height requirements of
Section 3.90.
8) All other applicable standards of this Section shall be met.
d) Landscaped Buffers. The Planning Commission may require a landscaped buffer in
conjunction with approval of a site plan, Planned Unit Development, or Special Land
Use. When a buffer is required between a residential and a nonresidential use, it shall be
placed on the nonresidential use property. The Planning Commission shall approve the
location, size, shape, materials and other specifications for the buffer, subject to the
requirements of this Section.
1) Buffer Requirements
a. The buffer may be comprised of berms, required plant material, additional
plant material where the required landscaping materials do not provide a
sufficient buffer, walls, fences, or any combination thereof.
b. No structures or parking may be located within a designated buffer.
c. Unless otherwise stated in this Ordinance, minimum width of the buffer
shall correspond to the setback requirements for parking areas, but shall in
no case be less than ten (10) feet.
d. All areas within the buffer zone that do not contain trees, shrubs or
planting beds shall be covered with grass or other living ground cover.
2) Detention/retention areas shall be permitted within a required buffer, provided
they do not hamper the screening intent of the buffer zone or jeopardize the
survival of the plant materials.
e) Landscaping General Requirements
1) Landscaping shall be installed such that, when mature, it does not obscure traffic
signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage patterns on site or adjacent properties, or
obstruct vision for safety of ingress or egress.
2) Unless used as street trees, all landscaped areas shall be arranged to simulate a
natural setting such as staggered rows or clusters.
3) Landscaping shall be designed to blend with that on adjacent parcels where a
road, walkway or other pathway flows between parcels.
4) All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, neat and orderly state free from
refuse and debris. Any dead or diseased plants shall be removed and replaced
within six (6) months. Native species are preferred.
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-12
5) Existing trees and other landscaping shall be protected from damage during
construction. When existing trees are shown on the site plan to be preserved, the
critical root zone shall be protected from construction traffic by fences and mulch
beds. Construction materials shall not be stored within a critical root zone.
6) Minimum plant sizes at time of installation shall be according to the chart below.
Plant Type Minimum Size
Deciduous Canopy Tree 2.5 in. caliper
Deciduous Ornamental Tree 2 in. caliper
Evergreen Tree 6 ft. height
Deciduous Shrub 18 in. height
Upright Evergreen Shrub 2 ft. height
Spreading Evergreen Shrub 18 to 24 in. spread
7) Mixing of Species: The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of any one (1) plant species.
8) Where a berm is provided for the purposes of screening and buffering, it shall
have a maximum slope of one foot of vertical rise to three feet of horizontal
distance (1:3) with a crest area at least four (4) feet wide.
9) The following trees are not permitted as they split easily; their wood is brittle and
breaks easily; their roots clog drains and sewers; and they are unusually
susceptible to disease or insect pests:
PROHIBITED SPECIES FOR NEW LANDSCAPING
Common Name Horticultural Name
Box Elder Acer Negundo
Ginkgo Ginkgo Biloba (female only)
Honey Locust Gleditsia Triacanthos (with
thorns)
Mulberry Morus Species
Poplars Populus Species
Black Locust Robinia Species
Willows Salix Species
American Elm Ulmus Americana
Siberian Elm Ulmus Pumila
Slippery Elm; Red Elm Ulmus Rubra
Chinese Elm Ulmus Parvifola
Russian Olive Elaeagnus-angustifolia
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-13
f) The Planning Commission may require a performance guarantee in accordance with the
requirements of Section 12.60 of sufficient amount to ensure the installation of all
required landscaping.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 5.80 Site Plan Review Standards
All site plans shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and with each of the
following standards:
a) Building Relationships - Where possible, buildings and structures shall be placed in an
orderly, non-random fashion such that an uncrowded, open appearance is maintained.
Open spaces shall be located and arranged in a manner which provides view protection,
visual relief, physical separation, environmentally sensitive area protection, and aesthetic
attractiveness to surrounding properties.
b) Driveways, Parking and Circulation:
1) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation facilities shall be designed so as to provide
for safe and efficient movement of vehicles and pedestrians, in a manner which
avoids conflict.
2) Points of vehicular access to public streets shall be limited to the minimum
number required to provide safe and efficient access. Points of access shall either
be directly aligned or offset a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) feet,
whenever possible.
c) Surface Water Drainage - The removal of surface water shall not adversely affect
neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system. Temporary on-site storage to
reduce peak runoff from the site may be required. Surface water in all paved areas shall
be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic and will not create standing water in the paved areas.
d) Utility Service - All new utility distribution lines shall be placed underground.
e) Emergency Access - The site plan shall provide for adequate access to the site and to all
buildings on the site by emergency vehicles.
f) Exterior Lighting - Exterior lighting shall be placed and designed so that illumination is
directed away from adjacent properties. Lights shall generally be shielded such that
resultant illumination is cast in a downward fashion to prevent off-site spillage and glare.
g) Special Features - Exposed storage areas, trash receptacles, exposed machinery
installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures and similar
accessory areas shall be reasonably screened by view from adjoining streets and other
public areas, or as required by this Ordinance.
h) Character of Area -When reviewing a site plan, consideration shall be given to the
safety, environmental, economic, and aesthetic impacts of the proposed site layout on
adjacent properties and the general area. Changes in the location of site features and the
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-14
application of conditions so as to ensure that a harmonious relationship will result may be
required.
Section 5.90 Construction in Conformity with Approved Site Plan Required
a) Official Site Plan - Upon approval of a site plan by the Planning Commission or City
Council, the Zoning Administrator and the applicant shall sign and indicate the approval
date of three (3) copies of the approved site plan. Signed copies shall be provided to the
applicant and the Zoning Administrator, and one (1) signed copy shall be made a part of
the record of approval and filed with the City Clerk. The site plan included as part of the
record of approval and filed with the City Clerk shall be considered the Official Site Plan.
The Official Site Plan shall be used in all matters of interpretation or dispute concerning
approved site plan requirements.
b) Conformity with the Approved Site Plan - Following approval of a site plan by the
Planning Commission or City Council, construction of all improvements and other
subsequent actions relating to the activity authorized shall be in conformity with the
approved site plan.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]]
Section 5.100 Time Limit for Approved Site Plans
a) Plan Expiration - A site plan approval granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be valid
for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval. If construction is not commenced
by the end of this period, and if a written request for extension of the approval has not
been submitted by the applicant as outlined by subparagraph b) below, the site plan
approval shall be deemed expired and no longer valid.
b) Extension of Approved Site Plan - The approving body (the Planning Commission or
City Council, as applicable) may grant one (1) extension of the site plan approval for a
one (1) year period, commencing from the date of the original site plan approval, upon
submittal in writing by the applicant of a request for an extension. The approving body
shall grant an extension only upon presentation of written evidence indicating that
construction of the project has been delayed by factors beyond the reasonable control of
the applicant and that construction of the project is likely to proceed within one (1) year
of the extension. The written request for an extension shall be made thirty (30) days prior
to the expiration of the initial site plan approval.[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 5.110 Changes to Approved Site Plans
a) Authority to Approve Minor Plan Amendments - As outlined under subparagraph b)
below, minor amendments to a site plan approved by the Planning Commission or the
City Council may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator provided the amendments
are in conformance with this Ordinance and are mutually agreed to by the applicant and
the Zoning Administrator. Minor amendments shall generally be restricted to situations
resulting from unforeseen site constraints or other unusual site conditions that were not
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-15
recognized or known at time of the initial site plan approval by the Planning Commission
or City Council.
1) If a request for approval of a minor amendment to the site plan is made by the
applicant, then that request shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in
writing by the applicant. If a request for an amendment to the site plan is made by
the Zoning Administrator, then the request shall be initiated by the Zoning
Administrator who shall, in writing, inform the applicant.
2) Minor amendments to conditions specifically imposed as part of site plan
approval (including site plans for Special Land Uses and Planned Unit
Developments) in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.60 b) are not
subject to this Section. Requests for amendments or changes to conditions of
approval of site plans require re-submission of the request in the same manner as
the original submittal.
b) Minor Amendments - Minor amendments to an approved site plan may be approved by
the Zoning Administrator provided the proposed revisions do not alter the basic intent
and design of the plan. Minor amendments shall be limited to the following:
1) Movement of a building or buildings by no more than five (5) feet, provided
however, the movement shall not encroach on required setbacks.
2) Horizontal and/or vertical elevations may be altered by up to five (5) percent,
provided however, that any alteration shall not exceed the height limitations of the
underlying zone district.
3) Approved plantings may be replaced by similar types and sizes of landscaping.
4) Changes in floor plans that do not alter the character of the use or have an exterior
site impact.
5) Slight modification of sign placement or reduction of sign size or height.
6) Relocation of sidewalks to avoid natural features or other physical conditions and
relocation of refuse storage stations.
7) Internal arrangement of a parking lot which does not affect the number of parking
spaces or alter access locations or general design.
8) Improvements to site access or circulation, such as inclusion of deceleration lanes,
boulevards, curbing, pedestrian/bicycle paths, and similar features.
9) Changes of building materials to others of higher quality
[Ordinance No 224, 9/19/05]
c) Notification of Minor Amendment - The Zoning Administrator shall notify the
Planning Commission, and City Council if responsible for the original final approval, in
writing of the approved minor amendments. A record of approved minor amendments
shall be placed on file with the original site plan review record. A notation shall be made
on the Official Site Plan indicating that amendments have been made to the document
with a description of same. The notation shall be signed and dated by the applicant and
the Zoning Administrator with a copy of the amended plan forwarded to the Planning
Commission, and City Council if responsible for the original final approval. The
amended plan shall be filed with the Commission and Council within thirty (30) days of
SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
5-16
the signing, or the next regular meeting of the Commission and Council if less than thirty
(30) days from the date of the signing. A copy shall also be filed with the City Clerk.
d) Other Changes - Other changes to an approved site plan shall be subject to review and
approval by the Planning Commission and City Council following the procedures
required for the initial site plan review.
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-1
ARTICLE 6
PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Section 6.10 Purpose and Application of Requirements
The purpose of this Article is to provide all districts at the time of erection, enlargement or
change in use, of any principal building or structure, off-street parking space with adequate
access to all spaces. Off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses,
shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance as hereinafter
prescribed. Due to the unique characteristics of the Service District, certain provisions of Article
VI have been modified. These are detailed under Section 9.90, S Zone District - Service District.
Section 6.20 General Requirements
a) Residential Off-Street Parking - Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a
parking strip, driveway, garage, or combination thereof, and shall be located on the
premises they are intended to serve.
b) Commercial District - Off-street parking within the Commercial Districts shall either be
on the same lot, contiguous lots under the same ownership, or open public (municipal)
parking lots within three hundred (300) feet of the building it is intended to serve,
measured from the nearest public building entrance to the nearest parking space of the
off-street parking lot. Provided however, the city may require that some or all of the
required parking be provided outside of municipal parking lots if it is determined that
sufficient capacity is unavailable within the municipal parking lot(s).
c) Change in Parking Location - Any area once designated as required off-street parking
shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities meeting the
standards of this section are provided elsewhere, or the parking requirements of the site
change.
d) Prohibited Use of Parking Area for Storage - The use of parking areas for material
storage, refuse storage stations and dumpsters, storage or display of vehicles and/or
merchandise, or for vehicle or machinery repair or maintenance is expressly prohibited,
except during construction for which a building permit has been issued. The use of semitrailers
or similar vehicles for storage purposes on the premises for five (5) or more days
is prohibited.
e) Collective Parking Arrangements - Except for single-family detached housing units, two
(2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking, in
which case the required number of parking spaces for the uses calculated individually
may be reduced by up to ten percent (10%) if a signed agreement is provided by the
property owners, and the Zoning Administrator, after site plan review, determines that the
peak usage will occur at different periods of the day. The agreement shall be recorded by
the applicant with the Ottawa County Register of Deeds, shall run with the land and not
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-2
the property owners or uses of record, and shall only be modified by consent of the
Planning Commission
f) More Than One Use on Premises - Where two or more uses exist on the premises,
parking requirements shall be calculated for each use, unless specifically provided
otherwise herein.
g) Parking Lot Deferment - Where the property owner can demonstrate that the required
amount of parking is excessive, the Planning Commission may approve a smaller parking
area, provided that an area of sufficient size to meet the parking space requirements of
this Article is retained as open space, and the owner agrees to construct the additional
parking at the direction of the Planning Commission based on observed usage within six
(6) months of being informed of the request in writing by the Zoning Administrator. The
site plan shall note the area where parking is being deferred, including dimensions and
dotted parking lot layout. The Planning Commission may require the applicant to post a
performance guarantee to ensure construction of the deferred parking if it is determined
that the parking is needed. Parking lot deferment for special land uses and planned unit
developments shall be processed by the City Council.
h) Use Enlargement or Change - In the event an existing use is enlarged or changed to a
different use, the available on-site parking provided shall be adjusted to reflect the
parking requirements of the expanded use or new use, provided, however, should the
expansion or new use require less parking than the former use, the applicant shall not be
required to modify the existing parking.
i) Excess Parking/Pavement - In order to minimize excessive areas of pavement which
depreciate aesthetic standards and contribute to high rates of storm water runoff,
exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by greater than twenty-percent
(20%) shall not be allowed, except as approved by the City Council. In granting this
additional space, the City Council shall determine that the parking will be required,
based on documented evidence. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
j) Parking for Vehicles During Construction - During construction, off-street parking (off
the public right-of-way) shall be provided for all construction vehicles and employees.
The parking shall be on the lot or parcel at which the construction is occurring or another
lot or parcel. If parking is to occur on another lot or parcel, written permission shall be
secured from the owner of the lot or parcel prior to the parking of vehicles. In all cases,
the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to require the rearranging and/or
relocation of parking so as to assure the public safety.
k) Uses Not Listed, Including Temporary and Seasonal Uses - For uses not specifically
listed in Section 6.40, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in
accordance with a similar use or based on documentation regarding the specific parking
needs for the particular use, as determined by the Planning Commission or, in the case of
a special land use or planned unit development, the City Council following a
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-3
Section 6.30 Parking Units of Measurements
a) Floor Area:
1) Gross Floor Area - Where floor area is the unit for determining the required
number of off-street parking and loading spaces, the unit shall mean the gross
floor area (GFA), unless otherwise noted.
2) Useable Floor Area - Where the floor area measurement is specified as useable
floor area (UFA), parking requirements shall apply to all internal building areas
excluding the floor area used for incidental service, storage, mechanical
equipment rooms, heating/cooling systems and similar uses, and other areas not
intended for use by the general public. Where these areas are not defined, useable
floor area shall be considered to be eighty-five percent (85%) of the gross floor
area.
b) Benches and Pews - In calculating bench seating for places of assembly, each twentyfour
(24) inches of benches, pews or other seating, shall be counted as one seat.
c) Number of Employees - Where the number of spaces required is based on the number of
employees, calculations shall be based upon the maximum number of employees likely to
be on the premises during the peak shift.
d) Fractional Spaces - When units of measurements determining the number of required
parking or loading spaces result in a fractional space, any fraction shall be counted as one
(1) additional space.
Section 6.40 Parking Space Numerical Requirements (Parking Space
Schedule)
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined by the type of use in
accordance with the following schedule:
A. General Residential
Single-family and Two-family dwellings. 2.0 spaces per dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwelling and Dormitories. 1.5 spaces per each efficiency or one bedroom dwelling
unit and 2.0 spaces per each unit with two or more
bedrooms
Manufactured homes in a mobile home
park.
2.0 spaces per each manufactured/ mobile home unit or
site
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-4
B. Senior Housing
[Retirement Villages/Centers, Independent Care Units, Elder Care Housing.
Intermediate Care Units, Convalescent Homes, and Nursing Homes]
Housing for fully independent residents:
Senior independent units and Independent
Care Retirement Village or Center.
1.5 spaces per each room and living unit
Housing for residents requiring a
moderate level of care: Senior "interim
care", elder care”, and "intermediate care"
units.
1.0 space per each room, plus 1.0 space per employee
Housing for residents whose care is fully
dependent on others: Convalescent
homes, nursing homes, rest homes, etc.
1.0 space per each two rooms, plus 1.0 space per
employee
C. Institutional/Civic
[Religious, Municipal, Hospital, Child Care, Schools, and Halls]
Churches, temples, synagogues and other
places of worship.
1.0 space per each three seats or six feet of pews
Municipal office buildings. 4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, plus spaces required
for any assembly hall, auditorium, and outdoor arena.
Hospitals. 2.5 spaces per each licensed bed, plus outpatient care and
emergency care requirements
Outpatient care and emergency care
services.
Refer to Office Parking Requirements
Child care centers. 2.0 spaces, plus, 1.0 additional space for each seven
children of licensed authorized capacity
Primary schools (elementary and junior
high schools).
1.0 space per each classroom, plus 3.5 spaces per each
1,000 square feet of gross office area, plus spaces
required for any assembly hall, auditorium, and outdoor
arena
Secondary (high) schools.
Commercial/Trade schools.
College/University.
5.0 spaces per each classroom, plus 3.5 spaces per each
1,000 square feet of gross office area, plus spaces
required for any assembly hall, auditorium, outdoor
arena, and dormitory or other on-campus housing
Auditoriums.
Assembly halls.
Outdoor arenas.
1.0 space per each three seats or six feet of bleachers
Public recreation centers 5.0 spaces per 1000 square feet of GFA
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-5
C. Institutional/Civic
[Religious, Municipal, Hospital, Child Care, Schools, and Halls]
Dance hall.
Union/Lodge hall.
Fraternal hall/club.
Similar uses
1.0 space per every two persons of capacity authorized
by the City Building Code [or Fire Code if more
stringent]
D. Office
Medical/dental office/clinic. 7.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, plus outpatient care,
emergency, twenty-four hour med station requirements
Outpatient care.
Emergency care.
Twenty-four (24) hour med station.
2.0 spaces per exam or outpatient procedure/operating
room, plus 1.0 space per laboratory or recovery room,
plus 1.0 space for each two rooms for employee parking
General office building. 3.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Branch bank.
Credit union.
Savings and Loan.
5.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, plus 4.0 stacking spaces
per window and ATM
E. Commercial/Retail/Service
Appliance store. 4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA
Automobile service station and gasoline
stations, with or without convenience
goods.
2.0 spaces per each service bay, plus 1.0 space per
employee, plus 1.0 space per each tow truck, plus 1.0
space for each 300 square feet devoted to sales of
convenience goods, plus 2.0 spaces per pump
Vehicle repair, minor and oil change/quick
lube.
2.0 spaces per service bay, plus 1.0 space per employee
Vehicle sales, with or without minor
vehicle repair
1.0 space per 200 sq. ft. gross sales [showroom and
office] floor area, plus 3.0 spaces per each auto service
bay
Vehicle wash (automatic or semiautomatic).
2.0 spaces, plus 1.0 space per employee, plus stacking
spaces as required by Section 4.80
Bar (Lounge). 16.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA, or 0.7 spaces per seat,
whichever is greater
Barber shop/beauty salon/hair salon. 2.5 spaces per each barber or beautician's chair or station
Bed-and Breakfast Inn. 2.0 spaces, plus 1.0 space per guest room
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-6
E. Commercial/Retail/Service
Conference rooms, exhibit halls, and
similar uses.
1.0 space per every two persons of capacity authorized
by the City Building Code, or 10.0 spaces per 1,000 sq.
ft. GFA, whichever is greater
Convenience store, with or without gasoline
service.
4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA, plus 2.0 spaces per
pump
Discount retail store. 5.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA
Dry cleaners. 2.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA, plus 2.0 spaces per
drive-up window
Equipment repair. 1.0 space per 4,000 sq. ft. UFA
Funeral homes. 1.0 space per 50 sq. ft. UFA devoted to service parlors,
chapels, and reception areas, plus 1.0 space per each
funeral vehicle stored on the premises
Furniture/carpet store. 1.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA
Hardware/paint/home improvement store 3.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA
Laundromat. 1.0 space per each two washing machines
Mini/self-storage warehouse. Minimum of 6.0 spaces, plus 1.0 space per each
mini/self-storage unit with parking to be located adjacent
to the front garage door of each unit
Motel/hotel with lounge, restaurant,
conference or banquet rooms or exhibit
facility.
1.0 space per guest room, plus 10.0 spaces per 1,000 sq.
ft of lounge, restaurant, conference or banquet rooms or
exhibit space
Manufactured/modular sales and service. 1.0 space per 800 sq. ft. UFA, plus 2.0 spaces per each
vehicle sales service bay
Restaurant-sit-down type with liquor
license.
16.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA, or 0.6 spaces per seat,
whichever is greater
Restaurant - family type (without liquor
license).
12.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft UFA or 0.5 spaces per seat,
whichever is greater, plus 5.0 longer spaces [no less than
25 ft.] designated for recreational vehicles
Restaurant - fast food with drive-through
window.
15.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA or 0.6 spaces per seat,
whichever is greater, plus 10.0 designated drive-through
short term waiting spaces, plus 5.0 longer spaces [no less
than 25 ft.] designated for recreational vehicles
Restaurant - take out with less than six
tables and/or booths.
6.0 spaces, plus 1.0 space per employee
Business center. 4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA
Showroom of a plumber, cabinet maker,
decorator, or similar trade.
1.0 space per 800 sq. ft. UFA
Supermarket. 4.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-7
E. Commercial/Retail/Service
Mega-Market (combined grocery and
department store).
4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA
Video rental establishments. 1.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA, with a minimum of 8.0
spaces provided
F. Recreation/Entertainment
Batting cages. 3.0 spaces per cage
Bowling centers. 5.0 spaces per lane, plus amount required for the bar if a
bar or lounge is present
Commercial outdoor recreation not listed
elsewhere.
5.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, with a minimum of 10
spaces provided
Golf course driving range. 1.0 space per tee
Golf course, miniature. 1.0 space per course hole
Golf course, par three. 3.0 spaces per course hole
Golf course. 6.0 spaces per course hole
Golf course banquet hall/lounge. 0.5 spaces per seat, plus spaces required for golf course
Health fitness centers without swimming
pool.
5.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. UFA
Ice/roller skating rink. 6.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Marina 1.5 spaces per boat slip, plus 1.0 space for each four (4)
boat racks in an “in-out” boat keeping building or facility,
plus 1.0 space per 800 sq. ft. UFA for showroom sales,
plus 2.0 spaces per each service bay
Swimming pool. 1.0 space per each three persons of capacity authorized by
the City Building Code
Theater, cinema. 1.0 space per each four seats, plus 4.0 spaces per screen
or stage
Racquetball/tennis centers. 1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA or 6.0 spaces per court,
whichever is greater
Video Arcade. 1.0 space per 50 sq. ft. UFA, with a minimum of 6.0
spaces required
G. Industrial
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-8
Light industrial, manufacturing, testing
labs, research and development centers,
other industrial.
1.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, or 1.2 spaces per
employee, whichever is greater, plus 1.0 space for each
corporate vehicle
Warehousing. 1.0 space per each 2,500 sq. ft. GFA, or 1.0 space per
employee, whichever is greater, plus 1.0 space for each
corporate vehicle [Note: separate standard provided for
mini-storage]
H. Uses Not Specified
Refer to 6.20, k) for determining required parking for uses not specified under Section 6.40.
Section 6.50 Barrier Free Parking Requirements
a) Barrier Free Spaces - Within each parking lot, signed and marked barrier free spaces
shall be provided at a convenient location, in accordance with state and federal law.
b) Barrier Free Access - Wheelchair access requirements shall be according to state or
federal barrier free regulations, with the most restrictive requirements applying.
Section 6.60 Stacking Space Requirements
Where the requirements of Section 6.40, Parking Space Schedule, requires the reservation of
space for the stacking of vehicles, the follows standards shall apply to the space:
a) Conflict With Other Traffic - Stacking spaces shall not conflict with traffic accessing
the use, nor adjacent uses.
b) Length - Each space shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet in length.
c) Blocking of Parking Spaces - Parking spaces blocked by stacking spaces shall not be
included in calculating the required number of parking spaces.
d) Use of Public or Private Street - The use of a public or private street for stacking of
vehicles is prohibited.
e) Additional Spaces Required - Additional stacking spaces may be required if it is
determined, during site plan review, that the spaces are necessary for proper traffic safety
and control.
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-9
Section 6.70 Off-Street Parking Space Design Standards and Setback
Requirements
Off-street parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained according to the
following standards and regulations.
a) Ingress and Egress - Ingress and egress to the parking facility shall be provided by
clearly defined driveways. For purposes of public safety, ingress and egress movements
may be restricted or otherwise regulated pursuant to vehicular movement (e.g. one-way,
in-only, out-only, right-turn only, etc.), driveway openings and spacings, driveway size,
and related factors.
b) Construction Material Surface - All parking lots shall have a concrete, asphalt, or brick
paver surface. Pervious or semi-pervious hard surfacing materials, as part of a low-impact
design for stormwater management approved as part of the site plan, are permitted and
encouraged [Ord. No. 265, 10/4/2010]
c) Driveways - Surface Material
1) Single-Family Residential - All single-family dwelling unit driveways shall have
a concrete, asphalt, or brick paver surface, provided, however, a dwelling unit
accessing a non-paved road, or with a driveway of two hundred (200) feet or
greater in length, shall be permitted to install a driveway of compacted gravel or
stone, except as follows:
a. The paving exclusion detailed above shall not apply to that portion of a
driveway located in a required setback. That portion of a driveway
located in a required setback shall have a concrete, asphalt, or brick paver
surface.
2) Other Driveways - All driveways, other than Single-Family Residential
referenced above, shall have a concrete, asphalt, or brick paver surface.
d) Driveways - Design and Construction Standards:
1) Single-Family Residential - All driveways shall possess a curb opening and
minimum width of sixteen (16) feet and shall be constructed of materials specified
under Paragraph c), above.
2) Multiple-Family, Commercial, and Industrial - All driveways shall possess a
curb opening and minimum width of thirty (30) feet and shall be constructed of
materials specified under Paragraph c), above. Provided, however, more stringent
design and construction standards may be required if determined necessary for the
public safety and/or to maintain compliance with County or State requirements
pursuant to connection with a County or State road.
e) Maneuvering Lanes - All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of
maneuvering lanes.
f) Lighting - All parking lot or display lighting shall be designed, located and/or shielded to
prevent spill over onto adjacent properties, and shall be arranged to prohibit adverse
effects on motorist visibility on adjacent public roadways. The maximum height of
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-10
parking lot light fixtures shall be twenty (20) feet for any lot within one-hundred and fifty
(150) feet of a residential district, and a maximum height of forty (40) feet in all other
parking lots.
g) Curbing - Curbing or bumper blocks shall be provided where parking spaces abut
landscaping, property lines, sidewalks or required setback areas.
h) Use of Public Street - Parking lots shall be designed to prevent vehicles from backing
into the street or requiring use of the street for maneuvering between parking rows.
i) Right-of-Way Setback for Parking Lots and Maneuvering Aisles - Parking lots and
related maneuvering aisles shall have a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any
adjacent right-of-way line. Required parking lot setback areas shall be landscaped.
j) Parking Lot Setback from Property Line - Parking lots shall have a minimum set back of
ten (10) feet from any property line that is not a street right-of-way line. This
requirement may be waived where a shared access driveway, connected parking lots,
frontage road, or rear service drive exists.
k) Parking Lot Setback from Residential Zone - Parking lots shall have a minimum rear and
side yard setback of twenty (20) feet from any residential zoning district. This setback
area shall include either a landscape berm or other landscaping and/or a wall to screen
headlights. The design of the landscape or wall feature shall be compatible with the
character the adjacent residential district.
l) Parking Space Design - All spaces shall be designed and marked with dimensions
described below:
ANGLE SPECIFICATION [Refer to Parking Diagrams - Figures 6-1, 6-2 and 6-3]
76 to 90 Degree 9 x 18 feet with 24 feet wide aisle for 2-way traffic or 18 feet for singleloaded
1-way aisle.
30 to 75 Degree 9 x 21 feet with 24 feet wide aisle for 2-way traffic or 15 feet for single- or
double-loaded 1-way aisle.
Parallel Parking 9 x 25 feet with a 3 feet area striped for "No Parking" between each two
spaces, and 22 feet for 2-way traffic aisle or 15 feet wide for 1-way aisle.
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-11
m) Space Width Reduction Option - Required width of parking spaces may be reduced by
six (6) inches per space if the parking lot is marked with double (or loop) stripes at three
(3) or four (4) inches wide and spaced eighteen (18) to twenty four (24) inches apart.
n) Use of Front Yard for Parking:
1) Single-Family Residential - On any single-family residential lot, the parking of
vehicles shall be restricted to the driveway, carport, or garage. Except for the
parking of recreational vehicles as provided for under Section 3.190, and as
provided above, the front yard shall not be used for the parking of vehicles.
2) Other Than Single-Family Residential - Parking shall be restricted to those
locations (e.g. driveways and parking lots) approved for the use based on the
provisions of this Ordinance and subject to site plan review and approval.
Figure 6-3: 35-75 Degree Parking
Dimensions
Figure 6-3: Parallel Parking Dimensions
90 Degree: measured perpendicular to the
aisle centerline
Less than 90 Degree: Measure along the
aisle centerline
Figure 6-3: 90-Degree Parking Dimensions
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-12
Section 6.80 Parking Lot Construction and Maintenance
a) Plans and Review and Approval - Plans and specifications for parking areas shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. These
plans shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator for compliance with this Ordinance
and the Building Official for compliance with City Construction Codes. If the parking lot
is to be constructed in conjunction with a building project, the following information may
be submitted as part of an overall project site plan which incorporates all project
elements. The plan shall include:
1) Existing and proposed locations, sizes, and grades of the parking lot(s).
2) Sufficient engineering design detail, including run-off calculations, to
demonstrate that storm water will be accommodated on-site through approved
drainage facilities, including catch basins, proper pipe sizes, and connections to
existing drainage structures.
3) Design detail of surface and base materials to be used during construction.
4) Curb cut and deceleration and acceleration lane detail, including size, design,
relationship to curb cuts on adjacent property, turning radius, and traffic flow.
5) Perimeter and interior landscaping including location, size, and setbacks of
planting areas, type and size of plant
materials, irrigation, architectural
screens or walls, and other features.
6) Signs, including placement, purpose,
size, type, and method of
illumination.
7) Lighting detail including location,
size, and type(s) of fixture(s).
Fixtures used for the lighting of
parking lots shall be of a cut-off (or
comparable) design to prevent the
spillage of light/glare onto adjoining
residential properties. (See Figure
6.4).
b) Installation Period - Approved parking lots
shall be installed and completed before issuance of a building occupancy permit. The
Zoning Administrator may grant a temporary occupancy permit, combined with an
extension for up to six (6) months to hard surface the parking in the event of adverse
weather conditions or unusual delays beyond the control of the property owner. In
granting a temporary occupancy permit, the uncompleted parking lot must be sufficiently
improved to permit safe use by the public. In granting the extension, the Zoning
Administrator may require the applicant to file a performance guarantee to ensure
construction of the parking lot as approved.
Figure 6-4 Cut-Off Lighting
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-13
c) Pavement Markings - All parking spaces, aisles, loading and unloading areas, pedestrian
crossings, and directional control shall be marked. The visibility of pavement markings
shall be of high quality and well maintained. Pavement markings shall be maintained on
a regular basis to ensure lasting visibility.
d) General Maintenance - All parking lots shall be maintained. Zoning approval is not
required for normal maintenance such as cleaning, sealing, and/or patching.
Section 6.90 Off-Street Loading and Unloading Areas
On the premises, space for standing, loading and unloading vehicles shall be provided for each
use involving the receipt or distribution of goods based on the following criteria:
a) Size and Location (General) - The loading area shall be of sufficient size, and properly
located, to prevent undue interference with adjacent required parking spaces,
maneuvering aisles, or traffic flow on public streets.
b) Alley Location - Where an alley exists at the rear of the building, the required loading
area may be computed from the centerline of the alley.
c) Visible to a Public Street - Loading/unloading areas and docks shall not be provided in
the front yard or on any building side facing and directly visible to a public street.
d) Visible to a Residential District - Loading docks and loading areas facing a residential
district shall be adequately screened by a wall and/or landscaping.
e) May Not Be Used in the Calculation of Off-Street Parking - Required loading areas
shall not be included in calculations for off-street parking space requirements.
f) Space Size and Clearance - The size of all required loading/unloading spaces shall be at
least ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet or five-hundred (500) square feet in area, with a
clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet in height.
g) Construction Material - Loading dock approaches shall be constructed of an asphalt or
cement binder with a base sufficient to accommodate expected vehicle weight.
h) Required Spaces - The minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the following table:
Required Loading and Unloading Spaces
Institutional, Commercial and Office Uses
Up to 2,000 sq. ft. GFA None Required
2,001 to 20,000 sq. ft. GFA 1.0 space
Exceeding 20,000 sq. ft. GFA
1.0 space per each 20,000 sq. ft. GFA, with a
maximum of 5 spaces required
PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
6-14
Required Loading and Unloading Spaces
Industrial Uses
Up to 5,000 sq. ft. GFA 1.0 spaces
5,001 - 25,000 sq. ft. GFA 2.0 spaces
25,001 - 100,000 sq. ft. GFA 1.0 space per each 25,000 sq. ft. GFA, but no
less than 2.0 spaces
100,001 sq. ft. GFA and over 1.0 space per each 30,000 sq. ft. GFA, but no
less than 4.0 spaces
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-1
ARTICLE 7
SIGNS
Section 7.10 Statement of Purpose
The sign regulations of this chapter are intended to protect free speech; to eliminate visual
clutter; to reduce of the number and types of distractions experienced by drivers; to provide safer
conditions for pedestrians; and to direct customer, client, and delivery traffic to commercial and
industrial zoned areas.
Section 7.20 Definitions
a) Sign - An emblem, name, identification, description, illustration, device, structure,
fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols, color, and/or written copy designed
specifically for the purpose of advertising, identifying, and/or drawing attention to an
establishment, product, service, activity, object, person, institution, organization,
business, or piece of land.
b) Awning or Canopy Sign - An awning or canopy is a retractable or fixed shelter
constructed of rigid or non-rigid materials on a supporting framework that projects more
than twelve (12) inches from the exterior wall of a building to which it is attached. An
awning or canopy sign is a sign which is painted on, printed on or attached flat against
the surface of an awning or canopy. Refer also to Wall Sign and Projecting Sign.
[Ordinance No. 247, 12/01/08]
c) Balloon Sign - A sign composed of a non-porous bag of material filled with air.
d) Banner Sign - A fabric, plastic, or other sign made of non-rigid material without an
enclosing structural framework. A banner sign includes flags and pennants.
e) Billboard Sign Face - A static, trivision or digital sign panel, that is attached to a
billboard structure.
f) Billboard Structure - The pylon(s), pole(s), foundation, framework, supporting
members, skirting, lighting and other electrical equipment and all other components and
elements used to mount, support or operate a billboard sign face, whether or not a
billboard sign face is present on the billboard structure at any given time.
g) Billboard, Trivision - A billboard that has a sign face composed of a series of vertical or
horizontal cylinders, each of which has a triangular cross section. A rotation of the
triangular cylinders produces the display of a different image.
h) Electronic display - A sign or portion of a sign with a fixed or changing display/message
composed of a series of lights that may be changed through electronic means. [Ordinance
No. 265, 10/4/2010]
i) Freestanding Sign - A sign supported by uprights, poles, or braces in or upon the ground
surface and not attached to a building or wall. [Ordinance No. 190, 4/15/02]
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-2
j) Government Sign - A temporary or permanent sign erected by the City of Ferrysburg
and the Michigan Department of Transportation.
k) Ground Mounted (Monument) Sign - A low level ground mounted sign typically
attached to, or resting on, the ground on a solid base with no open space between the base
(ground) and sign face.
l) Incidental Sign – A small, secondary sign for used for general purposes on a lot, parcel,
structure, or building.
m) Marquee - A permanent structure constructed of rigid materials that projects from the
exterior wall of a building.
n) Marquee Sign - A sign affixed flat against the surface of a marquee.
o) Mural - A design or representation painted or drawn on a wall which does not advertise
an establishment, product, service, or activity. Murals are not considered signs.
p) Placard Sign - A sign not exceeding two (2) square feet.
q) Portable Sign (Temporary Signs) - A sign designed to be moved easily and not
permanently attached to the ground, a structure, or a building. A sign constructed on a
frame with wheel and axle(s), or of similar construction, and made to be transportable
shall be classified as a portable sign, even if the wheels and/or axles have been removed.
r) Projecting Sign - A double-faced sign attached to a building or wall that extends more
than twelve (12) inches.
s) Reader Board - A portion of a sign on which copy is changed manually.
t) Roof Line - The top edge of a roof or parapet wall, whichever is higher, but excluding
any cupolas, chimneys, or other minor projections.
u) Roof Sign - Any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof
of any building with the principal support on the roof structure.
v) Wall or Flat Sign (Refer also to Awning Sign) - A sign which is attached directly to or
painted upon a building wall or dropped roof and which does not extend more than
twelve (12) inches therefrom, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the
building wall. An awning sign projecting twelve (12) inches or less shall be classified as
a wall sign.
w) Window Sign - A sign installed on the interior (inside) surface of a building window and
intended to be viewable from outside the building.
Section 7.30 General Sign Provisions
a) Permit Required to Install Sign Unless Exempted - No person shall erect, alter, place
or permit to be placed, or replace any sign without first obtaining a sign permit, including
payment of necessary fees, provided the following signs, as defined in Section 7.20, shall
not require a sign permit:
1) Signs used for directional purposes no more than six (6) square feet in size or less.
2) Government signs and state historic markers.
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-3
3) Murals.
4) Placards.
5) Temporary yard signs.
6) Window signs, unlimited in non-residential districts, no more than one (1)
window sign per principal building in residential districts and not exceeding two
(2) square feet.
7) Flags or insignia of any nation, state, city, community organization, or
educational institution.
8) Memorial signs and tablets located in cemeteries.
9) Signs with address and/or owner or occupant name, not to exceed two (2) square
feet in area and located on the premises to which the sign address and/or name
refers.
10) Incidental signs, no more than one (1) square foot in size.
b) Maintenance - Signs shall be maintained free of peeling paint or paper, fading, staining,
rust, or other condition which impairs legibility or intelligibility.
c) Sign Hazards - Sign supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be maintained in such a
manner as not to cause a hazard.
d) Illumination – Except for home occupation signs, all signs may be illuminated subject to
the following requirements:
1) External Illumination. Externally lighted signs are allowed in all commercial and
industrial districts and for non-residential uses in residential districts, subject to
the following requirements:
a. Sign lighting shall be of low intensity with effective provisions made to
minimize spillover of light beyond the actual sign face.
b. The light source shall be enclosed and directed to prevent light from
shining directly onto traffic or neighboring property.
2) Internal Illumination. Sign faces shall be opaque so individual lamps are muted
and cannot be distinguished behind the sign face.
3) Window Sign Illumination. Indoor neon, LED, or electronically illuminated
window signs are restricted to the CC, GC, and S Districts and are subject to the
following requirements.
a. Signs are limited to four (4) square feet.
b. A building is limited to one (1) neon-illuminated sign per tenant or
business entity.
c. Illumination shall be static and stationary in nature. There shall be no
movement, appearance of movement, intermittent illumination, blinking at
any interval, or changing of color.
4) Electronic displays: An electronic display is permitted, subject to the following
requirements:
a. General requirements
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-4
1. An electronic display is permitted only on freestanding or ground
signs, except that an electronic display that displays time and
temperature only may be allowed as part of a wall sign.
2. An electronic display is not permitted on a sign that has a reader
board.
3. The entire sign face shall only convey a single product or message
at any one time.
4. Except for the change from one display to the next, which shall be
instantaneous, each individual sign display shall be stationary. No
elements of the display may move, flash or scroll, except to change
from one display to the next.
5. Displays may change no less than five seconds apart.
b. An electronic display strictly for the purpose of stating gasoline prices and
that is stationary (except when updating prices) is exempt from these
requirements; however the area of any such display shall be included in
the total permitted area of the sign of which the display is a part.
c. District requirements
1. In the RD, RG-1, RG-2 and RG-3 districts and in residential
planned unit developments, an electronic display is permitted for
an allowed non-residential use only. The electronic display shall
consist of no more than 40 percent of the sign area.
2. In the GC, CC, S, LI and PI districts and any commercial or mixed
use planned unit development, an electronic display is permitted
for nonresidential uses, provided that the electronic display shall
consist of no more than 50 percent of the sign area.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
e) Right-of-Way Encroachment - No sign shall be placed in, upon or over any public
right-of-way, alley, or other public place, except as may be otherwise permitted by this
Ordinance.
f) Placement Restriction - No light pole, utility pole, or other supporting member shall be
used for the placement of any sign unless specifically designed and approved for the use.
g) Hazard or Nuisance - No sign shall be erected in any place where it may, by reason of
its position, shape, color, or other characteristic, interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, or constitute a nuisance per
se.
h) Use of Vehicle as Sign - No vehicle, which in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator
has the intended function of acting as a sign, shall be parked in any area or lot abutting
the street, unless no other parking area is available on the area or lot. No vehicle
functioning as a sign shall be parked in the public right-of-way.
i) Moving or Flashing Signs – Except for electronic displays as allowed by this Article, no
sign shall employ any flashing, moving, oscillating, blinking, or variable intensity light.
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-5
j) Moving Signs - No sign shall contain any moving or animated parts nor have the
appearance of having any moving or animated parts.
k) Miscellaneous Signs - Balloons, strings of light bulbs, pennants, streamers, or flags
(other than those installed by a government agency) hung overhead to draw attention to a
business or its merchandise on display shall be prohibited.
l) Wall Sign Placement Extension - No wall sign shall extend beyond the edge of the wall
to which it is affixed, and no wall sign shall extend above the roof line of a building.
m) Above Roof Line - No sign attached to a building shall be erected above the roof line of
that building.
Section 7.40 Nonconforming Signs, Illegal Signs, and Signs Accessory to
Nonconforming Uses
a) Every permanent sign which does not conform to the height, size, area, or location
requirements of this Article as of the date of the adoption of this Ordinance, is hereby
deemed to be nonconforming.
b) Nonconforming signs may not be altered, expanded, enlarged, or extended; however,
nonconforming signs may be maintained and repaired so as to continue the useful life of
the sign.
c) For the purposes of this Ordinance, a nonconforming sign may be diminished in size or
dimension or the copy of the sign amended or changed without jeopardizing the privilege
of nonconforming use.
d) Any nonconforming sign destroyed by fire or other casualty loss shall not be restored or
rebuilt if reconstruction will constitute more than fifty (50) percent of the value of the
sign on the date of loss.
e) A sign accessory to a nonconforming use may be erected in the City in accordance with
the sign regulations for the District in which the property is located.
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-6
Section 7.50 Signs - Units of Measurement
a) Sign Area – (see Figures 7-1 and 7-
2) The area of a sign shall be
measured as the area within a single,
continuous perimeter composed of
any straight line geometric figure
which encloses the extreme limits of
writing, representation, emblem,
logo, or any other figure of similar
character, together with any frame
or other material or color forming an
integral part of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the
background against which it is
placed, excluding only the structure
necessary to support the sign.
b) Area and Multiple Sign Faces –
The area of all sign faces on a
freestanding or projecting sign
structure shall count against the
maximum area permitted. In the
case of sign structures with two (2)
back-to-back sign faces that are
twelve (12) inches or less apart, only
one (1) side is counted against the
maximum area permitted if the sign
faces are of equal size. This method
of measurement does not apply to billboard sign faces.
c) Height – (see Figure 7-3) The
height of a sign shall be measured
as the vertical distance from the
highest point of the sign to the
grade of the adjacent street or the
average grade of the ground
immediately beneath the sign,
whichever is less.
d) Apportioning Sign Area for
Multiple Tenants - For buildings
with multiple tenants, the sign areas
for wall signs, projecting signs and
awning signs shall be determined
by taking that portion of the front
Dotted line (straight line geometric figure)
depicts sign area for sign comprised of lettering
attached to a wall, awning, or other structure.
Figure 7-2: Area of Sign, Example 1
Sign mounted or material or enhanced by
background color and attached to a wall, awning,
or other structure. Sign area based on outer limits
of background material or color to which the
lettering is attached.
Figure 7-1: Area of Sign, Example 2
Figure 7-3: Height of Sign
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-7
wall of the building applicable to each tenant and computing sign requirements for that
portion of the total wall.
Section 7.60 Sign Regulations Applicable to all Districts
a) The following sign regulations are applicable to all Districts:
1) Portable signs and balloon signs are not permitted except for special events as
noted under Section 7.60.
2) All ground, wall and freestanding signs may include reader boards.
3) Any sign, including awnings to which signs are affixed or displayed, not resting
directly on the ground shall maintain a minimum clear space of eight (8) feet from
the bottom of the sign to the ground.
4) Directional signs are permitted subject to the following restrictions:
a. A directional sign may contain a logo of an on-premise establishment, but
no advertising copy.
b. No directional sign shall exceed six (6) square feet in area or four (4) feet
in height.
c. Directional signs shall be limited to traffic control functions only.
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-8
Section 7.70 District Sign Regulations
RD, RG-1, RG-2, AND RG-3 DISTRICTS - PERMITTED SIGNS
Temporary Yard Signs
Number One (1) temporary yard sign per lot or parcel. One (1) extra temporary yard sign is
permitted during any one (1) of the following timeframes. However, no more than two (2)
temporary yard signs are permitted at any one (1) time per lot or parcel.
1. From a date forty-five (45) days prior to an election to ten (10) days after an election
2. From a date when a home, lot or parcel is listed for sale to the date of closing
3. From a date of a building permit issuance for construction on a lot or parcel to the
date of issuance of an occupancy permit or final approval
Size No greater than six (6) square feet per sign
Location Minimum five (5) feet from front right-of-way line and fifteen (15) feet from any side and
rear property line
Height No higher than six (6) feet
Other Off-site commercial advertising temporary yard signs are prohibited
Special Event Signs (Banners, temporary yard signs, portable signs)
Number No more than one (1) sign shall be displayed for a special event
Size No greater than thirty-two (32) square feet
Location The sign shall be located on the lot on which the special event is to be held. Minimum
fifteen (15) feet from front right-of-way line and fifteen (15) feet from any side and rear
property line
Height No higher than six (6) feet
Duration A maximum of twenty-one (21) days
Ground signs for residential subdivisions, manufactured home parks, and multiple family complexes
Number One (1) per major entrance
Size No greater than thirty-two (32) square feet
Location Minimum five (5) feet from front right-of-way line and fifteen (15) feet from any side and
rear property line
Height No higher than six (6) feet
Directional Signs for Non-Residential Uses
Number One (1) per driveway
Size No greater than six (6) square feet per sign
Height No higher than four (4) feet
Wall signs for home occupations
Number One (1) per lot or parcel
Size No greater than two (2) square feet
Location On wall of house facing street, unilluminated
Wall signs for non-residential uses
Number One (1) per street frontage
Size No greater than five percent (5%) of the wall area to which the sign is affixed.
Location On wall of building facing street
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-9
S - SERVICE and C - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS - PERMITTED SIGNS
Wall and Projecting Signs (see Figure 7-4)
Number One (1) per street frontage, per tenant
Size S - No greater than five percent (5%) of the wall area to which the sign is affixed.
C - No greater than ten percent (10%) of the wall area to which the sign is affixed.
The bottom edge of projecting signs shall be at least eight (8) feet above the ground and the
sign shall not extend more than thirty-six (36) inches from the exterior building wall.
Location On wall of building facing street
Multi-
Tenant
See section 7.50 d) for number and size requirements
Figure 7-4: Area of Wall Signs
Awning or Canopy Signs [Ordinance No. 247, 12/01/08]
Number 1 per awning or canopy
Size Not to exceed 1/3 of awning or canopy; any sign area on an awning or canopy shall be
included in the calculations of maximum wall sign square footage.
Location No awning or canopy sign shall extend above the awning or canopy structure to which it is
attached
Temporary Yard Sign
Number Two (2) per lot or parcel
Size No greater than thirty-two (32) square feet total between signs
Location Minimum five (5) feet from the front right-of-way line and fifteen (15) feet from any side and
rear property line
Height No higher than six (6) feet
Special Event Sign (Banners, temporary yard signs, portable signs)
Number No more than one (1) sign shall be displayed for a special event.
Size No greater than thirty-two (32) square feet
Location The sign shall be located on the lot on which the special event is to be held. Minimum
fifteen (15) feet from front right-of-way line and fifteen (15) feet from any side and rear
property line
Height No higher than six (6) feet
Duration A maximum of twenty-one (21) days
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-10
S - SERVICE and C - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS - PERMITTED SIGNS
Directional Signs for Non-Residential Uses
Number One (1) per driveway
Size No greater than six (6) square feet per sign
Height No higher than four (4) feet
Pole Signs
Number S - None permitted
C - One (1) per lot or parcel, except for parcels with two (2) or more public street frontages
equaling or exceeding three hundred (300) feet shall be permitted two (2) signs, which may
be either pole or ground signs, or a combination, each of which must meet the other
regulations applicable to the sign.
A business center on a parcel in the C District with public street frontage(s) equaling or
exceeding three hundred (300) feet shall be permitted two (2) signs, which may be either
pole or ground signs, or a combination, each of which must meet the other regulations
applicable to the sign [Ordinance 232, 8/21/06]
Size One and one-half (1½) square feet for each one (1) foot of lot frontage up to a maximum of
fifty (50) square feet, for each sign allowed
For business centers, One and one-half (1½) square feet for each one (1) foot of lot frontage
up to a maximum of seventy-five (75) square feet, for each sign allowed or, if only one (1)
sign is erected on a lot with public street frontage(s) equaling or exceeding three-hundred
(300) feet, one (1) sign not-to-exceed 120 square feet. [Ordinance 232, 8/21/06]
Location Minimum five (5) feet from front right-of-way line and fifteen (15) feet from any side and
rear property line
Height No higher than twenty (20) feet
Ground Signs
Number One (1) per lot or parcel, except that only one (1) ground sign or one (1) freestanding sign
shall be permitted per lot or parcel.
A business center on a parcel in the C District with public street frontage(s) equaling or
exceeding three hundred (300) feet shall be permitted two (2) signs, which may be either
freestanding or ground signs, or a combination, each of which must meet the other
regulations applicable to the sign
Size S – No greater than thirty two (32) square feet for each sign allowed
C – No greater than fifty (50) square feet for each sign allowed.
For business centers, One and one-half (1 ½) square feet for each one (1) foot of lot
frontage up to a maximum of seventy-five (75) square feet, for each sign allowed or, if only
one (1) sign is erected on a lot with public street frontage(s) equaling or exceeding threehundred
(300) feet, one (1) sign not-to-exceed 120 feet.
Location Minimum of five (5) feet from the front right-of-way line and fifteen (15) feet from any side
and rear property line
Height No higher than six (6) feet [Ordinance 232, 8/21/06]
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-11
INDUSTRIAL and PI - PORT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS - PERMITTED SIGNS
Ground Signs
Number One (1) per lot or parcel
Size No greater than thirty-two (32) square feet
Location Minimum of five (5) feet from the front right-of-way line and fifteen (15) feet from any
side and rear property line
Height No higher than six (6) feet
Wall Signs
Number One (1) per street frontage
Size No greater than five percent (5%) of the wall area to which the sign is affixed
Location On wall of building facing street
Temporary Yard Sign
Number Two (2) per lot or parcel
Size No greater than thirty-two (32) square feet total between signs
Location Minimum five (5) feet from the front right-of-way line and fifteen (15) feet from any side and
rear property line
Height No higher than six (6) feet
Special Event Sign (Banners, temporary yard signs, portable signs)
Number No more than one (1) sign shall be displayed for a special event.
Size No greater than thirty-two (32) square feet
Location The sign shall be located on the lot on which the special event is to be held. Minimum
fifteen (15) feet from front right-of-way line and fifteen (15) feet from any side and rear
property line
Height No higher than six (6) feet
Duration A maximum of twenty-one (21) days
Directional Signs for Non-Residential Uses
Number One (1) per driveway
Size No greater than six (6) square feet per sign
Height No higher than four (4) feet
Billboards - Subject to Section 7.80
Section 7.80 Billboards
a) Billboard structures shall be permitted in the Industrial Districts subject to the following:
1) Billboards structures within the Industrial Districts shall be classified as a
permitted use but shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning
Commission under the Site Plan Review provisions of Article 5 of this Ordinance.
2) The maximum number per parcel shall not exceed one (1) billboard structure.
The sign shall be in addition to the other signs permitted for an existing use
located on the same site on which the billboard structure is to be placed.
3) The maximum billboard sign face area shall not exceed three hundred (300)
square feet.
4) The billboard sign face shall not exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet.
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-12
5) The sign may be illuminated. To minimize glare, light shall be directed upon the
sign and shall not be visible to motorists on an interstate highway, except as
reflected from the sign.
6) Billboard sign structure placement shall be regulated as follows:
a. Shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of an interchange or
intersection.
b. Shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of Spring Lake or the
Grand River.
c. Sign shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of an RD, RG1,
RG2, or RG3 Zone District.
d. Shall not be located closer than seventy five (75) feet from the nearest
edge of the main traveled portion of Highway U.S. 31, nor greater than six
hundred sixty (660) feet from the main traveled portion of Highway U.S.
31.
e. Shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of another billboard
sign structure on the same side of the highway, including official and offpremise
signs as defined in Section 131 [c] of Title 23 of the United States
Code. The spacing measurement shall apply separately to each side of the
highway and shall be measured along the nearest edge of the pavement of
the highway between points directly opposite each sign.
7) A billboard sign face shall not be located or maintained on trees or painted or
drawn upon rocks or other natural resources.
8) When voluntarily removed, or required to be moved, the entire billboard sign
structure, including supports, foundation, electrical apparatus, and other sign
components and related materials shall be removed from the site.
9) Billboard sign structures and billboard sign faces shall be subject to all state and
federal permitting requirements.
10) Electronic graphic display billboard sign faces. A billboard sign face meeting all
other requirements of this Section may consist of an electronic graphic display,
subject to the following:
a. Each message shall be static and not animated in any way.
b. Minimum duration of a message shall be seven seconds.
c. Transition from one message to the next shall be instantaneous and shall
not fade, scroll or otherwise be animated.
d. Maximum brightness of the electronic graphic display billboard shall not
exceed illumination of 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during
daylight hours, nor 540 nits between dusk and dawn, as measured from the
billboard sign face at maximum brightness. The billboard sign face shall
have an automatic dimmer switch control to produce a distinct
illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower
illumination level for the period of time between one-half hour before
sunset and one-half hour after sunrise.
SIGNS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
7-13
e. An electronic graphic display billboard sign face shall be equipped with
automatic dimmer features to adjust brightness levels for ambient light
during daylight hours. The illumination system shall be set to "automatic"
in order to comply with levels of brightness as set forth in this section.
f. An electronic graphic display billboard sign face may only be constructed
to replace an existing billboard sign face.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010; Ordinance No. 290, 7/3/17]
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-1
ARTICLE 8
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Section 8.10 Intent - Planned Unit Development (PUD)
It is the intent of this Article to provide for flexibility in the regulation of land development,
encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout, and type of structures, achieve
economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy, and the providing of public
services and utilities, encourage useful open space and provide a variety of housing, employment
and shopping opportunities. In order to accomplish these objectives, this Article permits the
relaxation or waiving of one or more of the zoning district requirements otherwise applicable to
the land proposed for a planned unit development (PUD). The use of land and the construction
and use of buildings and other structures as a planned unit development shall be in conformance
with the procedures, standards, requirements and conditions for eligibility contained in this
Article. A Planned Unit Development shall be classified as a Special Land Use in all districts,
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 8.20 Qualifying Conditions
Any development that fails to meet the following qualifying conditions, at a minimum, shall not
qualify for application as a PUD.
a) All PUDs shall be served by public water and public sanitary sewer facilities or a private
system approved by the City Council, the Ottawa County Health Department, or other
agencies, as applicable.
b) The tract of land for which a PUD application is received must be either in one (1)
ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all properties
and/or their agent. If the PUD application is filed by a prospective purchaser or option
holder, written consent of all property owners must be submitted as evidence of their
concurrence with the PUD application.
c) The proposed uses and densities of the PUD must be consistent with the Master Plan for
the subject property, unless otherwise noted in this Article.
d) All PUDs shall contain a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) open space meeting the
requirements of Section 8.40 d), unless otherwise specified.
e) The proposed PUD site shall have a minimum sixty-six (66) feet of frontage on an
existing public road sufficient to provide access to the site.
Section 8.30 PUD Development Matrix
The following table summarizes allowed PUD developments, but is not exhaustive. Refer to
Section 8.40 for complete requirements and exceptions to the requirements stated in the table.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-2
PUD Characteristics PUD Types
Residential PUD Mixed Use PUD Non-Residential PUD
Master Plan Land
Use Designation1
LDR, MDR, MDR-P, DR,
MUR, TNR, CLS
CB, C, MUR C (Commercial
PUD); LI,
PI(Industrial PUD)
Minimum PUD Area
1-3 ac., if qualified;
otherwise 3 ac.
C: 5 ac.
All others: no
minimum
5 ac. (Commercial
PUD): 10 ac.
(Industrial PUD)
PUD Subtypes
Single Family Detached
PUD;
Single Family Attached
PUD;
Townhouse PUD;
Duplex PUD;
Multi-Family PUD;
Mixed Density PUD
None Commercial PUD
Industrial PUD
Allowed Uses
All residential uses;
Parks, natural areas and
similar open space uses;
Accessory recreational
uses;
Real estate office;
Limited neighborhood
commercial in MUR
Permitted and
special land
uses in the CC
and GC zoning
districts;
Residential uses
Commercial PUD:
any Permitted or
Special Land Use
within CC and GC
zoning districts;
Industrial PUD:
Any Permitted or
Special Land Use in
the LI-1, LI-2 and LI-
3 zoning districts
Density Bonus Provided Not provided Not provided
1See City of Ferrysburg Master Plan
[Ordinance 239, 08/20/07]
Section 8.40 Site Development Requirements
a) Residential PUD.
1) The Residential PUD site shall be on property designated Low Density
Residential, Medium Density Residential, Dune Residential, or Mixed Use
Residential PUD, Traditional Neighborhood Residential, or Cottage/Lakefront
Settlement on the Future Land Use Map of the City of Ferrysburg Master Plan.
[Ordinance 239, 08/20/07]
2) Minimum Project Area. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010] A Residential PUD site
shall consist of fully contiguous property not separated by a public road or private
street that is not part of the PUD, nor by a railroad or other similar feature or
barrier. However, land divided by an alley shall be considered fully contiguous.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-3
a. In the RG-1 District, if the development includes attached single family,
two family or multiple family dwellings, the minimum site area shall be
ten (10) acres.
b. In all other districts, the minimum site area shall be three (3) acres..
c. Notwithstanding the above, however, a parcel containing less than the
minimum required site area as herein defined, but in no case less than one
(1) acre, may be considered as a planned unit development if the City
Council, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, determines
that the proposal meets all of the following criteria:
1. The proposed PUD will result in a development of greater quality
than would be allowable under conventional zoning requirements;
2. There are physical conditions related to the property not created by
the owner that do not permit increasing the area to meet the
minimum, such as the placement of streets, natural barriers such as
streams, wetlands or steep slopes, or established ownership
patterns of adjacent properties;
3. The use of architectural and site design, building materials and
colors, use of landscaping, and provision of site amenities is of
sufficiently high quality that the reduction is warranted; and
4. The reduction is not proposed due solely to the inability of the
applicant to meet the normal requirements of the zoning district in
which the PUD is proposed.
3) The following uses shall be permitted:
a. Residential uses, including detached single family dwellings, attached
single family dwellings, townhouse dwellings, two-family dwellings,
multiple-family dwellings, and parks, natural areas, and other similar open
space uses.
b. Leisure and recreational facilities accessory to the residential use . These
facilities may include but are not limited to: marinas, health clubs, and
similar uses when approved as part of the PUD.
c. One (1) real estate sales office may be permitted, provided the office is
used solely for the purpose of marketing and selling properties located
within the PUD, and provided that the office is located in a building or
portion of a building approved as part of the PUD. Any real estate office
proposed as a permanent use shall be so designated on the PUD plan.
d. For Residential PUDs over forty (40) acres in area on property designated
as Mixed Use Residential on the Master Plan, the Planning Commission
may allow limited neighborhood commercial uses, provided that:
1. No more than twenty (20) percent of the total area may be
dedicated to commercial uses, including parking areas, up to a
maximum of ten (10) acres;
2. No commercial building may exceed six thousand five hundred
(6,500) square feet in gross floor area;
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-4
3. Commercial buildings shall be designed so as to complement the
residential neighborhood and may include dwelling units above the
first floor;
4. The commercial area of the PUD shall be designed to be easily
accessed by pedestrians.
5. The uses permitted shall be limited to neighborhood-oriented
businesses that serve the residents of the PUD and adjacent
residential neighborhoods. A list of specified uses allowed in the
PUD, as recommended by the Planning Commission and approved
by the City Council, shall be made a part of the final PUD
Agreement. [Ordinance 239, 08/20/07]
4) The maximum number of dwelling units permitted by the City Council, upon
recommendation by the Planning Commission, shall be determined by the
designation of the Master Plan and/or the underlying zoning for the property on
which the PUD is proposed. In any case, residential densities shall not exceed the
following limits, unless otherwise permitted through the density bonus provisions
of Section 8.50. If the PUD lies in more than one (1) Future Land Use category in
the Master Plan and/or more than one underlying zoning district, the number of
dwelling units shall be calculated on a proportionate acreage basis. 
Master Plan Designation Zoning Units Per Gross Acre
Low Density Residential RG1 6
Medium Density Residential
Medium Density Residential
PUD
RG-2 6
RG-3 8
Lakefront/Cottage Settlement RG1 8
Dune Residential RD 4
Traditional Neighborhood
Residential RG2, RG3 4
Mixed Use Residential RD 4
[Ordinance 239, 08/20/07]
5) The minimum requirements for building height, lot area, width, lot coverage and
setback requirements for any lot designated for residential use shall comply with
the following requirements.
The maximum density across all zones is 8 units per acre.


PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-5
Use
Max.
Building
Height
Min. Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Min. Lot
Width
(ft.)
Max.
Lot
Coverage
(%)
Minimum Setbacks
(ft.) (see para. b,
below)
Front Side Rear
Detached
single family
As allowed
by the
zoning
district1
6,500 66 35 25 10 40
Attached
single family,
townhouses &
two-family
As allowed
by the
zoning
district1
5,500 per unit2 70 40 25 10 30
Multiple
Family
As allowed
by the
zoning
district1
5,500 per unit2 Same as
RG-31 40 25
10 30
25 ft.
between
buildings
1 See Section 9.150 for zoning district requirements
2 This calculation shall not include the area of lots, parking, and any other associated areas dedicated to
permitted non-residential uses.
a. The City Council may, after recommendation by the Planning
Commission, reduce the required setbacks and building separation in order
to ensure proper and harmonious building relationships, protect or
preserve natural features, or other purposes that conform to the intent of
this Article. The plan shall address adequate buffers and setbacks for any
site that is adjacent to properties in any Residential District that permits
single-family uses, two family uses or PUD.
b. Except as may otherwise be noted in this Article, all other site
development requirements shall conform to the requirements of the
underlying zoning district.
c. Land not proposed for development but used for the calculation of overall
density shall be considered open space, subject to the requirements of
Section 8.40, d).
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
b) Mixed Use PUD.
1) Qualifying Conditions: The following conditions shall be satisfied prior to
accepting an application for a Mixed Use PUD:
a. The PUD site shall be designated as Central Business, Commercial or
Mixed Use Residential PUD on the Future Land Use Map of the
Ferrysburg Master Plan.
b. The minimum required area shall be five (5) acres for property designated
as Commercial on the Master Plan.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-6
c. There shall be no minimum required area for Mixed Use PUDs on
property designated as Central Business or Mixed Use Residential PUD on
the Master Plan. [Ordinance 239, 08/20/07]
2) Permitted uses in a Mixed Use PUD may include any Principal Permitted Use or
Special Land Use within the Core Commercial and General Commercial zoning
districts, along with accessory uses. In addition, residential uses are permitted
subject to the following:
a. For properties designated as Central Business on the Master Plan,
residential uses are permitted only above the ground floor of any building.
Ground floor space shall be dedicated to office or commercial uses.
b. For properties designated on the Master Plan as Mixed Use Residential
PUD or Commerical, residential uses may not occupy more than fifty
percent (50%) of the ground floor area of any building that also contains a
commercial or office use; nor shall residential uses occupy more than forty
percent (40%) of the total gross floor area of all principal buildings within
the PUD.
c. All residential uses shall be integrated into the design of the Mixed Use
PUD with similar site development elements, such as architectural style,
signs, landscaping, etc. [Ordinance 239, 08/20/07]
3) All merchandise for display, sale or lease shall be entirely within an enclosed
building(s).
4) No minimum setback requirements shall apply. Setbacks and building separation
shall be determined as part of the final development plan approval by the City
Council, after recommendation by the Planning Commission. The plan shall
address adequate buffers and setbacks for any site that is adjacent to properties in
any Residential District that permits single-family uses, two family uses or PUD.
5) The maximum height of any principal building shall conform to the requirements
of the underlying zoning district.
6) For mixed use PUDs on property designated Central Business or Medium Density
Residential PUD on the Master Plan, the City Council, upon recommendation by
the Planning Commission, may waive all or part of the twenty-five percent (25%)
open space requirement in a Mixed Use PUD upon finding that the waiver meets
one (1) or more of the following conditions: [Ordinance 239, 08/20/07]
a. The reduction in open space is necessary to allow for density and
arrangement of uses to create a “town center” or pedestrian village
atmosphere in accordance with the City’s Master Plan;
b. All or part of the required open space meeting the requirements of Section
8.40 d) has been provided elsewhere within adjacent or nearby
developments;
c. The layout, design and/or architectural treatment prevents meeting the
twenty-five percent (25%) requirement and is of sufficiently high quality
or innovative design to warrant the reduction. An increase in residential
density or the desire to provide a larger area for non-residential
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-7
development shall not be considered as a sole reason for an open space
reduction.
c) Non-Residential PUD.
1) The PUD site shall be designated by the Master Plan as “Commercial” for
Commercial PUDs; or “Port” or “Light Industrial” for Industrial PUDs.
[Ordinance 239, 08/20/07]
2) The Non-Residential PUD site shall be not less than five (5) acres in area for
Commercial PUDs and not less than ten (10) acres in area for Industrial PUDs.
3) Any Principal Permitted Use or Special Land Use within the CC or GC Zoning
Districts may be permitted within a Commercial PUD and any Principal Permitted
Use or Special Land Use within the LI-1, LI-2 or LI-3 Zoning District may be
permitted within an Industrial PUD. The PUD application and approval shall
include the specific identification of uses to be permitted within the PUD, and
only those uses so approved shall be permitted.
4) The minimum lot area requirements of the underlying zoning district shall apply
to Commercial and Industrial PUDs, but may be reduced by no more than twenty
five percent (25%) in a PUD, provided that the site is served by public water and
sewer and adequate setbacks and buffers, as approved by the City Council after
recommendation by the Planning Commission, are provided for any portion of the
site adjacent to properties in any Residential District or Residential or Mixed Use
PUD.
5) The minimum setback requirements (building and parking) of the underlying
zoning district shall apply; however, setback requirements may be reduced up to
twenty-five percent (25%) of the underlying zoning minimum, if deemed
appropriate by the City Council, after recommendation by the Planning
Commission. The plan shall address adequate buffers for any site that is adjacent
to properties in any residential district or Residential or Mixed Use PUD.
6) All other site development requirements shall conform to the requirements of the
underlying zoning district.
d) Open Space.
1) The City Council, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, shall find
that, to the extent possible, designated open space is large enough and of proper
dimensions to contribute significantly to the intent of the PUD.
2) Open Space Maintenance.
a. All open spaces shall be in the joint ownership of the property owners
within the PUD. A property owners= association or similar arrangement
for common ownership or maintenance agreement shall be formed which
shall take responsibility for the maintenance of the open space.
Alternatively, evidence shall be given that satisfactory arrangements will
be made to relieve the City of future maintenance of the open space.
b. The maintenance requirements of natural areas designated as open space
are not necessarily intended to require regular clearing, mowing or other
active maintenance . For the purposes of this Article, a maintenance
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-8
requirement for natural areas is intended to include such items as the
removal of any accumulation of trash or waste material , clean up of storm
damage, or removal of dead or diseased plant materials.
3) Open space shall be deed restricted, placed in a conservation easement, or
otherwise held as open, undeveloped land in perpetuity. Suitable recorded
instruments shall be submitted to the City Attorney for review prior to final
approval of the PUD.
4) The open space shall be designed so that all residents of the PUD shall have
reasonable access to it.
e) All other applicable requirements of this Ordinance shall apply to all PUDs unless
specifically modified in this Article.
Section 8.50 Residential Density Bonus
a) In order to further promote the benefits of PUD for the City and the property owner, an
optional density bonus may be requested which is intended to provide added incentive to
utilize the PUD process, through increased densities and reduced minimum requirements
beyond the basic PUD requirements of Sections 8.30 and 8.40. The residential bonus
density may be awarded in exchange for substantial benefits to the community and to
promote the City’s goals and policies, as expressed in the Master Plan. This density
bonus is to be used only for Residential PUDs meeting the requirements of Section 8.40,
a).
b) Residential PUDs under ten (10) acres containing only Single Family Detached
dwellings; or any Residential PUD containing Duplex and Townhouse dwellings.
1) A Residential PUD containing only detached single family development on
properties less than ten (10) acres in area, or any duplex or townhouse residential
PUD development, is eligible for a density bonus of up to twenty percent (20%),
upon a finding by the City Council, after recommendation by the Planning
Commission, that all of the following conditions are present:
a. The PUD allows redevelopment or infill of sites that are otherwise
difficult or impractical to develop under conventional zoning, or natural
features on the site are preserved that otherwise might be developed under
conventional zoning, or other site conditions are present that make
development under conventional zoning impractical; and
b. the PUD is of sufficiently high quality in elements as layout, design,
architectural treatment, landscaping and use of innovative storm water
management techniques to warrant an increase in density.
c) Residential PUD of ten (10) acres or more, containing only single family detached
dwellings.
1) In order to qualify for a density bonus, the property proposed for Planned Unit
Development shall meet one (1) or more of the following:
a. The applicant must demonstrate that the property proposed for a density
bonus contains significant and/or unique site conditions, significant
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-9
natural features, or large open spaces which would otherwise be developed
but which will be preserved from development as a result of exercising the
density bonus.
b. The applicant must demonstrate, in writing and other appropriate material,
that the proposed PUD, with its added density, meets the intent of this
Article, as stated in Section 8.50,a), in addition to the PUD intent,
described in Section 8.10 and all other requirements of this Article for a
PUD.
c. The PUD provides one (1) or more of the following features:
1. Walking trails/bikeways/pathways through the entire PUD and/or
links to adjacent facilities of a similar nature
2. Active recreation areas (ball field, tennis court, small playground
area or “tot lot,” swimming pool, etc.) at a ratio of at least one (1)
facility per twenty-five (25) dwelling units.
3. Innovative design features, such as traditional neighborhood
development, traffic calming measures, innovative stormwater
management, and other similar features throughout the
development.
2) A Single Family PUD density bonus shall be based on an aggregate of one (1) or
more of the following elements for which the PUD qualifies, as determined
during the Preliminary Plan review; provided the total density bonus shall not
exceed a maximum of one hundred percent (100%) of the units otherwise
permitted in Section 8.40, a), 5). Where applicable, the City Council, after
recommendation by the Planning Commission, may award a smaller bonus than
the maximum permitted below. In determining the amount, if any, of a density
bonus to be awarded, the City Council and Planning Commission shall consider
the location, character, quality and extent of the elements provided.
a. Clustered development may qualify for density bonuses in accordance
with the following:
1. Not less than thirty percent (30%) open space. Five percent (5%)
density bonus.
2. Not less than thirty-five percent (35%) percent open space. Ten
percent (10%) percent density bonus.
3. Not less than forty percent (40%) percent open space. Fifteen
percent (15%) percent density bonus.
4. Not less than forty-five percent (45%) percent open space. Twenty
percent (20%) percent density bonus.
5. Not less than fifty percent (50%) percent open space. Twenty-five
percent (25%) percent density bonus.
6. Not less than fifty-five percent (55%) percent open space. Thirtyfive
percent (35%) percent density bonus.
7. Not less than sixty percent (60%) percent open space. Forty-five
percent (45%) percent density bonus.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-10
b. Preserving natural features such as wooded areas, wetlands, floodplains,
and unique vegetation areas will qualify for up to a thirty percent (30%)
density bonus, depending on the degree of preservation and preservation
plan.
c. If, due to the use of setbacks, vegetative screen, topographic relief, or a
combination of elements, no dwelling units or other developed portion of
the PUD, other than the entrance road, are visible from any perimeter
road, a bonus density of up to twenty-five percent (25%) percent may be
granted.
d. Providing a natural vegetative buffer of at least one hundred (100) feet
around the perimeter property lines of the PUD will qualify for a density
bonus of up to twenty-five percent (25%).
e. Including a restriction in the PUD agreement prohibiting the removal of
tree cover (except for dead and diseased trees) beyond a fifty (50) foot
distance from all dwelling units (except for roads or other necessary
elements of the PUD) will qualify for up to a ten percent (10%) density
bonus.
f. Providing passive recreation opportunities for the residents of the PUD,
including trails, boardwalks, nature interpretive markers, and similar
amenities throughout the site will qualify for up to a ten percent (10%)
density bonus.
g. Combining three (3) or more parcels under different ownership for the
PUD project will qualify for up to a ten percent (10%) density bonus.
h. Use of innovative storm water management techniques, such as rain
gardens, pervious surface paving, vegetative swales, or green roofs, will
qualify for up to a twenty percent (20%) bonus.
3) The following development regulations apply to Single Family Residential PUDs
of ten (10) acres or over where a density bonus is to be awarded.
a. Principal and accessory buildings shall maintain at least a fifty (50) foot
setback from the boundaries of the PUD site, unless a greater distance is
required by this Article.
b. Lot sizes for detached single family dwellings may be reduced from the
minimums specified elsewhere in this Article, but shall not be less than
seven thousand (7,000) square feet in area. There shall be no minimum
yard setback requirements; provided, no principal buildings shall be closer
than ten (10) feet to any other building.
c. No building site shall be permitted to gain direct access to any public or
private street not constructed or planned as part of the PUD.
d. Natural vegetation on single family residential lots shall be preserved to
the greatest degree possible. The total clearance zone area of any single
family residential lot shall be limited to that necessary to construct
buildings, drives, sidewalks, or other facilities or structures, but in any
case shall be limited to fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, or forty
percent (40%) of the area of the lot, whichever is less; unless density
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-11
bonus points have been granted based on more restrictive requirements, in
which case the more restrictive shall prevail. In any case, the Planning
Commission, as part of Final Plan review, may allow additional lot
clearance zone area upon finding that the applicant has demonstrated that
such a limitation does not allow sufficient area for building and lot
development, due to the presence of significant natural features or other
limitations related to the physical features of the site.
e. Clearance zone areas shall be clearly staked on each lot by the developer
and approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to any construction
activity or land clearing and no disturbance of the site shall take place
outside of the clearance zone. This does not prohibit, however, thinning
of overgrowth and removal of noxious species.
f. A development setback of at least seventy-five (75) feet shall be provided
from any abutting perimeter street not part of the PUD. No building
envelope shall be permitted within the development setback.
1. No native or natural vegetation shall be removed from the
development setback, except for that necessary for entrance streets
or private roads. The Planning Commission may modify this
requirement; provided the applicant demonstrates that the clearing
of existing vegetation would contribute significantly to the intent
of this Article, as described in Section 8.10.
2. No grading or changes in topography shall be permitted, except as
may be necessary to construct entrance streets or private roads, or
provide screening as noted in paragraph 3, below.
3. The required seventy-five (75) foot setback may be reduced to not
less than twenty-five (25) feet; provided a year-round, opaque,
natural screen is present or installed which shall afford the desired
screening of the development from the street view. This screen
shall consist of existing vegetation, land forms, or landscaped areas
using native or natural materials, or a combination thereof, but
shall not include fences or walls.
4. The development setback area shall qualify as meeting the required
open space, provided that the requirements 8.40, d) are met.
g. All requirements of Section 8.40, d) shall also apply.
Section 8.60 PUD Application Processing
Overview of PUD Review Process
Planning Commission Pre-
Application Conference
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
Planning Commission Public Hearing
and Review with Recommendation to
City Council ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
City Council Review and Final
Action ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
PUD Special Land Use approved or
denied
a) A PUD shall be processed in the same manner and be considered as a Special Land Use.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-12
b) Pre-application Conference - A pre-application conference shall be held with the
Planning Commission for the purpose of establishing general direction and eliciting
feedback from the Planning Commission regarding the general content of a proposed
planned unit development. Application for a pre-application conference shall be made on
an appropriate form provided by the Zoning Administrator. The application for a Preapplication
conference shall include a basic concept plan that conforms to the
requirements listed in Section 5.20, d).
c) Development Plan Application Requirements - Applicants seeking approval of a
planned unit development shall submit a complete application for review of the proposed
development plan to the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days prior to review by
the Planning Commission. The application shall contain all of the following:
1) Site Plan Copies and Information - Fourteen (14) copies of a proposed, fully
dimensioned, site development plan encompassing all phases of the proposed
PUD and containing all site plan information required by Article V.
2) Detail Regarding Waiver of Standards - A listing of the underlying zone
district requirements and standards that the applicant seeks to have relaxed and/or
waived based on the design and uses proposed for the PUD.
3) Project Narrative - A narrative statement describing the overall objectives of the
PUD and the Standards for PUD Approval [Section 8.70].
4) Application - A completed application on a form supplied by the City.
5) Fee - Payment of the required PUD plan review fee and any other fees required
by the City.
d) Notices, Public Hearings, and Review Process
Publication of notices, conduct of public hearings, Planning Commission and City
Council review of PUD site plans shall conform to the requirements in Article IV,
Special Land Uses.
Section 8.70 PUD Approval Standards
A planned unit development shall be approved only if it complies with each of the following
standards. The PUD shall:
a) Meet the requirements of Article V, Site Plan Review Standards.
b) Be consistent with Section 4.20, Standards for Approval of Special Land Uses, and
Section 5.70, Site Plan Review Standards.
c) Where feasible, natural features shall be preserved and integrated into the overall site
design. In the event the integration of these features is not practicable, the PUD shall
incorporate a site development and landscape program of sufficient quality, character,
and mass to mitigate the loss of the site’s natural characteristics.
d) Be consistent with the public health, safety and welfare needs of the City.
e) Be designed to provide safe and efficient ingress and egress, with particular reference to
pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control and access in case of fire or
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-13
other emergency. Multiple structures and uses shall be linked via an internal system of
sidewalks and streets.
f) Be designed so that the proposed character and placement of buildings and other
structures, parking, lighting, signs, refuse storage, landscaping and other site elements are
compatible with surrounding properties. This includes a determination that any waiver
and/or relaxation of underlying zone district requirements will not be detrimental to the
internal elements of the PUD, surrounding area, and City as a whole.
Section 8.80 Conformity With Approved PUD Plan and PUD Agreement
a) Construction Must Conform to Approved Plan - Following approval of a planned unit
development, no construction on the land included in the planned unit development shall
be undertaken unless it conforms to the approved plan, including any conditions imposed
in conjunction with the Special Land Use approval.
b) PUD Agreement - Prior to issuance of any building permits for construction of any
portion of a planned unit development, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with
the City Council setting forth the applicant's obligations with respect to the planned unit
development. The agreement shall describe all improvements to be constructed as part of
the planned unit development, and shall incorporate by reference the final development
plan submitted with the planned unit development application, other documents which
comprise the planned unit development, and all conditions attached to the approval by the
City Council. The agreement shall also establish the remedies of the City Council in the
event of default by the applicant in carrying out the planned unit development, and shall
be binding upon all successors in interest to the applicant. These remedies may include,
but shall not be limited to, performance guarantees in conformance with the requirements
of Section 12.60.
Section 8.90 Changes To An Approved Planned Unit Development
a) Changes to an Approved PUD Plan - With the exception of minor amendments, no
changes to an approved final development plan for a planned unit development shall be
made, except by mutual agreement between the applicant and the City Council after
recommendation by the Planning Commission. Revisions not considered minor to an
approved PUD final development plan or to any conditions imposed shall be processed in
the same manner as an original PUD application.
b) Minor Amendments - Minor amendments may be made to the PUD plan under the
provisions of Section 5.110 of this Ordinance, provided, however, modification of a
specific condition attached to the PUD shall only be changed according to the provisions
of paragraph a), above.
Section 8.100 Time Limit For Approved Planned Unit Developments
a) Construction Commencement - An approved planned unit development, or approved
PUD phase, shall commence construction and proceed meaningfully toward completion
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-14
within twelve (12) months from the date on which the PUD agreement is approved by
City Council. At a minimum, “proceeding meaningfully toward completion” shall refer
to the active construction or completion of infrastructure (e.g. roads, water, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, street lights, buffers, soil stabilization, and so forth) and conditions,
if any, necessary to support the PUD land uses.
b) PUD Extension of Time for Construction - The owner or applicant of the planned unit
development may apply to the City Council for one (1) extension of the original approval
for an additional term of one (1) year. The City Council may, in its discretion, authorize
this extension. In approving an extension, the City Council shall consider the following
factors:
1) The approved planned unit development, or approved phase thereof, has
encountered unforeseen difficulties beyond the reasonable control of the
owner/applicant.
2) The approved planned unit development, or approved phase thereof, has a
likelihood of proceeding within the extended time period.
c) Voiding of PUD Approval Due to Non-Construction - If the planned unit development,
or approved phase thereof, has not commenced and proceeded meaningfully towards
completion at the end of the initial twelve (12) month time period, or any extension
thereof, then the planned unit development approval shall be automatically null and void.
Thereafter, additional construction on the site will require the filing of a new PUD
application, or other appropriate zoning application if the project is no longer to continue
as a PUD. The City Council may exercise the full benefits of any existing performance
guarantee as determined necessary and appropriate.
d) Modified Construction Schedule Oriented to the PUD - In lieu of the above, items a)
through c), the City Council may approve a construction schedule oriented specifically to
the proposed planned unit development, including any phases thereof. In approving a
modified construction schedule, the City Council shall determine that a typical
completion schedule is not appropriate, or in the best interest of the City, based on the
size, complexity, and/or uniqueness of the planned unit development.
Section 8.110 Phasing the PUD
a) Request for PUD Site Development Phasing - At the request of the applicant,
coincident with the filing of the original PUD application, the City Council may consider
and approve a PUD to be constructed in phases (differing sequences of time). If a phased
PUD is approved, only approved phases shall receive necessary City permits for
construction purposes.
b) PUD Application and Site Plan for Phased Construction - Generally, the PUD
application and site development plan shall be fully executed and cover the entire site,
according to the provisions of this Article. At the discretion of the City, the level of site
plan detail and associated documentation normally required may be relaxed for future
phases until such time that these phases become subject to the site plan review
requirements specified under subparagraph c), following. The degree to which
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
8-15
submission of any information may be relaxed shall be subject to the full discretion of the
City Council.
c) Approval and Construction of Future Phases - Provided the original PUD plan as
approved, including future phases, remains unchanged, subsequent construction phases
shall be processed under the site plan review and approval provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance in effect at the time of the applicant’s request to proceed with a subsequent
construction phase.
d) Installation of Improvements and Performance Guarantees - In approving a phased
PUD, the City may permit the project’s infrastructure and conditions, if any, to be
constructed in time frames consistent with the construction of approved phases; or, the
City may require immediate installation of any or all of the infrastructure and/or other
public elements and conditions necessary to serve the entire PUD site. Similarly, for a
phased PUD, the City may permit performance guarantees in accordance with the
provisions of Section 12.60 to be allocated and submitted as the various phases are
approved for construction; or, may require a performance guarantee to cover multiple
phases or the entire project.
[This article adopted via Ordinance No. 229, 2/20/06]
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-1
ARTICLE 9
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
Section 9.10 Zone Districts
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the City of Ferrysburg is hereby divided into the following
Zone Districts.
Section District Name District Symbol
9.50 Low Density Dune Residential RD
9.60 Low Density Residential RG1
9.70 Medium Density Residential RG2
9.80 High Density Residential RG3
9.80 Manufactured Home Park MHP
9.100 Service S
9.110 Commercial
? Core Commercial
? General Commercial
CC
GC
9.120 Industrial
? Light Industrial - 1
? Light Industrial - 2
? Light Industrial - 3
LI-1
LI-2
LI-3
9.130 Port Industrial PI
Section 9.20 Zone District Map
a) Boundaries - The boundaries of the districts identified in Section 9.10 are hereby
established as shown on a map entitled "The Zoning Map of the City of Ferrysburg,
Michigan" which accompanies this Ordinance and is made a part of this Ordinance.
Except where referenced on the map to a street line, water body, or other designated line
by dimensions shown on the map, the district boundary lines follow lot lines or the center
lines of streets or alleys or railroad rights-of-way as they existed at the time of adoption
of this Ordinance.
b) Boundary Interpretation - Matters of interpretation concerning the exact location of
district boundary lines shall be determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-2
Section 9.30 Lot Divided by Zone District Boundary Line
Where a district boundary line, as
established in this Ordinance or as shown
on the Zoning Map, divides a lot or lots in
common ownership and of record at the
time of enactment of this Ordinance the
least restrictive use shall be considered as
extending to the entire lot, if the more
restrictive portion of the lot is entirely
within twenty-five (25) feet of the
dividing district boundary line. The use
so extended shall be deemed to be
conforming. If the more restrictive
portion of the lot is not entirely within
twenty-five (25) feet of the dividing
district boundary line, the various portions
of the lot shall be zoned according to the
underlying zone district classifications (see Figure 9-1). [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 9.40 Zone Districts and District Standards
Zone districts and district standards are enumerated and described in Sections 9.50 through
9.140.
Figure 9-1: Lot Divided by Zoning Boundary
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-3
Section 9.50 RD Zone District - Low Density Dune Residential
a) Statement of Purpose - The ecology of the dunes and Lake Michigan shoreline are
unique, but fragile, environmental features that provide character and lifestyle quality to
the residents of Ferrysburg. The purpose of the RD District is to permit the establishment
of a tenable balance between the delicate dunes and shoreline ecologies and human use.
Improper and shortsighted development in dune and shoreline areas can result in large
scale despoliation of property with resultant waste and depreciation of property values.
Therefore, the preservation of the dune and shoreline ecology and the regulation of
development in the dune and shoreline areas are designed to promote the general welfare
of the city and residents thereof.
b) Principal Permitted Uses:
1) Single family dwellings.
2) Day care family home.
3) Adult foster care family home.
4) Foster family home
5) Home occupations.
c) Accessory Buildings and Uses:
1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use or
special land use.
d) Special Land Uses (see Article 4):
1) Day care group home.
2) Adult foster care small group home.
3) Foster family group home
4) Community service buildings and facilities [e.g. fire station, city offices,
clubhouse of a private property owners association, non-profit recreational
buildings, tennis courts, public parks and playgrounds, and building and facilities
of a similar nature.]
5) Golf course.
6) Planned unit development (see Article 8).
e) Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements - Area, Height, Bulk and Placement
Requirements unless otherwise specified are as provided in Section 9.150, "Schedule of
District Standards".
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-4
RG1 Zone District - Low Density Residential
a) Statement of Purpose - The RG1 District has been established to provide locations
oriented to residential development of a single-family detached character with homes
placed in neighborhood settings. Housing density is relatively low and the range of nonresidential
uses very limited. It is the primary goal of the RG1 District to support and
protect single family homes and the residential neighborhoods within which the homes
exist or are likely to be constructed.
b) Principal Permitted Uses:
1) Single family dwellings.
2) Day care family home.
3) Adult foster care family home.
4) Foster family home.
5) Home occupations.
c) Accessory Buildings and Uses:
1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use or
special land use.
d) Special Land Uses (see Article 4):
1) Churches, synagogues, temples, and other similar places of religious worship.
2) Public and private schools.
3) Public parks and playgrounds.
4) Day care group home.
5) Adult foster care small group home.
6) Foster family group home.
Planned Unit Development (see Article 8 [Ordinance No. 205, 8/18/03;
Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
e) Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements - Area, Height, Bulk and Placement
Requirements unless otherwise specified are as provided in Section 9.150, "Schedule of
District Standards".
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-5
Section 9.70 RG2 Zone District - Medium Density Residential
a) Statement of Purpose - The RG2 District recognizes the importance of accommodating
a variety of housing types consistent with the needs and demands of the populace. These
include multiple-family housing units of a low density character and residential facilities
oriented to populations with special needs. Certain non-residential uses are also
permitted. Due to the variety of potential uses and impact on surrounding development,
many of the RG2 Zone District uses are subject to special review and approval.
b) Principal Permitted Uses:
1) Single family dwellings.
2) Day care family home.
3) Adult foster care family home.
4) Foster family home.
5) Home occupations.
6) Two-family dwellings/duplexes.
c) Accessory Buildings and Uses:
1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use or
special land use.
d) Special Land Uses (see Article 4):
1) Churches, synagogues, temples, and similar places of religious worship.
2) Public and private schools.
3) Public parks and playgrounds.
4) Day care group home.
5) Adult foster care small group home.
6) Foster family group home.
7) Profit and non-profit day care centers.
8) Bed and breakfast facilities.
9) Nursing homes.
10) Senior citizen housing.
11) Libraries, fire stations, police stations, and other municipal offices and facilities,
but not including penal institutions, halfway houses, work release facilities, or
facilities of a similar nature.
12) Planned unit development (see Article 8).
e) Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements - Area, Height, Bulk and Placement
Requirements unless otherwise specified are as provided in Section 9.150, "Schedule of
District Standards".
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-6
Section 9.80 RG3 Zone District - High Density Residential
a) Statement of Purpose - The RG3 District recognizes the broadest range of housing types
and housing density. In addition to single family, the district offers opportunity to place
duplexes, apartments, mobile home and manufactured housing parks, and other
compatible uses in high quality settings. To ensure compatibility among potential RG3
and surrounding district uses and to ensure that existing public facilities and services are
adequate to handle high density development needs, many of the RG3 uses have been
classified as Special Land Uses.
b) Principal Permitted Uses:
1) Single family dwellings.
2) Day care family home.
3) Adult foster care family home.
4) Foster family home.
5) Home occupations.
6) Two to four family multiple-unit dwellings.
c) Accessory Buildings and Uses:
1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use or
special land use.
d) Special Land Uses (see Article 4):
1) Day care group home.
2) Adult foster care small group home.
3) Foster family group home.
4) Churches, synagogues, temples, and similar places of religious worship.
5) Public parks and playgrounds.
6) Bed and breakfast facilities.
7) Nursing homes.
8) Senior citizen housing.
9) Multiple family dwellings and apartments in excess of four (4) units.
10) Libraries, fire stations, police stations, and other municipal offices and facilities,
but not including penal institutions, halfway houses, work release facilities, or
facilities of a similar nature.
11) Planned unit development.
12) Boat slips accessory to permitted and special uses.
e) Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements - Area, Height, Bulk and Placement
Requirements unless otherwise specified are as provided in Section 9.150, "Schedule of
District Standards".
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-7
Section 9.90 MHP Manufactured Home Park District
a) Statement of Purpose
1) The purpose of this Section is to establish areas within the city where
manufactured home parks can be located and regulated to assure compatibility
with adjacent uses and to provide decent, safe, and physically attractive
residential environments. To that end, this Section requires that manufactured
home parks provide adequate space and facilities for healthful living conditions
and be located abutting a major thoroughfare roadway for easy accessibility.
Furthermore, suitable water and sewer facilities shall also be available in
accordance with State, County, and City health regulations and statutes.
2) It is the intent to format this Section to be consistent with the other parts of the
Zoning Ordinance, while keeping the regulations pertaining to manufactured
home parks the same as those of the Manufactured Housing Commission Act (PA
96 of 1987, as amended).
b) Principal Permitted Uses:
1) Single family manufactured homes within manufactured home parks.
2) Day care family home.
3) Adult foster care family home.
4) Foster family home.
5) Home occupations.
c) Accessory Buildings and Uses:
1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use or
special land use.
2) Buildings and uses accessory to manufactured home park management, including
sales and leasing offices, post offices, community rooms, and community
recreational facilities
d) Special Land Uses (see Article 4):
1) Day care group home.
2) Adult foster care small group home.
3) Foster family group home.
4) Churches, synagogues, temples, and similar places of religious worship.
5) Public parks and playgrounds.
6) Libraries, fire stations, police stations, and other municipal offices and facilities,
but not including penal institutions, halfway houses, work release facilities, or
facilities of a similar nature.
e) Required Conditions for Manufactured Home Parks
1) Manufactured home communities shall meet the requirements of the Michigan
Public Act 419 96 of 1987, as amended and the Manufactured Housing
Community Rules as promulgated by the Manufactured Housing Commission.
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-8
2) A manufactured home park shall have its primary access on a major thoroughfare.
f) Site Plan Review. For all uses permitted in an MHP District, except manufactured home
sites, a site plan must be submitted to the Planning Commission in accordance with
Article V.
g) Area, Height, And Placement Requirements. For all uses other than manufactured homes
within a manufactured home community, the applicable requirements of the RG-1, Single
Family Residential District shall apply.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-9
Section 9.100 S Zone District - Service District
a) Statement of Purpose - The Service District is a special, mixed-use commercial district,
in which viable, pre-existing industries, businesses, and homes have historically
integrated in a pattern of nearby, peaceful, co-existence with limited provision for buffers
and other transitional techniques commonly employed to separate differing land use
types. The Service District provides the city with the unique opportunity to maintain
these historic mixed-use patterns in settings demonstrated to be conducive to the use.
[Amended, Ord. 269, 2/7/11]
Recognition of the Service District as a unique and desired element of the City’s overall
land use program results in a need to implement design criterion somewhat modified over
the more typical, and generally more restrictive, standards of this Ordinance. This
modification is based on the long standing physical arrangement of uses, buildings, and
structures historically located in the Service District, and on the determination that any
relaxation of standards is not anticipated to diminish the quality or integrity of the
District, nor the health, safety, and welfare of City residents.
b) Principal Permitted Uses:
1) Light industrial, including light manufacturing, in which operations are conducted
within an enclosed building. [Refer to Section 9.110, a), 1) for definition of
Light Industrial.]
2) Service and repair shops in which operations are conducted within an enclosed
building.
3) Minor vehicle repair, subject to Section 4.80. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
4) Executive and administrative offices including communication, accounting, Real
Estate, insurance, stockbroker, employment agencies, data processing, secretarial,
and similar business services.
5) Banks, credit unions, and savings and loan offices, but not to include financial
institutions with drive-through facilities.
6) Personal service businesses including hair salons, nail care salons, health and
fitness salons and spas, photographic studios, travel agencies, and similar personal
care services.
7) Offices providing legal, architectural, engineering, community planning, and
similar professional services.
8) Medical and dental offices and clinics, not including: veterinarian hospitals, any
type of medical facility providing overnight in-patient care, or the business of
caregivers registered pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.
[Ordinance No. 269, 2/7/2011]
9) Manufacturing and equipment sales offices.
10) Office supply, printing, and copy services.
11) Sales offices of industrial products which do not require outside storage or
display.
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-10
c) Accessory Buildings and Uses:
1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use or
special land use.
d) Special Land Uses (see Article 4):
1) Offices of construction services provided that products, equipment, and related
goods are housed within an enclosed building.
2) Enclosed warehousing.
3) Accessory drive through facilities serving any permitted or special land use.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
4) Fire stations, police stations, and other municipal offices and facilities, but not
including penal institutions, halfway houses, or facilities of a similar nature.
5) Private clubs, lodge halls, civic halls, and fraternal organizations except for any
association organized for the purpose of growing, distributing or using medical
marihuana on the site.
[Ordinance No. 269, 2/7/2011]
6) Newspaper, magazine, and book sales, but not including adult book stores.
7) Restaurants without drive-through service.
8) Veterinary offices, but not to include outdoor kennel, run, or exercise facilities.
9) Profit and non-profit day care centers.
10) Single and two-family dwellings.
11) Residential apartments located on the second or above story of a permitted district
use.
12) Underground storage of gasoline and similar fuels.
13) Small animal grooming of common household pets (e.g. dogs and cats), but not to
include outdoor kennels, run, or exercise facilities.
14) Planned unit developments [Ordinance No. 221, 12/20/04]
e) Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements - Area, Height, Bulk and Placement
Requirements unless otherwise specified are as provided in Section 9.150, "Schedule of
District Standards".
f) Parking and Access Standards - The following standards shall prevail over the more
restrictive standards found in this Ordinance:
1) Required Parking - One (1) space per employee, based on the number of
employees per the maximum shift.
2) Ingress and Egress - Ingress and egress to a parking facility shall be provided in
a safe and efficient manner.
3) Curbing - Curbing or bumper blocks shall be provided where parking spaces abut
landscaping, property lines, sidewalks, or required setback areas, provided,
however, the curbing and blocks shall not be required at the street (e.g. between a
parking area and abutting street).
4) Maneuvering in the Public Right-Of-Way - The use of public right-of-way for
ingress, egress, and other maneuvering of vehicles shall not result in a traffic or
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-11
safety hazard. Any maneuvering shall be subject to the Traffic Safety Codes of
the City of Ferrysburg.
5) Section 6.70, i ) [Right of way Setback for Parking Lots and Manuevering
Aisles]- Section not applicable to the Service District. [Ordinance No. 221.
12/20/04]
6) Section 6.70 j ) [Parking Lot Setback from Property Line]- Section not applicable
to the Service District. [Ordinance No. 221, 12/20/04]
7) Parking Space Dimension - Nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet deep.
[Ordinance No. 221, 12/20/04; No. 265, 10/4/2010]
8) Section 6.90 c ) [Re: Visibility of loading areas] - Section not applicable to the
Service District.
9) Section 6.90 e ) [Re: Loading areas and use for parking] - Section not applicable
to the Service District.
10) Section 6.90 f ) [Re: Size of loading area] – The Zoning Administrator may
reduce or waive the loading area size requirements for site plan approval on site
where the existing arrangement of buildings and/or parking areas or other factors
prevent provision of a loading space that meets the requirements of Section 6.90,
f).
[Ordinance No. 221, 12/20/04]
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-12
Zone Districts - Core Commercial (CC) and General Commercial (GC)
a) Statement of Purpose - The Commercial designation provides opportunity for a wide
variety of business and service uses oriented to the local and regional markets. It is the
intent of the commercial districts to encourage the concentration of compatible business
uses to the mutual advantage of consumers and merchants, while avoiding marginal strip
development along the City’s heavily traveled streets. Business uses having the potential
to create offensive and loud noise, glare, heavy truck traffic comparable to industrial
uses, or other such impacts shall be highly regulated or, if determined to be excessively
offensive, prohibited.
In fostering the above Statement of Purpose, and in recognition of the differing
geographic and economically diverse zones within which commercial development is
found, the commercial districts have been divided into two (2) classifications.
1) Core Commercial (CC) - The Core Commercial District encompasses the
concentrated business district located in the core area of the City. The district
location is found in the general vicinity bounded by Ridge (N.), Spring Lake (E.),
the Grand River (S.), and U.S. 31 (W.). Much of the Core Commercial District
has exposure to Spring Lake and/or the Grand River.
2) General Commercial (GC) - All commercial areas not located in the Core
Commercial District are identified as General Commercial. General Commercial
locations tend to experience high levels of both local and regional traffic. The
nature of development, and associated customer base, is highly oriented to that
daily traffic.
b) Permitted and Special Land Use - Principal permitted land uses and special land uses
for the commercial districts are listed in the following table (TABLE 9.110). A use
classified as a Principal Permitted Use is designated by the letter “P”, while a Special
Land Use is designated by the letter “S” (see Article 4 for special land use standards and
requirements). A use designated by “NP” is not permitted. [Ordinance No. 265,
10/4/2010]
Table 9.110
Principal Permitted Uses (P) and Special Land Uses (S) (Note: NP = not permitted)
Commercial Districts
USE CC GC
1. GROCERY, FOOD STUFFS, PHARMACIES AND RELATED USES
a. Grocery, convenience and
specialty food store
Under 2,500 s.f. GFA: P
P
2,500 s.f. and over: NP
b. Bulk food sales (retail) S P
c. Bakery and donut shop (retail) P P
d. Pharmacy, without drive-through service S P
e. Medical supplies S P
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-13
USE CC GC
f. Liquor sales S S
2. AUTOMOTIVE, MOBILE HOME, R.V., AND MARINE SALES AND SERVICE
a. Vehicle sales, (automobiles, light trucks and recreational
vehicles) with or without minor vehicle repair as an
accessory use
NP S
b. Manufactured/modular home sales and service NP S
c. Gasoline station, with or without convenience goods S S
d. Automobile service stations including minor vehicle repair,
with or without convenience goods S S
e. Vehicle repair, minor, without fuel sales NP S
f. Vehicle wash, automatic or manual NP S
g. Automobile and light truck parts sales NP P
h. Marine supplies, not including water craft sales and service P P
i. Marine supplies, including water craft sales and service S S
3. OFFICES
a. Executive, professional, and administrative offices P P
b. Medical offices and out-patient clinics and emergency
medical centers, not including the business of caregivers
registered pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act.
[Ordinance No. 269, 2/7/11)
P P
c. Veterinary office, but not including outdoor kennels, run, or
exercise facilities NP S
d. Municipal offices and facilities, but not including penal
institutions, halfway houses, work release facilities, or
facilities of a similar character
S S
e. Banks, credit unions, savings and loan, mortgage, stock
brokerage, including facilities, including facilities without
drive-through facilities
P P
4. RESTAURANTS, LOUNGES, BARS, AND PUBS
a. Restaurant, cafes, ice cream shops, retail bakeries without
drive-through service P P
b. Restaurant, cafes, ice cream shops, retail bakeries with
drive-through service S S
c. Bar, lounge, and pub, but not including adult entertainment S S
d. Banquet halls
[Ordinance No. 270, 5/2/2011] S S
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-14
USE CC GC
5. GENERAL AND SPECIALITY RETAIL AND PERSONAL SERVICES
a. Sporting goods, not including recreational vehicle sales and
service P P
b. Bait shops S P
c. Retail merchandise sales
conducted entirely within an
enclosed building and limited to
new merchandise.
Under 2,500 s.f. GFA: P
P
2,500 s.f. and over: S
d. Used retail merchandise sales conducted entirely within an
enclosed building and handing product lines classified as
antiques, used, second-hand, surplus, or factory seconds.
P P
e. Business center containing multiple stores, either detached
or attached S P
f. Service of small appliances, computers, office equipment P P
g. Printing and mailing services, not including commercial
delivery services maintaining a fleet (in excess of 2
vehicles) of trucks, vans, or cars
P P
h. Hair salons, nail care salons, beauty and barber shops, health
and fitness salons and spas, photographic studios, travel
agencies, locksmith, and personal services of a similar
character
P P
i. Tattoo parlors and body piercing NP S
j. Massage clinics, massage services NP S
k. Laundromats and dry-cleaning (non-industrial) outlets S S
l. Funeral homes NP S
m. Lumber and building supply NP S
n. Lawn and garden sales and services NP S
o. Florist, without greenhouse P P
p. Florist, with greenhouse S S
q. Books, magazine, and video sales and rental, not including
adult entertainment material
P P
6. RECREATION, LEISURE, HOTELS, AND MOTELS
a. Marinas and yacht clubs S NP
b. Bowling alley, with or without sale of food and alcoholic
beverages
NP P
c. Miniature golf NP S
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-15
USE CC GC
d. In-door movie theater, not including adult entertainment NP S
e. Lodge halls, social clubs, fraternal organizations, and other
similar uses not involving: residential occupancy, adult
entertainment, or growing distributing or using medical
marihuana on the site. [Ordinance No. 269, 2/7/11]
NP S
f. Public parks and playgrounds P P
g. Hotel or motel S S
j. Bed and Breakfast S S
7. MISCELLANEOUS
a. Public utility buildings and uses, but not including storage
yards NP S
b. Planned unit development (see Article 8) S S
c. Accessory outdoor storage, display and sales (unless
specifically exempted) S S
d. Small animal grooming of common household pets (e.g. dogs
and cats), but not to include outdoor kennels, run, or exercise
facilities.
NP S
e.
Pre-existing single-family dwellings, including the alteration
and expansion of such dwellings, subject to RG2 Zone
District Standards provided for under Section 9.150,
Schedule of District Regulations. [Ordinance No. 176,
7/19/99]
P NP
f. Accessory drive through facilities for any use other than a
restaurant S S
g. Dwelling units located on the second or above story of a
permitted district use S NP
h. Churches, synagogues, temples and similar places of worship
[Ordinance No. 270, 5/2/2011] NP S
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
c) Accessory Buildings and Uses - Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
a principal permitted use or special land use.
d) Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements - Area, Height, Bulk and Placement
Requirements unless otherwise specified are as provided in Section 9.150, "Schedule of
District Standards".
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-16
Section 9.120 LI Zone Districts - Light Industrial District (LI-1, LI-2, and
LI-3)
a) Statement of Purpose - The intent of the LI Light Industrial District is to permit in
planned areas of the City, certain industries which are primarily light manufacturing in
character and do not create an adverse impact on the environment or pose the probability
of creating a heavy demand on public services or utilities. To ensure that the uses may be
properly integrated with nearby land uses, such as commercial and residential uses,
limitations are placed on the degree of acceptable noise, smoke, glare, waste, and other
impacts so as to avoid adverse effects. The Light Industrial District also recognizes
certain industrial locations which, according to the City Master Plan, are proposed for
eventual transition to non-industrial use.
The LI Light Industrial District is divided into three (3) sub-categories:
1) LI-1 Industrial District - LI-1 is defined as wholesale, warehousing, and
manufacturing uses and facilities whose external effects (e.g. noise, vibration,
odor, smoke, heat, etc.) have minimal or no detrimental effect on surrounding
properties and zone districts. LI-1 Districts permit the manufacturing,
compounding, processing, packaging, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or
semi-finished products from previously prepared material.
This district provides opportunity to locate a limited range of industrial uses
within close proximity of areas experiencing residential and commercial growth.
The spatial orientation of the LI-1 District is based on the potential for identified
locations to support a select range of industrial uses, as well as the historic
development of lands so designated. Due to the proximity of LI-1 sites to nonindustrial
development, the range of uses is, however, limited in scope. Certain
compatible commercial uses are also provided for in the LI-1 District.
2) LI-2 District - LI-2 is defined as manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication
activities, including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose
external effects (e.g. noise, vibration, odor, smoke, glare, etc.) have greater
potential to be felt/experienced by surrounding land uses and zone districts (when
compared to LI-1 uses). These effects have a potential to be detrimental to
surrounding properties unless carefully regulated.
LI-2 uses include, but are not limited to, many of the uses provided for within the
LI-1 District as well as the manufacturing, processing, and/or compounding of
finished or semi-finished products from raw materials. This district is located in
close proximity to the US-31 Freeway/VanWagoner Road Interchange. In
addition to the buffering effect of these major road systems, the LI-2 District is
segregated from areas of higher density development as a result of extensive
wetlands bordering the southern and westerly sides of the district. The isolation
of the LI-2 District from non-industrial uses affords greater opportunity to support
a larger, more diverse, range of industrial development. Certain compatible
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-17
commercial uses are also provided for in the LI-2 District.
While both districts provide for many of the same land uses, their individual location and
site characteristics offer opportunity to focus a select number of specific uses unique to
each sub-category.
3) LI-3 District - This is a transitional industrial district. The district recognizes the
pre-existence of historic industrial development on sites likely to experience a
transition to non-industrial use over time. The transitional character of LI-3
District locations is recognized as such by the City Master Plan. Due to their
relatively large size, location, and general relationship to surrounding
development, LI-3 District sites do not exhibit the general characteristics of spot
zones. Uses programmed for the LI-3 District include pre-existing industrial
development and a range of non-industrial transitional uses.
b) Principal Permitted Uses - LI-1 and LI-2:
1) Light manufacturing and processing industries enclosed entirely within a building,
not including the baking or processing of food or food products, processing of
organic wastes, recycling, or similar activities employing plant or animal products
or other goods, materials, or products or procedures likely to result in the off site
transmission of odor, dust, light, glare, noise, vibration, or other external impacts
of a similar nature. Examples of permitted light industrial uses include the
assembly of pre-manufactured electronic, computer, vehicular, communication,
furniture, or other components; fabrication of signs and sheet metal products;
production of clothing from pre-manufactured materials; silk screening;
commercial and industrial packaging and mailing services; and, delivery services
(e.g. United Parcel Service).
2) Warehousing of new materials and products when enclosed entirely within a
building.
3) Moving and storage operations, with no outside storage.
4) Indoor boat storage facilities.
5) Printing and copy services of a high volume commercial nature (as opposed to
services oriented to day to day, walk-in, pedestrian traffic).
6) Public utility facilities.
7) Gasoline service stations, including those with convenience stores.
8) Taxi and limousine services [Ordinance No. 217, 11/15/04]
9) Service and repair shops enclosed entirely within a building, except those
classified as Special Land Uses.
c) Principal Permitted Uses - LI-3:
1) Manufacture of boilers and related appurtenances.
d) Accessory Buildings and Uses - LI-1 and LI-2:
1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use or
special land use.
e) Special Land Uses - LI-1 (see Article 4):
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-18
1) Light industrial uses having a potential to result in the limited transmission of offsite
odor, dust, light, glare, noise, vibration, or other external impacts or those
possessing large quantities of explosives, fuels, or other materials potentially
detrimental to surrounding uses and the overall environment unless properly
stored and handled. For purposes of this section, large quantities shall mean
quantities in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons for liquid or semi-liquid
products and five hundred (500) pounds for dry products. The above light
industrial uses may be permitted subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and
after demonstration that all potential off-site impacts may be mitigated through
appropriate design controls.
2) Automobile, truck tractor and trailer sales, rental, and service.
3) Machinery and transportation equipment sales and service.
4) Heavy equipment rental.
5) Freight and trucking terminals.
6) Warehousing of new materials and products involving outside storage.
7) Moving and storage operations involving outside storage.
8) Outdoor boat storage facilities.
9) Vehicle repair, major [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
10) Planned unit development.
f) Special Land Uses - LI-2 (see Article 4):
1) Light industrial uses having a potential to result in the limited transmission of offsite
odor, dust, light, glare, noise, vibration, or other external impacts or those
possessing large quantities of explosives, fuels, or other materials potentially
detrimental to surrounding uses and the overall environment unless properly
stored and handled. For purposes of this section, large quantities shall mean
quantities in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons for liquid or semi-liquid
products and five hundred (500) pounds for dry products. The above light
industrial uses may be permitted subject to the provisions of this Ordinance and
after demonstration that all potential off-site impacts may be mitigated through
appropriate design controls.
2) Manufacturing, processing, and/or compounding of finished or semi-finished
products from raw materials.
3) Adult entertainment uses.
4) Automobile, truck tractor and trailer sales, rental, and service, including major
and minor vehicle repair. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
5) Machinery and transportation equipment sales and service.
6) Heavy equipment rental.
7) Freight and trucking terminals.
8) Warehousing of new materials and products involving outside storage.
9) Moving and storage operations involving outside storage.
10) Outdoor boat storage facilities.
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-19
11) Communication towers and antennas.
12) Planned unit development.
g) Special Land Uses - LI-3 (see Article 4):
1) Hotels (including bar, restaurant, and lounge).
2) Marinas and yacht clubs.
3) Restaurants (not including fast food).
4) Residential condominiums.
5) Planned unit development.
6) Public parks and playgrounds.
h) Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements - LI -1, LI-2, and LI-3 - Area,
Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements unless otherwise specified are as provided in
Section 9.150, "Schedule of District Standards".
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-20
Section 9.130 PI Zone District - Port Industrial District
a) Statement of Purpose - The Port Industrial District has been established to
accommodate the demand and special requirements for the out-door bulk storage of
industrial materials which are received via large waterborne craft. The district also
permits other uses having a water related orientation and/or capable of being designed to
avoid conflicts with the district’s primary use.
b) Principal Permitted Uses:
1) Indoor and outdoor bulk storage of non-hazardous material which is temporarily
stored and distributed for wholesale such as aggregate, salt, fertilizer, and
products of a similar nature or character. The above materials being delivered by
large waterborne craft and trucks.
c) Accessory Buildings and Uses:
1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use or
special land use.
d) Special Land Uses (see Article 4):
1) Processing of materials permitted under b), 1), above. This shall not include any
hazardous materials including, but not limited to, dredge materials containing
hazardous substances.
2) Boat storage.
3) Marinas and yacht clubs.
4) Hotels (including bar, restaurant, and lounge).
5) Planned unit development.
6) Public parks and playgrounds.
e) Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements - Area, Height, Bulk and Placement
Requirements unless otherwise specified as are provided in Section 9.150, "Schedule of
District Standards".
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-21
Section 9.140 IL-O – Inland Lakefront Overlay District
a) Statement of Purpose. The IL-O Overlay District has been established to encourage the
conservation and redevelopment of the older, waterfront residential neighborhood on
inland Spring Lake, designated as Lakefront/Cottage Settlement on the City of
Ferrysburg Master Plan, where most existing lots and/or structures do not conform fully
to the standards of the underlying zoning district. Since the area includes a wide variety
of lot sizes, the intent is to support the continued use and improvement of small lot single
family homes while providing for new residential development that is consistent with the
standards of the underlying zoning district.
b) Applicability. The IL-O Overlay District is established as an overlay district that is
applied over the existing underlying zoning district, and shall be applied only to lands
designated as Lakefront/Cottage Settlement on the Future Land Use Map of the City of
Ferrysburg Master Plan. Except as modified by the requirements of this Section, all
requirements of the underlying zoning district and of this Ordinance shall apply.
c) Boat Lots. The exceptions and modifications allowed or required in the IL-O District
shall not apply to a boat lot as defined by this Ordinance. A boat lot shall be subject to the
requirements of Section 3.130, h).
d) Principal Permitted Uses:
1) Any permitted use allowed in the underlying zoning district.
e) Accessory Buildings and Uses:
1) Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to a principal permitted use or
special land use.
2) Boat lots, according to Section 3.130, h).
f) Special Land Uses (see Article 4):
1) Any Special Land Use allowed in the underlying zoning district.
g) Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements:
1) Development Requirements. Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Requirements,
unless otherwise specified, are as provided for the underlying zoning district in
Section 9.150, “Schedule of District Standards”.
2) Development or Expansion. Any new use or expansion of an existing use or
structure within the IL-O Overlay District shall meet the following requirements:
a. Lot of Record. The exemptions allowed by this Section shall apply only to
lots of record in existence on the effective date of this Section. Any lot,
parcel or site condominium unit created after the effective date of this
Section shall comply with the minimum lot area, minimum lot width,
setbacks and all other requirements of the underlying zoning district.
b. Permitted and Special Land Uses on Substandard Lots of Record. In
the event that a lot of record within the IL-O Overlay District in existence
on the effective date of this Section does not meet the minimum
underlying zoning district regulations for minimum lot area, minimum lot
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-22
width or both, the lot may be used for the permitted and accessory uses
listed in Section 9.130, d) and e), provided that all other dimensional
requirements are met as required by the underlying zoning district and as
modified by the requirements of this Section. Except for Planned Unit
Developments that are developed in accordance with Article 8, special
land uses shall be permitted only upon lots that meet the requirements of
the underlying zoning district.
c. Setbacks on Substandard Lots of Record.
1. For existing lots of record that do not comply with the minimum
lot area requirements of the underlying zoning district, the
minimum setback requirements may be reduced by the same
percentage as the difference between the area of the lot and the
required zoning district minimum lot area in Section 9.150,
Schedule of Regulations, provided that:
i. No lot shall be less than forty (40) feet in width.
ii. No side yard setback shall be less than seven (7) feet.
iii. No rear yard setback shall be less than twenty (20) feet;
however, no waterfront lot shall have a rear yard setback
for the principal structure of less than forty (40) feet.
iv. No front yard setback shall be less than twenty (20) feet, or
the average established setback of the houses on the same
block as determined in accordance with Section 3.270,
“Basis of Determining Front Yard Requirements and
Averaging of Setback”; however, no dwelling is required to
be set back further than the minimum front yard setback
requirement in Section 9.150, “Schedule of District
Standards”.
v. The above minimums shall also apply to projections, as
otherwise permitted by Section 3.60, a) through d). A low
level rear yard deck may be located within the rear yard, as
permitted by Section 3.60, e).
2. For existing lots of record that meet minimum lot area
requirements but do not meet minimum lot width requirements, the
front and rear yard setback requirements of Section 9.150,
“Schedule of Regulations,” and Section 3.310, “Basis of
Determining Front Yard Requirements and Averaging of Setback”
shall be met; however, minimum side yard setbacks may be
reduced by the same percentage as the difference between the
width of the lot and the required zoning district minimum lot width
in Section 9.150, provided that no side yard setback shall be less
than seven (7) feet. The minimum seven (7) foot side yard setback
shall also apply to projections, as otherwise permitted in Section
3.60, a) through d). A low level rear yard deck may be located
within the rear yard, as permitted by Section 3.60, d).
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-23
3. For corner lots that meet minimum lot area requirements but do not
meet minimum lot width requirements, both the interior side yard
and the front yard adjacent to the side street may be reduced by the
same percentage as above; however, the interior side yard shall not
be less than seven (7) feet and the front yard adjacent to the side
street shall conform to the requirements of Section 9.130, g), 2), c,
1, iv, above.
Example: A lot of record within the underlying RG-1 District is 6,000 square feet
in area. RG-1 Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet
Percentage Difference: lot is 40 percent less than minimum (10,000 - 6,000)
/10,000 = 40%); therefore, setback requirements may be reduced by 40 percent or
the minimums in paragraph g) 2) c, above, whichever is larger.
Requirement RG-1 Minimum IL-O Permitted Calculation
Front Yard 25 ft. 20 ft.
25 – (40% of 25 ft.) =
15; cannot be less than
20 feet*
Side Yard 10 ft. 7 ft.
10 ft. – (40% of 10 ft.)
= 6 ft.; cannot be less
than 7 feet
Rear Yard 40 ft. 24 ft. 40 ft. – (40% of 40 ft)
= 24 ft.
*or the average established setback of the houses on the same side of the block;
see Sec. 9.130, g), 2), c, above.
d. Corner Lots. On corner lots, no structure over forty (40) inches in height
may be placed or constructed within the clear vision area as described in
Section 3.90, g).
3) Contiguous Vacant Lots. If contiguous vacant lots of record, which individually
do not meet the lot area and/or lot width requirements of the underlying zoning
district are available for combination, and are owned in common, then a proper lot
combination shall be made to achieve or to bring the property closer to
conformance with the minimum required lot size, in compliance with Section
3.50, b). Lots so combined that still do not meet the minimum district regulations
may be granted the exemptions in Section 9.130, g), 2), c, above.
4) Reconstruction. Notwithstanding the applicable requirements of Article 10,
Nonconforming Uses and Structures, and because of the historic cottage nature of
dwellings within the IL-O Overlay District and the unique nature of the
neighborhood, a nonconforming dwelling on an existing lot of record, which
exists on and after the date of adoption of this Section, may be replaced by a new
structure upon the same building footprint with the same setbacks as the original
dwelling, provided that:
a. A building permit must be obtained and construction on the new dwelling
begun within one (1) year after demolition of the original dwelling.
b. Along any portion of the dwelling abutting a side lot line that does not
meet the setback requirement of the underlying zoning district, there shall
be no increase in height above the height of the original structure;
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-24
however, the replacement structure may not exceed the height
requirements for the underlying zoning district.
c. The new residence does not increase any nonconformity or result in any
new nonconformity.
d. Notwithstanding the location of the original dwelling footprint, if the
original dwelling was located seven (7) feet or less from any side lot line,
no portion of the new structure may be less than seven (7) feet from any
side lot line.
e. Notwithstanding the location of the original dwelling footprint, front yard
setback requirements shall conform to Section 9.130, g), 2) c, 1, iv.
f. All other district regulations for the underlying zoning district, as outlined
in Section 9.150, shall apply.
[Ordinance No. 256, 07/06/09]
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 5/4/15]
9-25
Section 9.150 Schedule of District Standards, City of Ferrysburg
[See Footnote [1]. Refer also to Section 9.150 (b) for Minimum Floor Area Requirements of Residential Units]
a) Lot, Yard and Height Requirements
Standard RD RG1 RG2 RG3 S CC & GC I-1, I-2 & I-3 PI
Minimum Lot Area 12,000 sq. ft.-Res.
20,000 sq. ft. -Other
10,000 sq. ft.-Res
20,000 sq. ft.-Other
7,000 sq. ft. [2]
20,000 sq. ft.-Other
7,000 sq. ft. [2]
20,000 sq. ft.-Other
12,000 sq. ft. 8,712 sq. ft. 15,000 sq. ft. 22,500 sq. ft.
Minimum Lot Width 100ft. 100ft. 70ft. [3] 70ft [3] 100ft. 66ft. 100ft. 100ft.
Minimum Front Yard 25ft. 25ft. 25ft. 25ft. 25ft. 20ft. 40ft. 40ft.
Minimum Side Yard 10ft. 10ft. 10ft. 10ft. 10ft. 7ft. [5] 25ft. 25ft.
Minimum Rear Yard 40ft. 40ft. 30ft. 30ft. 30ft. 25ft. 25ft. 25ft.
Maximum Building
Height [6]
35ft 35ft. 35ft. 35ft. 35ft. 35ft. 50ft. or 2 Stories
[7]
50ft. or 2 Stories
[8][9]
Maximum Lot
Coverage
35% 35% 40% 40% [11] 60% 60% [10] 60% [10] 60% [10]
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010; Ordinance No. 287, 3/21/2016]
Notes:
[1] Standards reflect principal permitted and special land uses, unless otherwise provided for by this Ordinance.
[2] Required lot area per dwelling unit.
[3] Lot frontage required for first unit. Additional thirty-five (35) feet required per unit thereafter.
[5] Total of both side yards shall be no less than seventeen (17) feet.
[6] Single-family dwelling unit not to exceed 2 ½ stories. Refer to Definition of Building Height for Maximum Height Limit for Single and Two Family Dwellings.
[7] Whichever is less.
[8] The height of material storage silos may be increased one (1) foot per each instance in which required front, side, and rear yard setbacks have all been increased by
one (1) foot. Provided, however, no silo shall exceed a total height of one hundred fifteen (115) feet. [Ordinance No. 177, 11/22/99]
[9] Permitted outdoor storage piles shall not exceed eighty (80) feet in height. [Ordinance No. 177, 11/22/99]
[10] Amended; Ordinance No. 212, 5/3/04
[11] Places of religious worship shall have a maximum lot coverage of 50%. [Ordinance No. 287, 3/21/2016]
DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT STANDARDS CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
9-27
b) Minimum Floor Area Requirements for Residential Dwelling Units – All dwellings,
exclusive of a basement or attic, shall contain a minimum dwelling unit floor area
according to the following table. For single-family dwellings, at least one-half (1/2) of
the dwelling unit floor area shall be locate on the first floor.
Minimum Area in Square Feet (Gross Area)
Unit Type Single-Family
Detached
Single-Family
Attached Townhouse
Duplex (Per Unit)
Multiple-Family (Per
Unit – Three or More
Units per Apartment
Complex)
Efficiency Not Applicable Not Applicable 360
One Bedroom 960 720 500
Two Bedroom 960 864 700
Three Bedroom 960 1,000 900
More than Three
Bedrooms
960 1,000 plus 200 per
each additional
bedroom (in excess of
3 bedrooms)
900 plus 200 per each
additional bedroom (in
excess of 3 bedroom)
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
10-1
ARTICLE 10
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Section 10.10 Intent
Upon the adoption of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments, there may exist lots, structures,
and uses of land and structures which were lawful prior to the adoption of the Ordinance, or
amendment thereto, but which are not in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or
amendment thereto. It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit these nonconforming lots,
structures and uses to continue, but not to encourage their prolonged existence. Because
nonconforming lots, structures and uses, so long as they exist, prevent the full realization of the
goals and objectives of the City of Ferrysburg Master Plan, the spirit of this Ordinance is to
reduce, rather than increase, the nonconformance.
Section 10.20 Change of Tenancy of Ownership of Non-Conforming Uses
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing non-conforming
use of land, structures and premises, however, there shall be no change in the nature or character
of the non-conforming use without approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals as based on the
standards of Article XI. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 10.30 Nonconforming Lots
a) Existing Lot of Record - In any zoning district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by
other provisions of this Ordinance, where an existing lot of record which does not abut
any lot or lots of record in the same ownership, fails to meet the requirements for
minimum lot area, minimum lot width, or both, of the zoning district in which it is
located, the lot may be used for the permitted uses of the zoning district, provided that all
other dimensional requirements not involving lot area, lot width, or both, of the zoning
district in which the lot is located are met.
b) Abutting Lots of Record Under Single Ownership - In any zoning district, where one
or more abutting lots of record in the same ownership do not, when considered
individually, meet the requirements for minimum lot area, minimum lot width, or both, of
the zoning district in which the lots are located, the lots shall be considered as one lot for
the purposes of this Ordinance, including subparagraph a), above. Contiguous lots so
combined shall not be divided or reduced in dimensions or area so as to increase
noncompliance with the minimum requirements of this Ordinance. [Ordinance No. 265,
10/4/2010]
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
10-2
Section 10.40 Nonconforming Uses of Land Not Involving a Building or
Structure
The lawful use of any land, not involving a building or structure, existing and lawful on the
effective date of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, may be continued, even though the use
does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, subject to the
following provisions:
a) Enlargement - Except as permitted under Sections 10.40 and 10.50, no nonconforming
use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than
was occupied on the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto.
b) Relocation - Except as permitted under Sections 10.40 and 10.50, no nonconforming use
shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot occupied by the use on
the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto.
c) Cessation - If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more
than six (6) months, any subsequent use of the land shall conform to the requirements of
this Ordinance. Maintenance of the land or buildings or structures, including the
provision of maintaining utility service or postal service, shall not constitute a
continuation of the use of land.
Section 10.50 Nonconforming Structures
The lawful use of any structure existing and lawful on the effective date of this Ordinance, or
amendment thereto, may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the
provisions of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, subject to the following provisions:
a) Extending Use Within a Structure – Any nonconforming use may be extended
throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such
use at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any portion of a building which was not manifestly arranged or
designed for such use at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, nor
shall such use be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
b) Alteration of Structure Possessing a Nonconforming Use – Except as otherwise
permitted in this Article, no existing structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall be
enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is
located.
c) Reconstruction of Structure Occupied by a Nonconforming Use:
1) Except for certain nonconforming single family dwellings as outlined below, if a
structure which conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance but this is
occupied by a nonconforming use is damaged by any means or in any manner to
the extent that the cost of reconstruction or restoration exceeds one-half ( ½ ) the
value of the structure prior to the damaging occurrence, as determined by the most
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
10-3
recent assessment of the market value of such structure, for purposes of taxation,
the structure may be reconstructed or restored only if its use conforms with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
2) Notwithstanding the above, in the LI-1 or LI-2 districts, if a structure containing a
nonconforming single family residential use or an accessory structure serving a
nonconforming single family residential use is damaged or destroyed more than
one-half ( ½ ) the value of the structure prior to the damaging occurrence, as
determined by the most recent assessment of the market value of the structure, the
structure may be re-established upon the same footprint, provided that:
a. With regard to lot, setback, lot coverage, height or other requirements
pertaining to the structure, the new structure shall not increase any
nonconformity or result in any new nonconformity;
b. Notwithstanding the location of the original footprint, the new structure
may be no closer than five (5) feet from any side lot line if it is the
principal dwelling and no closer than three (3) feet from any side or rear
lot line and no closer than then (10) feet from the principal dwelling if it is
an accessory structure.
d) Re-establishment of Nonconforming Use - If a nonconforming use of any structure is
terminated and replaced by a permitted use, such nonconforming use shall not be later reestablished.
e) Abandonment – When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land is
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months, the structure,
or structure and land in combination, shall not hereafter be used except in conformance
with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. For purposed of this
provision, the maintenance of utility service, mail service, newspaper service, and other
such services shall not, in and of themselves, be considered evidence of nonabandonment.
f) Removal of Nonconforming Use Status After Removal or Destruction of Building –
Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal
or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming use status of the land.
g) Change in Use (Substitution) – A nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to
another nonconforming use, subject to prior approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Board may approve such change only if it complies with all of the following
standards:
1) The proposed use does not increase the degree of nonconformity existing prior to
such change of use. Pursuant to this standard, the proposed use shall not create, or
result in, impacts which are considered more objectionable than the use to be
replaced. Such impacts shall include, but are not limited to, increased traffic, truck
deliveries, parking requirements, hours of operation, noise, vibration, odors, litter,
outside storage, pedestrian movement, off-site drainage, and other factors.
2) No structural alteration of the existing structure will be required to accommodate
the new use, unless the alteration will render the structure more conforming to the
underlying zoning district
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
10-4
In approving a change in use, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require reasonable conditions in
order to increase the degree of conformity. Such conditions shall include, but are not limited to,
buffers, landscaping, off-street parking, access controls, hours of operation, and other such
conditions to bring about a greater degree on conformity.
Section 10.60 Nonconforming Use of Structure
The lawful use of any structure existing and lawful on the effective date of this Ordinance, or
amendment thereto, may be continued, even though the use does not conform with the provisions
of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, subject to the following provisions:
a) Extending Use Within a Structure - Any nonconforming use may be extended
throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for the
use at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any portion of a building which was not manifestly arranged or
designed for the use at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, nor
shall the use be extended to occupy any land outside the building.
b) Alteration of Structure Possessing a Nonconforming Use - Except as otherwise
permitted in this Article, no existing structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall be
enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in
changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is
located.
c) Reconstruction of Structure Occupied by a Nonconforming Use –
1) If a structure that conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance, but that is
occupied by a nonconforming use, is damaged by any means or in any manner to
the extent that the cost of reconstruction or restoration exceeds one-half (½) the
value of the structure prior to the damaging occurrence, as determined by the most
recent assessment of the market value of the structure, for purposes of taxation,
the structure may be reconstructed or restored only if its use conforms with the
provisions of this Ordinance.
2) Notwithstanding the above, in the LI-1 or LI-2 districts, if a structure containing
a nonconforming single family residential use or an accessory structure serving a
nonconforming single family residential use is damaged or destroyed more than
one-half (½) the value of the structure prior to the damaging occurrence, as
determined by the most recent assessment of the market value of the structure, the
structure may be re-established upon the same footprint, provided that:
a. With regard to lot, setback, lot coverage, height or other requirements
pertaining to the structure, the new structure shall not increase any
nonconformity or result in any new nonconformity;
b. Notwithstanding the location of the original footprint, the new structure
may be no closer than five (5) feet from any side lot line if it is the
principal dwelling and no closer than three (3) feet from any side or rear
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
10-5
lot line and no closer than ten (10) feet from the principal dwelling if it is
an accessory structure.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
d) Re-establishment of Nonconforming Use - If a nonconforming use of any structure is
terminated and replaced by a permitted use, the nonconforming use shall not be later reestablished.
e) Abandonment - When a nonconforming use of a structure or premises is discontinued or
ceases to exist for twelve (12) consecutive months, with an intent to abandon the use, the
structure, or premises shall no longer be used except in conformance with the regulations
of the district in which it is located. A determination that a nonconforming use has
ceased, with an intent to abandon the use, shall be made by the City based upon any one
or more of the following:
1) City or county government records, such as inspection reports, dated
photographs/aerial photographs or notarized statements that provide clear
evidence that the nonconforming use has ceased.
2) Changes to listings in telephone directories providing clear evidence that the
nonconforming use has ceased.
3) Changes to utility records providing clear evidence that the nonconforming use
has ceased.
4) Dated advertising or other information published in a newspaper, magazine or
website, such as a "going out of business sale," "moving sale," or "grand opening"
at a new location providing clear evidence that the nonconforming use has ceased.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
f) Removal of Nonconforming Use Status After Removal or Destruction of Building -
Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal
or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming use status of the land.
g) Change in Use (Substitution) - A nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to
another nonconforming use, subject to prior approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
The Board may approve this change only if it complies with all of the following
standards:
1) The proposed use does not increase the degree of nonconformity existing prior to
the change of use. Pursuant to this standard, the proposed use shall not create, or
result in, impacts which are considered more objectionable than the use to be
replaced. These impacts shall include, but are not limited to, increased traffic,
truck deliveries, parking requirements, hours of operation, noise, vibration, odors,
litter, outside storage, pedestrian movement, off-site drainage, and other factors.
2) No structural alteration of the existing structure will be required to accommodate
the new use, unless the alteration will render the structure more conforming to the
underlying zone district standards.
In approving a change in use, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require reasonable conditions in
order to increase the degree of conformity. These conditions shall include, but are not limited to,
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through 7/3/17]
10-6
buffers, landscaping, off-street parking, access controls, hours of operation, and other conditions
to bring about a greater degree of conformity.
[Ordinance No. 261, 4/5/2010]
Section 10.70 Repairs and Maintenance
a) Basic Repairs and Maintenance - On any structure devoted in whole or in part to any
nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months
on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring,
mechanical equipment, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of
the current replacement value of the structure as based on the records of the City
Assessor, provided that the structure is not enlarged, extended, moved or structurally
altered.
b) Safety Improvements - Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to
be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public health, upon order of the
official.
Section 10.80 Structures Under Construction
Any structure on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, or amendment thereto, but, which under this Ordinance, or amendment thereto, is
classified as nonconforming, shall be considered existing and legally nonconforming pursuant to
construction purposes and the intended use. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to
require any change in the plans, construction or use of the structure. Actual construction is
hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in a permanent position and
fastened in a permanent manner, except that where demolition or removal of an existing building
has been substantially begun preparatory to reconstruction the demolition or removal shall be
deemed actual construction. All construction shall be done pursuant to issuance of a building
permit by the City of Ferrysburg.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
11-1
ARTICLE 11
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Section 11.10 Creation and Membership
There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals, herein referred to as the "Board of Appeals,"
the membership, powers and duties of which are prescribed in this Ordinance.
Section 11.20 Composition and Alternate Members
a) Membership – The Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the
City Council, and shall include one (1) member from the City Council and one (1)
member of the Planning Commission.
1) One (1) of the first members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2)
for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter,
each member shall be appointed for a full term of three (3) years, provided,
however, the term of a member who is also an elected official of the City shall
cease upon termination of the elected position.
2) A member of the City Council shall not serve as Chairperson of the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
[Ordinance 248, 12/1/08]
b) Alternate Members - Two (2) alternate members to the Board of Appeals may also be
appointed by the City Council. Alternate members shall be appointed for a term of three
(3) years. The alternate members of the Board of Appeals may be called as specified
herein, to sit as regular members of the Board of Appeals, if a regular member is absent
from or unable to attend two or more consecutive meetings of the Board of Appeals, or
for a period of more than thirty consecutive days. An alternate member may also be
called to serve in the place of a regular member for reasons of conflict of interest. The
alternate member having been called to serve on a case shall serve on the case until a
final decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same voting rights as
a regular member of the Board of Appeals. The decision of whether an alternate member
shall sit in the absence of a regular member shall be determined by the Chairperson of the
Board of Appeals, and if there is no Chairperson, by a majority of the Board of Appeals'
members then in attendance at a duly called meeting of the same, and the records
maintained by the Board of Appeals shall reflect the attendance and participation of any
alternate member.
c) Compensation - All members of the Board of Appeals, including alternate members,
shall serve without compensation as members thereof.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
11-2
Section 11.30 Rules of Procedure
Rules of procedure prescribing the Board of Appeals process for the performance of its
authorized powers shall be adopted by the Board of Appeals.
Section 11.40 Jurisdiction and Limitations
a) Jurisdiction. The Board of Appeals shall have all jurisdiction and powers granted by the
Zoning Act, all jurisdiction and powers prescribed in other sections of this Ordinance,
and the following specific jurisdiction and powers:
1) Appeals - To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
permit, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, Planning
Commission, and City Council enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance, except
as otherwise provided for. The Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly
or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, permit, decision or
determination as in the Board's opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to
that end shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken.
2) Matters Referred - To hear and decide matters referred to the Board of Appeals
or upon which the Board of Appeals is required to pass under this Ordinance.
3) Non-Use Variances - If there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out
the strict letter of the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance applicable to a
property, the Board of Appeals shall have power in granting a variance to relax or
modify any of the rules or provisions of this Ordinance relating to the
construction, structural changes in, equipment, or alteration of buildings or
structures, so that the spirit of this Ordinance shall be observed, public safety
secured, and substantial justice done.
b) Limitations. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the power to hear and decide
upon the following:
1) Variances in the use of land.
2) Appeals of the decision of the City Council regarding special land uses.
3) Appeals of the decision of the City Council regarding Planned Unit
Developments.
Section 11.50 Granting of Variances
a) Standards for Granting of Variance – No variance in the provisions or requirements of
this Ordinance shall be authorized by the Board of Appeals unless it is found from the
evidence that all of the following conditions exist:
1) That compliance with the Zoning Ordinance would result in practical difficulties
to be exceptional, extraordinary or unique circumstances or conditions of the land
or parcel, such as:
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
11-3
a. Exceptional narrowness of the width or depth of a lot or parcel, or an
irregular shape.
b. Exceptional natural or topographic features located on the lot or parcel,
such as steep slopes, water, existing significant trees or other unique or
extreme physical conditions of the land.
c. Extraordinary location of an existing building or structure that allows no
other practical or feasible location for expansion because of exceptional
features of the land.
d. Other exceptional or extraordinary dimensional conditions or
characteristics of land, lot or parcel.
2) That the unusual circumstances do not apply to most or other lots or parcels in the
same manner or to the same extent to other lots or parcels in the same zoning
district.
3) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial
property right. The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be
deemed sufficient to warrant a variance.
4) That the granting of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent
and nearby land uses and properties.
5) That the applicant shall not have created the problem for which the variance is
being sought.
6) That the granting of the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and
that the spirit of this Ordinance shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done for both the applicant and other property owners in the
district.
b) Minimum Variance Necessary – In approving a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall only approve the minimum variance necessary to relieve the practical difficulty.
[Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010; Ordinance No. 288, 3/21/2016]
Section 11.60 Application
Application Requirements - All applications for consideration by the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be made by submitting the following materials to the Zoning Administrator at least twenty
one (21) days prior to the meeting at which the application (request) is to be considered:
a) Application - A completed application form signed by the applicant or his/her agent.
Applicants other than the owner of the property must submit written evidence that the
owner of the property is aware and approves of the application.
b) Fee - Payment of a fee which shall be established by the City Council, and which shall be
non-refundable.
c) Legal Description - A legal description of the property involved in the request.
d) Narrative and Site Plan - A narrative and, where applicable, a site plan drawn to scale,
sufficient to show the nature and extent of the requested variance. For purposes of a
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
11-4
variance, the narrative must fully describe how the request complies with the Standards
for Granting of Variance, Section 11.50.
e) Other information as determined by the Board of Appeals to be necessary in order make a
determination of findings.
Section 11.70 Information From Prior Zoning Actions
In addition to the complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals other information and evidence relevant to the requested appeal. This shall include, but
is not limited to, prior actions taken by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, or City
Council on the matter under consideration for appeal or variance.
Section 11.80 Submission of Application to the Zoning Board of Appeals
The Zoning Administrator shall take the actions necessary to place the appeal on the agenda of
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Section 11.90 Applicant Representation
Appellants for variances or other actions by the Board of Appeals shall be required to appear
before the Board or be represented by a party who can speak for and make commitment on
behalf of the applicant.
Section 11.100 Voting Requirements
Votes Needed to Authorize a Variance, Appeal, or Other Affirmative Action - The
concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse an
order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide
in favor of the applicant a matter upon which the Board of Appeals is required to pass under a
provision of this Ordinance, or to effect a variation from the requirements of this Ordinance,
except that a concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to
grant a variance from uses of land permitted in any zoning district.
Section 11.110 Time of Hearing and Notice of Hearing
The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal and shall give due
notice thereof to the persons to whom real property within three hundred (300) feet of the
premises in question shall be assessed, and to the occupants of dwellings within three hundred
(300) feet. Notice shall be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners
and tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll. If the tenants name is not known, the
term occupant may be used. The notice shall include:
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
11-5
a) Nature of the appeal.
b) Property location, including address and legal description.
c) Location (address) of the public hearing.
d) Public hearing date and time.
e) Address and timing for receipt of written comments.
f) Other information as determined relevant to the matter.
Section 11.120 Conditions on Variance and Other Approvals
Conditions - The Board of Appeals may impose conditions upon an affirmative decision.
Conditions shall:
a) Be designed to protect natural resources; the health, safety, and welfare, as well as the
social and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity under
consideration; the residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land
use or activity; and, the City as a whole.
b) Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which are affected by
the proposed use or activity.
c) Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations; be related to
standards established in the Ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration;
and, be necessary to insure compliance with those standards.
Section 11.130 Official Record and Findings of Fact
The Board of Appeals shall prepare an official record for all appeals and shall base its decisions
on this record. The official record shall include the following:
a) The relevant administrative records and orders issued relating to the appeal.
b) The notice of the appeal.
c) Any documents, exhibits, photographs or written reports as may be submitted to the
Board of Appeals for its decision.
d) Factual information received at the public hearing.
e) Determination of compliance with the provisions of Section 11.50.
f) The official vote of the Board of Appeals stating the conclusions of the Board relative to
the appeal, the basis for the decision, and any conditions imposed.
Section 11.140 Decisions of the Board of Appeals
a) Official Record
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
11-6
1) The decision and orders of the Board of Appeals in disposing of the appeal shall
be entered in the official record after they have been signed by the Chair of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, or, in the absence of the Chair, the Vice Chair. Written
notice of the disposition shall be served, whether in person or by mail, upon the
parties to the appeal, the Zoning Administrator, and the City Clerk.
2) The decision and orders of the Board shall be signed by the Chair at the next
meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals, unless the applicant requests, at the
meeting when the decision is rendered, that the decision be provided at an earlier
date, in which case the decision shall be signed and presented to the applicant
within ten (10) business days after the meeting at which the decision is rendered,
or by a date requested by the applicant, whichever occurs later.
b) Effective Date - The decision and orders of the Board of Appeals shall become effective
upon the recording and signing by the Chair (or, in the absence of the Chair, the Vice
Chair) of the official record of the appeal, unless the Board shall find immediate effect is
necessary to preserve property or personal rights and shall so certify on the record.
[Ordinance 248, 1/12/08]
c) Copy of Official Record - A copy of the official record of the appeal shall be made
available to the parties to any appeal upon request and after payment of a reasonable fee,
as set by the City Council, sufficient to recover the costs of duplicating this material.
d) Construction Timeframe - If the Board of Appeals grants a variance to the appellant,
the variance shall be exercised (construction commenced and actively continued) within
one year from the date of the approval action, unless more time is specifically granted by
the Board of Appeals. Failure to exercise the variance within the time frame as specified
above shall cause the variance approval to be terminated.
e) Reapplication – Following denial of any variance, no request for the same variance on
the same property may be requested for a period of one (1) year, unless the Zoning Board
of Appeals finds that new evidence can be provided or changes have occurred that could
lead to a different result. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
Section 11.150 Stay of Proceedings
An appeal to the Board of Appeals shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Appeals after notice of
appeal shall have been filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may, on due cause shown, be granted by the
Board of Appeals or by the Circuit Court on application, after notice to the Zoning
Administrator.
Section 11.160 Rehearing and Appeal of Decision to Circuit Court
The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be final, provided that the Board may, on its own
motion or at the request of any interested party, at any time subsequent to a decision on an
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
11-7
appeal, grant a rehearing, subject to Section 11.140 e), above. In such a case, notice of the
rehearing shall be made according to the process for an original hearing and the provisions of
this Ordinance and shall be treated as a new hearing. Any person having an interest affected by a
final decision on the appeal shall have the right of appeal to the Circuit Court as provided by the
Zoning Act. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
12-1
ARTICLE 12
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 12.10 Zoning Administrator Duties
a) Deputy Administrator - Where the provisions of this Ordinance authorize or direct the
Zoning Administrator to perform any act or carry out any function, this act or function
may also be carried out by a deputy or deputies designated by the City Manager.
b) Basic Duties - The Zoning Administrator shall have the power to grant certificates of
zoning compliance and to make inspections of premises necessary to carry out his/her
duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance, and to otherwise carry out the duties
assigned herein.
c) Official Zoning Map - The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for maintaining
the Official Zoning Map.
d) Violations - The Zoning Administrator shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of land,
buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures; discontinuance of any
illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to
ensure compliance with, or prevent violations of its provisions.
Section 12.20 Zoning Ordinance Amendments, Initiation
a) Timeframe for Application Submittal - All applications for amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least twenty-one (21) days
prior to the first consideration by the City Planning Commission.
b) Initiation of Amendments and Application Requirements - Requests for amendments
to the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated in writing by the owner of the property
requested for rezoning, or his/her authorized representative. Requests may also be made
by the City Planning Commission or the City Council through official action of the
Commission or Council taken at a public meeting which has been properly noticed as
required by law.
In the case of an amendment requested by a property owner or his/her authorized
representative, the request shall include the following:
1) Completion of a Zoning Amendment Application as provided by the Zoning
Administrator. The application shall include:
a. The name and address of the person making the request and all persons
having a legal or equitable interest in any land which is requested to be
rezoned.
b. In the case of a text amendment, the specific section to be amended and
the proposed text change.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
12-2
c. If the requested amendment requires a change in the zoning map, the
common address, legal description or property identification number (as
assigned by Ottawa County) of the area requested for change, and present
and proposed district classifications shall be provided. The applicant shall
also indicate by map form, the location of the property requested for
rezoning. Twelve (12) copies of the map shall accompany the original
application. [Ordinance No. 265, 10/4/2010]
If, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, or
City Council, the information submitted does not provide a clear
delineation of the specific area to be rezoned, the Zoning Administrator,
Planning Commission, or City Council shall require the applicant to
submit a boundary survey of the property in question. The survey shall
include a written legal description and drawing of the area to be rezoned.
The boundary survey, including legal description and map, shall be
completed by a Land Surveyor registered by the State of Michigan.
Twelve (12) copies of the boundary survey shall be provided.
d. The nature of the amendment shall be fully identified in writing.
e. Payment of all fees as required by the City of Ferrysburg.
Section 12.30 Amendment Procedure
After submission of the application and fee, amendments to this Ordinance shall be processed as
provided for in the Zoning Act.
Section 12.40 Consideration of Amendment
The following guidelines shall be used by the Planning Commission and City Council pursuant
to consideration of amendments to the Zoning Ordinance:
a) Text Amendment.
1) As applicable, the amendment shall be consistent with the City Master Plan.
2) In the event the amendment will add a use to a district, this use shall be fully
consistent with the character of the range of uses provided for within the district.
3) The amendment shall not result in problems of incompatibility among land uses
within a zoning district, or among adjacent districts.
4) As applicable, the proposed change shall be consistent with the City's ability to
provide adequate public facilities and services.
5) The proposed change shall be consistent with the public health, safety, and
welfare.
b) Map Amendment.
1) The change shall be consistent with the City Master Plan.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
12-3
2) The range of uses permitted by the proposed change shall be consistent with the
character of the area.
3) The existing or planned infrastructure including streets, sanitary sewers, storm
sewer, sidewalks, and street lighting shall have sufficient capacity to support
those uses provided for within the proposed zoning district classification.
4) Existing City facilities and services including, but not limited to, police and fire
protection, recreational facilities, educational facilities, and waste collection shall
have sufficient capacity to support those uses provided for within the proposed
zoning district classification.
5) The proposed change shall not result in the economic decline of adjoining
property values.
6) The proposed change shall be governed by sufficient standards to ensure that the
potential for problems of incompatibility between the proposed and adjoining
districts shall be minimal.
7) The proposed change shall not endanger the public health, safety, or welfare.
Section 12.50 Conditional Rezoning
a) Intent.
It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of
the City, as well as advantageous to property owners seeking a change in zoning
boundaries, if certain conditions could be proposed by property owners as part of a
request for a rezoning. It is the intent of this Section to provide a process consistent with
the provisions of Section 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (MCL125.3405) by
which an owner seeking a rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use
and/or development of land as part of the rezoning request.
b) Application and Offer of Conditions.
1) An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use
and/or development of land for which a rezoning is requested. This offer may be
made either at the time the application for rezoning is filed or may be made at a
later time during the rezoning process.
2) The required application and process for considering a rezoning request with
conditions shall be the same as that for considering rezoning requests made
without any offer of conditions, except as modified by the requirements of this
Section.
3) The owner’s offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses or
developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district.
4) The owner's offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to
the property for which rezoning is requested.
5) Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would
require a special land use permit under the terms of this Ordinance may only be
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
12-4
commenced if a special land use permit for the use or development is ultimately
granted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
6) Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would
require a variance under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if a
variance for the use or development is ultimately granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
7) Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would
require site plan approval under the terms of this Ordinance may only be
commenced if site plan approval for the use or development is ultimately granted
in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
8) The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of rezoning
consideration provided that any amended or additional conditions are entered
voluntarily by the owner. An owner may withdraw all or part of its offer of
conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of the City Council provided
that, if the withdrawal occurs subsequent to the Planning Commission’s public
hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be
referred to the Planning Commission for a new public hearing, with appropriate
notice and a new recommendation.
c) Planning Commission Review.
The Planning Commission, after public hearing in accordance with the Zoning Act and
consideration of the factors for rezoning set forth in Section 12.40, may recommend
approval or denial of the rezoning. The Planning Commission’s deliberations shall
include, but not be limited to, a consideration of the factors for rezoning set forth in
Section 12.40. Should the recommendation be for denial, the Planning Commission may
informally communicate to the applicant any conditions that may be considered
necessary for the Planning Commission to recommend approval; however, this
communication shall not be considered a tacit approval. Any changes to the offer of
conditions must be acceptable to and voluntarily offered by the owner.
d) City Council Review.
1) After receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the City Council
shall deliberate upon the requested rezoning and may approve or deny the
conditional rezoning request. The City Council’s deliberations shall include, but
not be limited to, a consideration of the factors for rezoning set forth in Section
12.40.
2) Should the City Council consider amendments to the proposed conditional
rezoning that have been offered by the owner but were not part of the offer of
conditions as recommended by the Planning Commission, then the City Council
shall refer the amendments to the Planning Commission for a report and
recommendation thereon within a time specified by the City Council and proceed
thereafter in accordance with the Zoning Act to deny or approve the conditional
rezoning with or without amendments.
3) The City Council may, at its own discretion, determine that the amendments are
different enough from those considered by the Planning Commission at the public
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
12-5
hearing so that a new public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be
required, followed by a new recommendation.
e) Approval.
1) If the City Council finds the rezoning request and offer of conditions acceptable,
the offered conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written Statement of
Conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming to the provisions of this
Section. The Statement of Conditions shall be incorporated by attachment to the
ordinance adopted by the City Council to accomplish the requested rezoning.
2) The Statement of Conditions shall:
a. Be in a form recordable with the Register of Deeds of Ottawa County or,
in the alternative, be accompanied by a recordable Affidavit or
Memorandum prepared and signed by the owner giving notice of the
Statement of Conditions in a manner acceptable to the City Council.
b. Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains.
c. Contain a statement acknowledging that the Statement of Conditions runs
with the land and is binding upon successor owners of the land.
d. Incorporate by attachment or reference any diagram, plans or other
documents submitted or approved by the owner that are necessary to
illustrate the implementation of the Statement of Conditions. If any
documents are incorporated by reference, the reference shall specify where
the document may be examined.
e. Contain a statement acknowledging that the Statement of Conditions or an
Affidavit or Memorandum giving notice thereof may be recorded by the
City with the Register of Deeds of Ottawa County.
f. Contain the notarized signatures of all of the owners of the subject land
preceded by a statement attesting to the fact that they voluntarily offer and
consent to the provisions contained within the Statement of Conditions.
3) Upon the rezoning taking effect, the Zoning Map shall be amended to reflect the
new zoning classification along with a designation that the land was rezoned with
a Statement of Conditions. The City Clerk shall maintain a listing of all lands
rezoned with a Statement of Conditions.
4) The approved Statement of Conditions or an Affidavit or Memorandum giving
notice thereof shall be filed by the City with the Register of Deeds of Ottawa
County. The City Council shall have authority to waive this requirement if it
determines that, given the nature of the conditions and/or the time frame within
which the conditions are to be satisfied, the recording of such a document would
be of no material benefit to the City or to any subsequent owner of the land.
5) Upon the rezoning taking effect, the use of the land so rezoned shall conform
thereafter to all of the requirements regulating use and development within the
new zoning district as modified by any more restrictive provisions contained in
the Statement of Conditions.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
12-6
f) Compliance with Conditions.
1) Any person who establishes a development or commences a use upon land that
has been rezoned with conditions shall continuously operate and maintain the
development or use in compliance with all of the conditions set forth in the
Statement of Conditions. Any failure to comply with a condition contained
within the Statement of Conditions shall constitute a violation of this Zoning
Ordinance and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any violation shall be
deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law.
2) No permit or approval shall be granted under this Ordinance for any use or
development that is contrary to an applicable Statement of Conditions.
g) Time Period for Establishing Development or Use.
Unless another time period is specified in the ordinance rezoning the subject land, the
approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and other required
permits must be commenced upon the land within 18 months after the rezoning took
effect and thereafter proceed diligently to completion. This time limitation may upon
written request be extended by the City Council if both of the following apply:
1) It is demonstrated to the City Council's reasonable satisfaction that there is a
strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence within the
period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion and
2) The City Council finds that there has not been a change in circumstances that
would render the current zoning with Statement of Conditions incompatible with
other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound
zoning policy.
a) Reversion of Zoning.
If approved development and/or use of the rezoned land does not occur within the time
frame specified under Subsection G above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning
classification as set forth in MCL 125.3405. The reversion process shall be initiated by
the City Council requesting that the Planning Commission proceed with consideration of
rezoning of the land to its former zoning classification. The procedure for considering
and making this reversionary rezoning shall thereafter be the same as applies to all other
rezoning requests.
b) Subsequent Rezoning of Land.
When land that is rezoned with a Statement of Conditions is thereafter rezoned to a
different zoning classification or to the same zoning classification but with a different or
no Statement of Conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to
Subsection h) above or otherwise, the Statement of Conditions imposed under the former
zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. Upon the owner's written request, the
City Clerk shall record with the Register of Deeds of Ottawa County a notice that the
Statement of Conditions is no longer in effect.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
12-7
c) Amendment of Conditions.
1) During the time period for commencement of an approved development or use
specified pursuant to Subsection g) above or during any extension thereof granted
by the City Council, the City shall not add to or alter the conditions in the
Statement of Conditions.
2) The Statement of Conditions may be amended thereafter in the same manner as
was prescribed for the original rezoning and Statement of Conditions.
d) City Right to Rezone.
Nothing in the Statement of Conditions nor in the provisions of this Section shall be
deemed to prohibit the City from rezoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a
Statement of Conditions to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be
conducted in compliance with this Ordinance and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act
(MCL 125.3101 et seq.)
e) Failure to Offer Conditions.
The City shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The
lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect an owner’s rights under this Ordinance.
[Ordinance No. 245, 08/11/08]
Section 12.60 Performance Guarantee
a) As a condition of approval of a site plan, special land use, planned unit development,
variance, or other zoning action, the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission, City
Council, or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, may require a bond or other
financial guarantee of sufficient sum to assure the installation of those features or
components of the approved activity or construction which are considered necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and of users or inhabitants of the
proposed development. Such features or components, hereafter referred to as
"improvements", may include but shall not be limited to roadways, curbs, landscaping,
fences, walls, screens, lighting, drainage facilities, sidewalks, utilities and similar items.
b) Performance guarantees shall be processed in the following manner:
1) The applicant shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the required
improvements, which shall then be reviewed and approved by the Zoning
Administrator. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be one-hundred
(100) percent of the following costs:
a. Purchase and/or construction of improvements.
b. Installation of improvements.
c. Architectural and/or engineering design or related professional costs.
d. Reasonable amount for contingencies, but in no case less than five (5)
percent of total costs for a. through c. above.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
12-8
2) The required performance guarantee shall be in the form of an irrevocable bank
letter of credit, surety bond, or other form of guarantee acceptable to the party
requiring the guarantee.
3) Upon receipt of the required performance guarantee, the Zoning Administrator
shall issue a certificate of zoning compliance for the subject development or
activity.
4) The Zoning Administrator, upon the written request of the applicant, shall rebate
portions of the performance guarantee upon determination that the improvements
for which the rebate has been requested have been satisfactorily completed. The
portion of the performance guarantee to be rebated shall be in the same amount as
stated in the itemized cost estimate for the applicable improvement.
5) When all of the required improvements have been completed, the applicant shall
send written notice to the Zoning Administrator of completion of all
improvements. Thereupon, the Zoning Administrator shall inspect all of the
improvements and shall recommend to the Planning Commission, City Council,
or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, approval, partial approval, or
rejection of the improvements with a statement of the reasons for any rejections.
6) The Planning Commission, City Council, or Zoning Board of Appeals, as
appropriate, shall either approve, partially approve, or reject the improvements.
The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the action of the
Planning Commission, City Council, or Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate,
within thirty (30) days after the official action of the Commission, Council, or
Zoning Board of Appeals. Where partial approval is granted, the applicant shall
be released from liability pursuant to relevant portions of the performance
guarantee, except for that portion sufficient to secure completion of the
improvements not yet approved.
7) A record of authorized performance guarantees shall be maintained by the Zoning
Administrator.
Section 12.70 Recording of Site Plans, Planned Unit Developments, and
Other Instruments
After final City approval, the City may record with the Ottawa County Register of Deeds
approved site plans and other similar instruments that include more than one (1) platted lot,
planned unit developments, and other zoning actions and approvals as determined necessary and
appropriate. The recording fee shall be borne by the applicant who shall remit same prior to
receipt of a Permit for Zoning Compliance. This provision shall not be construed to replace any
recording requirement mandated by other statues, ordinances, or regulations. [Ordinance No.
265, 10/4/2010
Section 12.80 Ordinance Violations
a) Any building or structure moved, erected, razed, converted, or used and any use of land
or premises which is carried on in violation of this Ordinance is declared to be a nuisance
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
12-9
per se. All buildings, structures, and land uses considered to be in violation of this
Ordinance shall be reported to the Zoning Administrator.
b) After an order to correct the violation has been issued by the Zoning Administrator, the
property owner (owner of the property upon which the violation is located) shall have
five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation cannot be corrected within five (5)
days the Zoning Administrator may, with just cause, extend the correction period for an
appropriate amount of time up to a period of six (6) months. The approved extension
period shall be at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator.
In the event a longer period of time is required:
1) The Zoning Board of Appeals, upon petition, may grant up to six (6) additional
months to correct the violation if conditions warrant an extended period of time.
The six (6) period shall commence at the end of the extended period as approved
by the Zoning Administrator (as referenced above).
2) If the violation involves a special land use or planned unit development, the
request for the extended period of time shall be made to, and approved by, the
City Council. Any violation not corrected within the required time frame shall be
reported to the City Council.
In all cases, a request for extending the period of time for correcting a violation shall be
made by the applicant. The request shall be in writing to the Zoning Administrator and
shall include specific detail on why the violation occurred, the requested timeframe for
correcting the violation, and actions to be pursued by the land owner to ensure correction
of the violation. The written request shall be delivered to the Zoning Administrator no
less than twenty-one (21) days prior to the expiration of the extended timeframe as
originally approved by the Zoning Administrator.
In the event the Zoning Administrator determines the violation poses an imminent threat
to the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants of the premises on which the violation
is located or to the general public, the Zoning Administrator may require that immediate
measure be taken to correct the violation.
c) Any person, firm, corporation, or organization who violates, disobeys, omits, or refuses
to comply with any provisions of this Ordinance or lawful order of the Zoning
Administrator, Planning Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, or City Council issued
in pursuance of this Ordinance shall be responsible for a civil infraction punishable by the
sanctions as set forth below. Each day which a violation continues, may be deemed a
separate infraction.
d) The sanction for any violation of this Ordinance which is a municipal civil infraction
shall be a civil fine as provided herein, plus any costs, damages, expenses, and other
sanctions authorized under Act 12 through 26, Public Acts of Michigan of 1994.
e) The Zoning Administrator, the Building Inspector, together with the police officers of the
City of Ferrysburg, are authorized officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations
and municipal civil infraction violation notices for violation of this Ordinance.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT CITY OF FERRYSBURG [Adopted 4/5/99 – amended through7/3/17]
12-10
f) A violation of this Zoning Ordinance shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine.
Increased civil fines will be imposed for repeated violations that occur within a six (6)
month period. The civil fine for a first offense is Fifty Dollars ($50.00). The civil fine
for the first repeat offense is Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) The civil fine for the
second repeat offense is Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). The City shall also be entitled
to equitable relief to abate the violations and to such other relief as may be available to
the City pursuant to Chapters 83 and 87 of the Michigan Revised Judicature Act, as
amended at the present time or in the future.