CODE OF ORDINANCES GREEN OAK CHARTER TOWNSHIP, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Charter Township Board 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of 
GREEN OAK CHARTER TOWNSHIP, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Susan Daugherty (Treasurer) 
Rollin Green (Trustee) 
George Kilpatrick (Trustee) 
William Palmer (Trustee) 
Michael Sedlak (Clerk) 
Rick Seymour (Trustee) 
Mark St. Charles (Supervisor) 
Charter Township Board 
____________ 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were ordinances adopted by the Township Board. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll and Brad Christy, Code Attorneys, and Leesa Hampton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mark St. Charles, Township Supervisor, Michael H. Sedlak, Township Clerk, Lesa Brookins, Planning and Zoning Coordinator, and Thomas J. Connelly, Township Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the Township readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the Township's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan. 
©  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan. 2005. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE [1] 
ORDINANCE NUMBER 01-2006 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR GREEN OAK CHARTER TOWNSHIP; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
GREEN OAK CHARTER TOWNSHIP ORDAINS: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Township adopted Resolution No. 07-2010 at a Regular meeting held on March 17, 2010, to correct a typographical error in Ordinance No. 01-2006, effective March 19, 2006. The corrected ordinance language has been reprinted here without further notation of the resolution. A copy of the resolution is on file in the office of the Township Clerk. 
 
Section 1. - Code adopted. 
The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 38, each inclusive, is adopted.  
Section 2. - Repealer—Generally. 
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 20, 2005, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.  
Section 3. - Same—Exception. 
The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.  
Section 4. - Penalty. 
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation that substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the * may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.  
Section 5. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.  
Section 6. - References in certain ordinances. 
Ordinances adopted after March 20, 2005, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.  
Section 7. - Publication. 
The Township Clerk shall cause this Ordinance, or a summary of this Ordinance, to be published in the manner required by law within 30 days after it has been duly adopted by the Township Board. The effective date shall be 30 days after the date of publication.  
Section 8. - Effective date. 
This Ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days from the date of publication of the Ordinance or a summary thereof. 
      Michael H. Sedlak, CMC 	
 	 
Township Clerk 
Adoption Date: 	February 15, 2006 	
Publication Date: 	February 19, 2006 	
Effective Date: 	March 19, 2006 	
 
CERTIFICATION 
I, Michael H. Sedlak, the Clerk for Green Oak Township, Livingston County, Michigan, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and complete copy of Ordinance Number 01-2006 adopted by the Green Oak Township Board at a regular meeting held on February 15, 2006. The following members of the Township Board were present at that meeting: Susan Daugherty, Rollin Green, George Kilpatrick, William Palmer, Michael Sedlak, Frederick Seymour and Mark St. Charles. 
The Ordinance was adopted by the Township Board with seven members of the Board voting in favor and no members voting in opposition. Notice of adoption and publication of the Ordinance was published in the Brighton Argus on Sunday February 19, 2006. The Ordinance shall be effective thirty (30) days after publication pursuant to 1945 P.A. 245, as amended. 
Michael H. Sedlak CMC, Township Clerk  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Green Oak Charter Township Code." 
State Law reference— Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 41.186.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the Township Board may be effectuated. Terms and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical terms, technical phrases and terms and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
Civil infraction. The term "civil infraction" means an act or omission prohibited by law which is not a crime and for which civil sanctions may be ordered. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either…or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly, but not in combination. 
Crime. The term "crime" means an act or omission forbidden by law that is not designated as a civil infraction and that is punishable upon conviction by any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Imprisonment. 
(2)  Fine not designated a civil fine. 
(3)  Other penal discipline. 
County. The term "county" means Livingston County, Michigan. 
Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a Township Officer or Township Employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
Gender. Terms of one gender include the other genders. 
Health Department and Department of Public Health. The terms "Health Department" and "Department of Public Health" mean the County Health Department. 
Health Officer. The term "Health Officer" means the director of the county health department. 
Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Includes and including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" means the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural shall include the singular. 
Oath, affirmation, sworn and affirmed. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" includes the term "affirmed." 
Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees. references to the term "officers," "departments," boards," "commissions" or employees" are to Township Officers, Township Departments, Township Boards, Township Commissions and Township employees. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person whose name appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing. 
Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, limited liability company, governmental unit and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
Public acts. The term "public acts" means the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 279 of 1909 is a reference to Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to the act as amended. 
Real property, real estate, land and lands. The terms "real property," "real estate," "land" and "lands" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
Street. The term "street" means any street, alley, highway, avenue, or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Swear. The term "swear" includes the term "affirm." 
Tenses. The present tense includea the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
Township. The term "Township" means Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan. 
Township Board, Township Board of Trustees, Board of Trustees and Board. The terms "Township Board," "Township Board of Trustees," "Board of Trustees" and "Board" means the governing body of Green Oak Charter Township. 
Week. The term "week" means a period of seven consecutive days. 
Written. The term "written" includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
State Law reference— Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Charter references, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
State Law reference— Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b.  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving provisions in it. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any rights, privileges, suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
State Law reference— Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4.  
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance: 
(1)  Annexing property into the Township or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the Township. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(5)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Providing for the duties of Township officers or employees not codified in this Code. 
(8)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits. 
(9)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(14)  Not codified in this Code that levies, imposes or otherwise relates to taxes, exemptions from taxes and fees in lieu of taxes. 
(15)  Pertaining to zoning map amendments. 
(16)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  The ordinances or portions of ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code.  
Sec. 1-6. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any Township ordinance on the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the Township relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u.  
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or unconstitutionality does not affect other provision or application of this Code that can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application, and, to this end, the provisions of this Code are severable. If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstance is held to be overbroad, that provision or application will nevertheless be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
State Law reference— Severability of state statutes, MCL 8.5.  
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows:… ." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan, is hereby created to read as follows:… ." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance.  
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Township. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the term "this ordinance" or similar terms to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code.  
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense or a violation by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  Any provision of this Code that is made or declared to be a misdemeanor, civil infraction or municipal civil infraction is a violation of this Code. 
(c)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a Township officer or Township employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(d)  Except as specifically provided otherwise by state law or Township ordinance, all violations of this Code are misdemeanors. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 93 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  The commission of any violation of this Code that is declared to be a civil infraction shall subject the violator to a civil penalty as provided by state law for municipal civil infractions or trailway municipal infractions, whichever is applicable, and as determined by Township ordinance. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise, or other administrative sanctions. 
(h)  Violations of this Code that are intermittent or ongoing are a nuisance per se and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement. 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 41.183; municipal civil infractions, MCL 600.8701 et seq.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(4); civil emergencies, ch. 8; fire department, § 12-31 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 20; utilities, ch. 34; sewer department, § 34-131 et seq.; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, § 38-41 et seq. 
State Law reference— Townships generally, MCL 41.1a et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TOWNSHIP BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Township Board, MCL 41.70 et seq.; Township meetings, MCL 41.8 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
 
Secs. 2-31—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for the duties of Township officers or employees not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(7); hearing officer, § 6-64; Fire Chief, § 12-33; duties of administrator for flood hazard protection, § 14-65; Director of the Sewer department, § 34-132; duties of the administrator, § 38-42. 
State Law reference— Township officers, MCL 41.61 et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-61—2-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER 
 
Sec. 2-71. - Office established. 
There is hereby established the office of Ordinance Enforcement Officer within the Township. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 1, 8-29-1991)  
Sec. 2-72. - Appointment. 
The Township Board is hereby authorized, by resolution, at any regular meeting of said Board, to appoint any person or persons to the office of Ordinance Enforcement Officer for such term or terms as may be designated in said resolution. Said Board may further, by resolution, remove any person from said office, in the discretion of said Board. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 1, 8-29-1991)  
Sec. 2-73. - Duties. 
The Ordinance Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to enforce all ordinances of the Township, whether heretofore or hereafter enacted, and whether such ordinances specifically designate a different official to enforce the same or do not designate any particular enforcing officer. Where a particular officer is so designated in any such ordinance, the authority of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer to enforce the same shall be in addition and supplementary to the authority granted to such other specific officer. The authority of such Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall also be in addition and supplementary to the authority vested by the Township Supervisor by state statute. The ordinance enforcing authority of the Township Supervisor and the other officers specifically designated in any Township ordinance shall continue in full force and effect and shall in no way be diminished or impaired by the terms of the within this division. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 1, 8-29-1991)  
Sec. 2-74. - Definitions. 
The ordinance enforcement duties herein authorized shall include, among others, the following: 
(1)  Investigation of ordinance violations; 
(2)  Serving appearance tickets as authorized under chapter 4 of the Public Act 175 of 1927, as amended; 
(3)  Appearance in court or other judicial proceedings to assist in the prosecution of ordinance violators; and 
(4)  Such other ordinance-enforcing duties as may be delegated by the Township Supervisor or assigned by the Township Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 1, 8-29-1991)  
Secs. 2-75—2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(8). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-91—2-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Eligible deferred compensation plan fund, MCL 129.94. 
 
Sec. 2-111. - Established. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by law, the Township hereby establishes a deferred compensation plan under section 457 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, whereby an officer or employee of the Township may be eligible to defer that individual's compensation, or a portion thereof, for the purpose of providing for the payment of such compensation in a different manner and at a different time thereby more effectively providing for such officer's or employee's retirement or death, and to defer federal and state income tax liability on such deferred compensation to the time of receipt by such officer or employee, or such individual's beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1, 8-2-2000)  
Sec. 2-112. - Eligibility. 
All Township officers and employees who perform services for the Township for 30 hours per week or more on a regular basis shall be eligible to participate in the deferred compensation plan established pursuant to this division and may elect to participate in the plan by entering into a written deferred compensation agreement in such form as the Township Board shall establish. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 2, 8-2-2000)  
Sec. 2-113. - Implementation, administration and interpretation. 
In order to implement the deferred compensation plan, the Township Board may enter into a contract with an insurance company authorized to do business with the state to provide for the administration of the deferred compensation plan. The Township Board shall have full power and authority to adopt rules and regulations for the administration of the deferred compensation plan and may, in its discretion, adopt the provisions of a contract entered into pursuant to this section as such rules and regulations. However, to the extent that any rules and regulations adopted, interpreted, altered, amended or revoked by the Township Board shall be inconsistent with the provisions of this division, the provisions of this division shall supersede such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 3, 8-2-2000)  
Sec. 2-114. - Tax ramifications. 
The deferred compensation plan and agreements provided for by this division are intended to comply with section 457 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, pertaining to deferred compensation plans of state and local governments. Any provision contained in this division which causes deferred compensation to be taxed prior to receipt thereof shall be deemed null and void. However, no guarantee is given to any officer or employee of the Township or to beneficiaries of such individuals as to the taxable status of any amounts of compensation deferred under the deferred compensation plan established pursuant to this division and the Township assumes no responsibility to any officer or employee of the Township or to any beneficiary of such individual in the event of any adverse tax determination. Any provision of the deferred compensation plan, or agreements made under this division, or any Township rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this division which are contrary to the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, or regulations adopted under such code, shall be deemed to be superseded by such Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, or regulations adopted under such code. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 4, 8-2-2000)  
Secs. 2-115—2-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-141—2-149. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-150. - Confirmation of creation of Planning Commission; powers and duties. 
(a)  The Township hereby confirms the creation of the Township Planning Commission, previously established by the Township Board in December 1968, with all the powers and duties provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act PA 110 of 2006, as amended, and the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (PA 33 of 2008, as amended). 
(b)  The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be selected in accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act. One member of the Township Board shall be a member of the Planning Commission. One Planning Commission member shall be a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1.A, eff. 4-4-2009)  
Sec. 2-151. - Membership; appointment; term. 
(a)  The membership of the Planning Commission shall be representative of important segments and geography of the Township to the extent practicable. 
(b)  One member of the Board of Trustees or the Township Supervisor, or both, may be appointed to the Planning Commission, as ex officio members. The term of the Township Supervisor shall correspond to his term as the Chief Elected Official. The term of a member of the Board of Trustees shall expire with his term on the Board of Trustees. 
(c)  The Township Supervisor shall appoint members of the Planning Commission, subject to approval by a majority vote of the members elected and serving on the Township Board of Trustees. 
(d)  The term of each Planning Commission member shall be for three years, except for members serving because of their membership on the Township Board, whose term shall be limited to the time they are members of the Township Board and/or the period stated in the resolution appointing them. Each member shall serve until his term shall expire. Members of the Planning Commission shall be qualified electors, except for one member who may be an individual who is not a qualified elector of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1.B, eff. 4-4-2009)  
Sec. 2-152. - Removal from office. 
(a)  The Township Board of Trustees may remove a member of the Planning Commission for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required herein constitutes malfeasance in office. 
(b)  Members of the Planning Commission who are absent from three consecutive Planning Commission meetings or four meetings held within the calendar year shall be subject to review and/or removal from the Planning Commission by action of the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1.C, eff. 4-4-2009)  
Sec. 2-153. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A member of the Planning Commission should only abstain from voting on a motion if he has a bona fide conflict of interest. A conflict of interest shall include issuing, deliberating on, voting on, or reviewing a case: 
(1)  Concerning him. 
(2)  Concerning work on land owned by him or which is adjacent to land owned by him. For purposes of this section, the term "adjacent property" includes any property falling within the notification radius for the application, as required by chapter 38 or the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act. 
(3)  Involving a corporation, company, partnership, or any other entity in which he or she is a part owner, or any other relationship where he or she may stand to have a financial gain or loss. 
(4)  Involving a relative or other family member. 
(5)  Involving which is an action which results in pecuniary benefit to him. 
(6)  Where his employee or employer is: 
a.  An applicant or agent for an applicant; or 
b.  Has a direct interest in the outcome. 
(7)  In which there is a reasonable appearance of a conflict of interest. An example of this includes a situation where the Planning Commission member is on the Board of Directors of an applicant association. 
(b)  The Planning Commission member disclosing the potential for a conflict of interest should state the nature of the potential conflict and whether he believes he could impartially consider the request before the Commission. Should the member disclosing the potential conflict of interest choose not to remove him from the dais, the remaining members of the Planning Commission shall evaluate the nature of the potential conflict and determine, by way of a vote, whether or not the member in question should be removed from the dais while the Commission discusses or deliberates on the request. In the event that the Planning Commissioner is removed from the dais due to a conflict of interest, either of his own volition or by a vote of the Planning Commission, that individual shall not participate in the discussion or deliberation in a role as a Planning Commissioner, and shall remove him from the dais. He shall not make any presentations to the Planning Commission as a representative of the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1.D, eff. 4-4-2009)  
Sec. 2-154. - Annual written report of activities. 
The Planning Commission, through the Township Board representative, shall make an annual written report of its activities to the Township Board of Trustees. The fiscal year of the Planning Commission shall be the same as the fiscal year of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1.E, eff. 4-4-2009)  
Sec. 2-155. - Preparation of capital improvements program. 
The Planning Commission shall be exempted from the requirement of PA 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3865, requiring annual preparation and submission to the Board of Trustees of a capital improvements program. The Township's Board of Trustees shall delegate the preparation of the capital improvements program, separate from or as a part of the annual budget, to the chief elected official or a nonelected administrative official, subject to final approval and adoption by the Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1.F, eff. 4-4-2009)  
Sec. 2-156. - Compensation. 
The Planning Commission member shall be compensated as provided by separate resolution of the Township Board of Trustees. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1.G, eff. 4-4-2009)  
Sec. 2-157. - Bylaws. 
The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business, and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1.H, eff. 4-4-2009)  
Sec. 2-158. - Assistance. 
The Planning Commission may be assisted by other professional or Township staff as needed, including the Planning and Zoning Administrator, Building Official, Ordinance Officer, Planning Consultant, Township Engineer, Township Attorney or other person or agency. 
(Ord. No. 02-2009, § 1.I, eff. 4-4-2009)  
DIVISION 3. - COMPENSATION COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-159. - Creation, title, and definitions. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 6aA of the Charter Township Act, MCL 42.6, the Green Oak Charter Township Board of Trustees establishes the Green Oak Charter Township Compensation Commission. 
(b)  This division shall be officially known and described as the "Green Oak Charter Township Compensation Commission Ordinance." 
(c)  Township shall mean Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan. 
(d)  Compensation commission shall mean the Green Oak Charter Township Compensation Commission. 
(e)  Township board shall mean the Green Oak Charter Township Board of Trustees. 
(f)  All other terms shall have the meaning ascribed by Section 6a of the Charter Township Act. 
(Ord. No. 04-2012, § 1, eff. 12-6-2012)  
Sec. 2-160. - Membership, term and appointment. 
(a)  Membership. The Compensation Commission shall consist of five members who are registered electors of the Township. Compensation Commission members shall be appointed by the Supervisor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the Township Board. An officer or employee of a government agency or unit or member of the immediate family of an officer or employee shall not be appointed to the Compensation Commission. 
(b)  Terms. The members first appointed to the Compensation Commission shall have the following terms: 
(1)  One member shall have a one-year term. 
(2)  One member shall have a two-year term. 
(3)  One member shall have a three-year term. 
(4)  One member shall have a four-year term. 
(5)  One member shall have a five-year term. 
Thereafter, and with the expiration of each term, a subsequently appointed member shall be appointed for a five-year term. 
(c)  Timing of Appointment. The first appointed members shall be appointed within 60 days of the effective date of this division. Thereafter, subsequent members shall be appointed within 60 days after a term expires or a vacancy occurs. 
(d)  Vacancy. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of an unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 04-2012, § 2, eff. 12-6-2012)  
Sec. 2-161. - Compensation; officers. 
The members of the Compensation Commission shall not receive compensation, but shall be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 04-2012, § 5, eff. 12-6-2012)  
Sec. 2-162. - Meetings. 
(a)  Number of meetings. The Compensation Commission shall meet for not more than fifteen (15) session days in each odd numbered year and shall make its determination within forty-five (45) calendar days of its first meeting. As used in this section, "session days" means calendar days on which the Compensation Commission meets and a quorum is present. 
(b)  Quorum. A majority of the members of the Compensation Commission constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the Compensation Commission. The Compensation Commission shall not take action or make a determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the Compensation Commission. 
(c)  Compliance with OMA. The business that the Compensation Commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the Compensation Commission held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, 1976 PA 267 ("OMA"). Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by the OMA. 
(d)  Chairperson. The Compensation Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. 
(Ord. No. 04-2012, § 6, eff. 12-6-2012)  
Sec. 2-163. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Salary determination. The Compensation Commission shall determine the salary of each member of the Township Board, which shall be effective at the beginning of the next fiscal year. The determination of the Compensation Commission shall be the salary unless the Township Board by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the Township Board rejects the determination. The determination of the Compensation Commission shall be effective 30 days following filing of the determination with the Township Clerk unless rejected by the Township Board. If the determination is rejected, the existing salary shall prevail. 
(b)  Other Duties. The Compensation Commission may exercise any other powers or duties permitted by law and delegated by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 04-2012, § 7, eff. 12-6-2012)  
Secs. 2-164—2-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(3); schedule of civil fines, § 20-37; sewer service fees and charges, § 34-181 et seq.; utility services rates and charges, § 34-441 et seq. 
State Law reference— Revised municipal finance act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; local government fiscal responsibility act, MCL 141.1201 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-171. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the Township shall be from July 1 to June 30 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 65, § 1, 2-14-1979) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year authorized, MCL 41.72.  
Secs. 2-172—2-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY SERVICE COST RECOVERY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 12. 
State Law reference— Police and fire protection, MCL 41.801 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-191. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Assessable costs means the costs for services incurred by the Township in connection with a response to an extraordinary emergency situation, including, but not limited to, the actual labor and material costs of the Township (including, without limitation, employee wages, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of transportation and costs of material disposal, whether or not the services are provided by the Township or a third party of the Township); service charges and interest; attorneys' fees; litigation costs; court costs; and charges, fines or penalties to the Township imposed by any court or other municipal, state or federal governmental entities. 
Bomb threat means the verbal or written threat of a bomb or other explosive device, which, if discharged as threatened, would violate a federal, state or local law. 
Cost recovery committee means a committee made up of the Supervisor, Clerk, Treasurer, Police Chief and Fire Department Chief. 
Emergency assistance means emergency medical, public safety, police, fire or civil defense services. 
Emergency situation means a situation requiring emergency assistance, rendered in response to: 
(1)  Any fire department or police department response started or caused by a property owner or person, such as but not limited to, a controlled brush fire or other open burning, which becomes uncontrolled, any fires purposely or knowingly started in any building, dwelling, apartment structure, or any other structure, or any motor vehicles, when said fire has been started for the specific purpose of and with the intent of causing damage to or destruction of any such building, dwelling, apartment structure or vehicle. 
(2)  Any fire or police department response to an incident caused by a criminal act; i.e., operating under the influence (OUI), intentional false alarm, arson, bomb threat, etc. 
(3)  Any fire or police department response to a fire in a structure causing a loss, ignited by accidental means, shall be subject to cost recovery for damage or destruction to fire or police department equipment beyond normal wear and tear, and for all expenses incurred and paid to a third party. 
(4)  Any fire or police department response for hazardous conditions or for a hazardous material incident or emergency or release. Charges in such case shall be made to the person responsible for the release, whether or not the release occurs on the property of the responsible party. The responsibility for the release includes releases caused by the person as well as any release from any vehicle, building, or other instrumentality, owned, occupied or utilized by the person, regardless of fault. 
(5)  Any fire or police department response to a traffic or vehicular accident, including but not limited to the control of fires or spills, assistance to injured persons or ambulance crews, or extraction of persons from vehicles. 
(6)  Any fire or police department response for hazardous conditions. 
(7)  Any Township response to a false alarm due to a system malfunction or maintenance issue at a property in excess of three such alarms in any consecutive one year period, commencing anew on January 1 of each calendar year. 
(8)  The provision of fire and police department equipment or personnel for the purpose of providing stand-by fire, rescue, or emergency medical services necessary to support a non-emergency event/situation or special event hosted by a for-profit organization. When such services are requested by a non-profit organization, the Township Board will act upon a recommendation by the fire or police chief to charge for services. 
(9)  Failure to comply with requests made by the fire or police departments to abate hazards as specified in the fire safety code as adopted by the State of Michigan. If compliance is not made within three inspection visits over a 30-day period, the fire chief or police chief will notify the Township, who will then charge the person(s) responsible for the property the appropriate fees as provided by resolution of the Township Board. 
(10)  Any fire or police department response to a threat of harm to oneself or others. 
(11)  Any fire or police department response to a structure demolition. 
(12)  Any fire or police department response to a utility line failure. 
Excessive requests for emergency assistance means any request for emergency assistance made to a particular location or premises if such location or premises has requested emergency assistance more than five times in the preceding 30 days. 
False alarm means any automated or manual device designed to request or summon emergency assistance, which device is activated, intentionally or otherwise, in the absence of an actual need for emergency assistance. A determination that there was no actual need for emergency assistance shall be made by the most senior person responding to a false alarm; provided, however, a false alarm shall not be deemed to have occurred if it: 
(1)  Was caused by an act of God; 
(2)  Originates from a motor vehicle alarm system; 
(3)  Has not occurred more frequently than three times in a calendar month or four times in a calendar year, commencing anew on January 1 of each calendar year. 
Fire and/or Police Department response means coming to the scene of a fire or hazardous materials incident, traffic or vehicular accident, or hazardous condition, or any investigation in connection with a fire, hazardous materials incident, accident or hazardous condition. 
Hazardous condition means any condition creating a concern for the physical welfare of persons, property or environment in the immediate area of the situation (including downed utility lines or gas leaks not in an occupied structure), requiring a fire or police department response. 
Hazardous material means the elements, substances, wastes or byproducts, including, but not limited to, combustible liquids, flammable gases, explosive flammables, poisons, organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophorics, unstable or reactive matter, water reactive matter, petroleum products, antifreeze, polychlorinated biphenyls and asbestos, which are or are potentially harmful to the environment, or human or animal life, or which pose an unreasonable or imminent risk to life, health or safety of persons or property, or to the essential balance of the environment as determined by the Fire Chief or the senior official of the Township in charge at the scene. 
Hazardous material incident or emergency means any occurrence, incident, activity, accident or emergency where a release of hazardous materials has occurred, or is reasonably imminent to occur, and where the Fire Chief or his designee has declared such activity, accident or emergency a hazardous material incident or emergency. 
Illegal fire means a fire set, or determined to have been set, in violation of any federal, state or local law and shall include an arson fire and a fire set in violation of a no burning ban or order. An illegal fire does not include an unintentional fire or a fire caused by an act of God, such as a lightning storm. 
Investigation means gathering of evidence or data in connection with arson investigations, or special investigations required to determine the responsibility of persons for fires, spills, accidents or hazardous conditions. Investigations do not include the normal investigation made to determine cause and origin of a fire as required by the State of Michigan. 
Person means a natural person, corporation, partnership or other entity with legal capacity. 
Release means any leaking, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment. 
Responsible party means any individual, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, governmental entity, any other legal entity, or any owner, tenant, occupant or party, including the estate, heirs, successors and assigns of such party, who is in control of real or personal property from which, onto which or related to which there occurs an extraordinary emergency situation. 
Structure demolition means the tearing down of a structure damaged by fire or explosion, which must, in the opinion of the Fire Chief or his designee, be properly demolished following such fire or explosion in order to protect public safety, or be removed in accordance with any dangerous structures ordinance adopted by the Township Board. 
Threat of harm to oneself and others means the verbal or written threat of harm to oneself, another or another's property, which, if carried out, would be a violation of any federal, state or local law. 
Utility line failure means the disabling of any transmission or service line, electric conduit, pipeline, wire, etc., used to provide, collect or transport electricity, natural gas, communication or electronic signals, including, but not limited to, telephone, computer, cable television and stereo signals, and water, sanitary or storm sewage lines, if the owner of such utility line does not respond within one hour to the request to repair or correct such a failure. 
(Ord. No. 100A, § 2, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 05-2015, §§ 1, 2, eff. 8-30-2015) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-192. - Purpose. 
In order to protect the Township from excessive expense resulting from the utilization of Township resources in response to extraordinary emergency situations, this division authorizes the imposition of charges to recover actual costs incurred by the Township in responding to such situations. 
(Ord. No. 100A, § 1, 4-17-2002)  
Sec. 2-193. - Authorization and procedure. 
(a)  The Township may recover all assessable costs in connection with emergency situations from any or all responsible parties, jointly or separately. Persons responsible for charges include: 
(1)  Persons who caused the condition. 
(2)  Property owners or occupants of property upon which the conditions exist. 
(3)  Owners of vehicles from which occupants are extricated, owners or renters of premises from which a person or persons are rescued, and owners of vehicles receiving fire extinguishment or spill abatement shall be deemed as benefiting from the services provided. 
(4)  Owners or lessees of instrumentalities involved in the condition, such as vehicle owners, utility, electric or gas companies. 
(5)  Insurers or guarantors for persons responsible or benefited. 
(6)  Exemption: A person who is a taxpayer of the Township at the time of an incident shall not be responsible for any charges imposed under this ordinance unless those acts are considered deliberate, criminal or deemed negligent. Green Oak Charter Township property owners pay a tax to support their fire and police departments, therefore the Township will accept payment from their insurance company for any services provided, other than deliberate, criminal or negligent acts. These insurance company payments, whatever their policy provides, shall be considered "payment in full." 
(7)  Any and all costs associated with false alarms shall be assessed in the manner provided in section 2-194 of the Code of Ordinances. For all other emergency situations, the cost recovery committee shall determine the total assessable costs and shall, in consultation with other Township personnel involved in responding to the emergency situation, determine whether to assess all or part of such costs against any of the responsible parties. In making such a determination, the following will be considered: 
a.  The total assessable cost; 
b.  The risk that the emergency situation imposed on the Township residents and their property; 
c.  Whether there was any injury or damage to a person or property; 
d.  Whether the emergency situation required evacuation; 
e.  The extent the emergency situation required unusual or extraordinary use of Township personnel and equipment; 
f.  Whether there was any damage to the environment. 
(b)  After consideration of the factors listed in subsection (a) of this section, the cost recovery committee may allocate assessable costs among responsible parties, including allocating all or some of such costs jointly and severally against all parties, rather than one responsible party, regardless of whether a responsible party has legal liability for such costs or is legally at fault. If the cost recovery committee determines not to assess all or part of assessable costs against a responsible party, such determination shall not in any way limit or extinguish the liability of the responsible party to other parties. 
(c)  The Township Board shall adopt a resolution that establishes a general fee schedule or fee guidelines, which may be associated with the Township's costs in providing emergency assistance. Such schedule or guidelines may include, among other things, the actual labor and material costs of the Township, such as employee wages, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of equipment operation, costs of transportation and costs of material disposal, whether or not the services are provided by the Township or a third party of the Township; service charges and interest; attorneys' fees; litigation costs; court costs; and any charges, fines or penalties to the Township imposed by any court or other municipal, state or federal governmental entities. The cost recovery committee shall use the fee schedule or fee guidelines in consultation with Township personnel in making the cost assessment determination. All funds collected as a result of this ordinance shall be used for the normal operations and maintenance of the fire and police departments and their equipment. However, the Township will first be reimbursed for any expenses incurred directly by the Township. 
(Ord. No. 100A, § 3, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 05-2015, §§ 3, 4, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 2-194. - False alarms. 
(a)  Regulations. 
(1)  No person shall install or operate an alarm system in the Township unless the alarm system is installed by a licensed alarm system contractor, or the owner or occupant of a residence in his own residence. Life line alarms are included within these regulations. 
(2)  Any installed audible alarm must be equipped with a system reset after a duration of not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(3)  Any alarm company shall diligently attempt to make telephone contact with the alarm site whenever an alarm is activated. Attempted verification of an emergency and the type of emergency shall occur prior to the alarm company notifying the Township police or fire department. 
(4)  A company or any other person which monitors an alarm system in the Township shall register such alarm system on forms provided by the Township and provide the following information to the Township police and fire departments: 
a.  The type of alarm system; 
b.  The location of the alarm system in the building or other structure; 
c.  The easiest and safest method of access to the alarm system; 
d.  The name of the person responsible for monitoring the alarm system; and 
e.  A local telephone number or a toll free number at which the alarm system representative can be reached 24 hours a day. If the telephone number changes, the representative shall immediately notify the Township police and fire departments, and the alarm users shall keep all registration information current if changes are made by the users. 
Should any person operating an alarm system within the Township fail to register such system with the Township, and the Township is required to render emergency assistance in response to a third false alarm of such system, the false alarm fees set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall be doubled. 
(5)  No person shall sell, install, operate, adjust or arrange for a contract to provide a device which, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by any other means, initiates the automatic calling or dialing of, or makes a connection directly to, the Township police or fire department, without first receiving written permission from such police and fire departments. 
(b)  Fees. The Township Board shall adopt a resolution that establishes fees for false alarms that occur more frequently than three times in a calendar month, commencing anew on the first of every month, or four times in a calendar year, commencing anew on January 1 of each calendar year. Five chargeable false alarms in a 12-month period will result in no waiver of the fees until a period of 12 months passes without a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 100A, § 4, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 05-2015, § 5, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 2-195. - Billing and collection of assessable costs. 
After determining to assess costs against a responsible party, the Township Treasurer shall mail an itemized invoice to the responsible party at the last known address of such party. Such invoice shall be due and payable within 30 days after the date of mailing, and any amounts unpaid, including any previously imposed late payment fees remaining unpaid, after such date shall bear a late payment fee equal to one percent per month. If the responsible party appeals assessable costs pursuant to section 2-196, such costs, if upheld, in whole or in part, shall be due and payable 30 days from the date of determination of the appeal and any late payment fees shall apply thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 100A, § 5, 4-17-2002)  
Sec. 2-196. - Procedure for appealing assessable costs. 
Any responsible party who receives an invoice for assessable costs shall have the opportunity to meet with the cost recovery committee to request modification of the assessable costs. The responsible party shall request in writing such a meeting within seven calendar days of the date of the invoice assessing the assessable costs. If, after the meeting with the cost recovery committee, the responsible party is still not satisfied, he may request an opportunity to appear before the Township Board to further request a modification of the assessable costs. A responsible party who desires to appear before the Township Board must first meet with the cost recovery committee, as provided in this section, and shall file a written request to appear before the Township Board with the Township Clerk within seven calendar days of the meeting with the cost recovery committee. Upon receipt of such request, the Township Clerk will place the responsible party on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled Township Board meeting, which meeting is at least 14 calendar days after the date on which the responsible party files the request to appear. The filed request to appear shall specifically identify and explain all reasons why the responsible party believes the assessed costs should be modified. Any reasoning, basis or argument for modification of assessable costs not set forth in the request to appear shall be deemed waived by the responsible party. Failure to timely file a written request to appear shall constitute a waiver of the responsible party's right to appear before the Township Board and shall further constitute the responsible party's agreement to pay the assessable costs invoiced. Once the responsible party has been given the opportunity to appear before the Township Board, the Township Board shall promptly determine whether to confirm, modify or void the payment of the assessable costs invoiced. 
(Ord. No. 100A, § 6, 4-17-2002)  
Sec. 2-197. - Assessable costs constituting a lien upon property. 
Any assessable costs which have been assessed, but not paid when due, including any late payment fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real property of the responsible party in the Township, from which, upon which or related to which an extraordinary emergency situation occurred. Such a lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by state statute for general law Township real property and shall include accrued interest and penalties. The Township Treasurer shall verify on March 1 of each year and certify to the Township Assessor the fact that such assessable costs are delinquent and unpaid. The Township Assessor shall then enter the delinquent amount on the next general ad valorem tax roll as a charge against the affected property, and the lien thereon shall be enforced in the same manner as provided and allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid real property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 100A, § 7, 4-17-2002)  
Sec. 2-198. - Other remedies. 
The recovery of charges and expenses imposed under this division shall not relieve or limit the liability of any person under any other local ordinance, or state or federal law, rule or regulation. The remedies provided herein shall be in addition to those remedies provided by the Hazardous Material Expense Recovery Ordinance, and nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the Township from also proceeding under the Hazardous Material Expense Recovery Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 100A, § 8, 4-17-2002; Ord. No. 05-2015, § 6, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 2-199. - Limitation of liability. 
The recovery of assessable costs pursuant to this division does not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 100A, § 9, 4-17-2002)  
DIVISION 3. - INCARCERATED PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR HEALTHCARE COSTS 
 
Sec. 2-200. - Findings and purpose. 
The Township has determined that it is in the best interests of the Township to protect its financial resources through requiring incarcerated individuals to pay all health care costs incurred while the individual is in custody of the Green Oak Charter Township Police Department. The Township finds that this chapter is necessary to protect the Township from excessive expense resulting from the utilization of Township resources and funds in response to health care costs of an individual in custody. 
(Ord. No. 05-2015, § 7, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 2-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Custody shall mean that term as defined in 72 FR 47405 and in accordance with how custody is defined by federal courts for the purposes of the habeas corpus protections of the constitution. For example, the term "custody" is not limited solely to physical confinement. Individuals on parole, probation, bail, or supervised release may be "in custody." "Custody" includes but is not limited to individuals who are: (1) under arrest, (2) incarcerated, (3) imprisoned, (4) escaped from confinement, (5) under supervised release, (6) on medical furlough, (7) residing in a mental health facility or halfway house, (8) living under home detention, (9) or confined completely or partially in any way under a state or local penal statute ordinance or rule. An individual in custody is referred to herein as an "incarcerated person." 
Health care costs shall mean and shall include any and all costs of medical services, including but not limited, costs related to transportation to and from a medical facility, doctor's charges, hospital charges, charges for medical testing and exams, charges for medication, and charges for any treatment deemed necessary by an incarcerated person's treating physician. 
Police department shall mean the Green Oak Charter Township Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 05-2015, § 7, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 2-202. - Incarcerated persons responsible for health care costs incurred while in custody. 
Any person in the custody of the police department shall be solely responsible for the payment of any and all health care costs rendered to or received by that person during the course of his or her confinement or while they are in custody with the police department. The incarcerated person shall be required to reimburse the Township in full for any fees or charges incurred for such health care costs, if not paid directly to the medical facility, ambulance provider, or medical provider by the incarcerated person or his or her insurance carrier. Under no circumstances will the Township be responsible for the cost of any health care provided to an incarcerated person. 
(Ord. No. 05-2015, § 7, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 2-203. - Remedies. 
The Township shall be entitled to pursue any remedy or may institute any appropriate court action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction as permitted by law to collect health care costs from the individual responsible for the health care costs under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-2015, § 7, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 2-204. - No limitation of liability. 
The recovery of health care costs pursuant hereto does not limit the liability of the individual responsible for the same under applicable local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 05-2015, § 7, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16 of the 1967 Code was repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 03-2006, effective 12-8-2006, and the contents of the chapter replaced by Ord. No. 04-2006, effective 12-8-2006. 
State Law reference— Wildlife conservation, MCL 324.40101 et seq.; endangered species protection, MCL 324.36501 et seq.; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq.; local authority to adopt animal control ordinances, MCL 287.290. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-2006, § 1, effective Dec. 8, 2006, repealed § 4-1, which pertained to ordinances relative to dogs being saved from repeal by the ordinance adopting this Code. 
 
Secs. 4-1—4-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
 
Sec. 4-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Private property means property of any person or persons, firm, association, partnership, LLC or corporation, other than property of the dog owner or dog owner's family, as family is defined in section 38-1 of the Green Oak Charter Township Zoning Ordinance. 
Public property means property owned by the Township, county or state, including but not limited to, recreation areas, playing fields, school grounds, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, walkways, streets and roads. 
Running at large means and includes any dog which shall be loose on the streets or highways of the Township and shall also include a dog entering upon a street or other public place. A dog shall not be considered to be running at large when accompanied by his owner or authorized agent and held properly in leash, or when engaged in lawful hunting, accompanied by his owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2(4-1), 11-1-2006; Ord. No. 04-2011, § 1, eff. 11-25-2011)  
Sec. 4-22. - Running at large. 
(a)  No person keeping, possessing, or harboring any dog shall permit such dog to run at large at any time. 
(b)  Any dog found at large in violation of this section may be caught and taken in charge by any police officer of the Township or any person designated by the Township Board for such work. Any police officer of the Township or any person designated by the Township Board who takes charge of any dog at large, must make a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of such dog listed on its tags. Any dog running at large that is taken in charge that has no identifying tags or where the person in charge cannot identify an owner of the dog, may turn such dog over to the County Animal Control Official. Any dog running at large in violation of this section, which the officers, charged with the enforcement hereof, determine that the dog poses a threat to the health, welfare and or safety of the public, may be destroyed by such officers. 
(c)  Any dog apprehended by a police or other officer shall be confined in the County Animal Control Center, and shall be thereafter disposed of in accordance with the rules and regulations of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2(4-2), 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 4-23. - Licensing and control of dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own any dog six months old or over, unless the dog is licensed in accordance with Act No. 339 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1919 (MCL 287.261 et seq.) as amended, or to own any dog six months old or over that does not at all times wear a collar with a tag approved by the Director of Agriculture, in accordance with Act No. 339 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1919 (MCL 287.261 et seq.) as amended, except when engaged in lawful hunting accompanied by its owner or custodian; or for any owner of any female dog to permit the female dog to go beyond the premises of such owner when she is in heat, unless the female dog is held properly in leash; or for any person except the owner or authorized agent, to remove any license tag from a dog; or for any owner to allow any dog, except working dogs such as leader dogs, guard dogs, farm dogs, hunting dogs, and other such dogs, when accompanied by their owner or his authorized agent, while actively engaged in activities for which such dogs are trained, to stray unless held properly in leash. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2(4-3), 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 4-24. - Barking dog. 
No person shall harbor or keep any dog which by loud and frequent or habitual barking, yelping, or howling, shall cause serious annoyance to the neighborhood or the people passing to and fro upon the streets. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2(4-4), 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 4-25. - Determination of harboring or keeping. 
Any person allowing any dog habitually to remain and be lodged or fed within his house, store, building, enclosure, or premises, shall be considered to be harboring or keeping the same within the meaning of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2(4-5), 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 4-26. - Limitation on number. 
No person shall harbor or keep more than three dogs over three months of age upon any one premises within the Township unless such person is lawfully operating a kennel duly licensed in accordance with Act No. 339 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1919 (MCL 287.270 et seq.) as amended, and in conformance with all other ordinances and regulations of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2(4-6), 11-1-2006)  
Sec. 4-27. - Defecation on public and private property. 
If any dog defecates upon any public property, or the private property of another, the owner of the dog shall immediately remove, or cause to be removed, from the property any and all feces deposited by the dog. This section shall not apply to guide dogs for the visually disabled or aid dogs for the physically disabled. 
(Ord. No. 04-2011, § 2, eff. 11-25-2011)  
Sec. 4-28. - Sanctions for violations. 
(a)  Any person or other entity who violates any of the provisions of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a civil fine plus costs. 
(b)  Costs shall include all direct and indirect expenses to which the Township has been put in connection with the violation. 
(c)  A violation of this article shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies and judicial orders as are authorized under section 1-11. Each day a violation of this article continues to exist constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 04-2011, § 3, eff. 11-25-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-2011, § 3, effective Nov. 25, 2011, redesignated the former § 4-27 as a new § 4-28 to read as set out herein. The former § 4-27 derived from Ord. No. 2006-04, § 2(4-7), adopted Nov. 1, 2006.  
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Single state construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 6-1—6-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODE  
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-11—6-20. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. SINGLE STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— The Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-21. - Enforcing agency designated. 
Pursuant to the provisions of section 8a of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1508a), the building official of the Township is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the Township under such act. The Township assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of such act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 96, § 1, 6-2-1999)  
Sec. 6-22. - Permit fees. 
Permit fees for the enforcement of the single state construction code shall be adopted by resolution of the Township Board from time-to-time.  
Sec. 6-23. - Construction board of appeals. 
A Township Construction Board of Appeals is created and shall consist of seven members appointed by the Township Board for two-year terms. The construction board of appeals is granted the powers and duties set forth in Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
State Law reference— State construction board of appeals, MCL 125.1514.  
Sec. 6-24. - Building permit performance bonds. 
(a)  Upon application for any building permit, the applicant shall deposit with his application a cash building permit performance bond. The bond shall be set from time-to-time by resolution. The condition of the bond shall be that the applicant shall complete the work called for by his application during the life of the permit and any extension thereof, and, in addition, shall remove, and cause to be removed, all debris, rubbish and trash from the building site, and establish ditches and culverts in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the County Road Commission. 
(b)  The building permit performance bond, or appropriate part thereof, shall be returned to the applicant after final inspection and approval by the building inspector and issuance of a certificate of occupancy, plus the necessary length of time which is required for processing by the Township. 
(c)  The building permit performance bond shall be forfeited and deposited in the general fund of the Township when work is commenced under any building permit and the conditions of the building permit performance bond as set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are not fulfilled during the life of the permit or any extension thereof. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 5, 11-13-1973; Ord. No. 45B, § 1, 12-10-1974) 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-141 et seq.  
Secs. 6-25—6-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Supplementary regulations regarding unsafe buildings, § 38-189. 
State Law reference— Dangerous buildings, MCL 125.538 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous building means any building or structure, residential or otherwise, that has one or more of the following defects or is in one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  A door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the Township fire code or building code. 
(2)  A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and does not meet the minimum requirements of the housing law of the state, Public Act No. 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq.), or the Township building code for a new building or structure, purpose or location. 
(3)  A part of the building or structure is likely to fail, become detached or dislodged, or collapse, and injure persons or damage property. 
(4)  A portion of the building or structure has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or structure have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new construction by the housing law of the state, Public Act No. 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq.), or the Township building code. 
(5)  The building or structure, or part thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way. 
(6)  The building or structure, or part thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used. 
(7)  The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind or flood, or is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for causing a nuisance or committing an unlawful or immoral act. 
(8)  A building or structure used, or intended to be used, for dwelling purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the Health Officer of the Township or County determines is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to injure the health, safety or general welfare of people living in the dwelling. 
(9)  A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and open at a door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(10)  A building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale, lease or rent with a real estate broker licensed under article 25 of the occupational code, Public Act No. 299 of 1930 (MCL 339.2501 et seq.), or is not publicly offered for sale by the owner. Such definition does not apply to either of the following: 
a.  A building or structure as to which the owner or agent does both of the following: 
1.  Notifies the Township Police Department that the building or structure will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The notice shall be given by the owner or agent not more than 30 days after the building or structure becomes unoccupied. 
2.  Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and adjoining grounds in accordance with this article and the housing law of the state, Public Act No. 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq.), or the Township building code. 
b.  A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies the Township Police Department that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or more each year. An owner who has given the notice prescribed by this subsection shall notify the Township Police Department not more than 30 days after the dwelling no longer qualifies for such exception. As used in this subsection, the term "secondary dwelling" means a dwelling, such as a vacation home, hunting cabin or summer home, that is occupied by the owner or a member of his family during part of the year. 
Enforcing agency means the Township, through the Township Building Official and/or such other official or agency as may be designated by the Township Board to enforce this article. 
Township building code means the building code administered and enforced in the Township pursuant to the State Construction Code Commission Act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 107, § II, 8-21-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-62. - Keeping and maintaining. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or his agent to keep or maintain any building, or part thereof, which is a dangerous building. 
(Ord. No. 107, § III, 8-21-2002)  
Sec. 6-63. - Notice. 
(a)  Issuance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building, the enforcing agency shall issue a notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building. 
(b)  Applicability. The notice shall be served on each owner of, or party in interest in, the building or structure in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records of the Township. 
(c)  Contents. The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous building and state that the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity at the hearing to show cause why the hearing officer should not order the building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained. 
(d)  Service. The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom the notice is directed, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records. If a notice is served upon a person by certified mail, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. The notice shall be served upon the owner or party in interest at least ten days before the date of the hearing included in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 107, § IV, 8-21-2002)  
Sec. 6-64. - Hearing officer. 
(a)  Appointment. The hearing officer shall be appointed by the Township Supervisor to serve at his pleasure. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters, including, but not limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector or member of a community housing organization. An employee of the enforcing agency shall not be appointed as a hearing officer. 
(b)  Filing of notice. The enforcing agency shall file a copy of the notice of the dangerous condition of any building with the hearing officer. 
(c)  Hearing testimony and decision. At a hearing prescribed by this article, the hearing officer shall take testimony and may receive evidence of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property and any interested party. Not more than five days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building or structure demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained. 
(d)  Order. If the hearing officer determines that the building or structure should be demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained, he shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply with the order. If the building is a dangerous building as defined under subsection (10) of the definition of the term "dangerous building" in section 6-61, the order may require the owner or agent to maintain the exterior of the building and adjoining grounds owned by the owner of the building, including, but not limited to, the maintenance of lawns, trees and shrubs. 
(e)  Noncompliance with order; request to enforce order. If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear, or neglects or refuses to comply with the order issued under subsection (d) of this section, the hearing officer shall file a report of the findings and a copy of the order with the Township Board not more than five days after noncompliance by the owner and request that necessary action be taken to enforce the order. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 6-62(d). 
(Ord. No. 107, § V, 8-21-2002) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 6-65. - Enforcement hearing. 
The Township Board shall fix a date, not less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed in section 6-64(c), for a hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice to the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 6-63(d) of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the order should not be enforced. The Township Board shall either approve, disapprove or modify the order. If the Township Board approves or modifies the order, the Township Board shall take all necessary action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner, agent or lessee shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the hearing under this section. In the case of an order of demolition, if the Township Board determines that the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood or other natural disaster and the cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state equalized value of the building or structure, the owner, agent or lessee shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of the hearing under this section. 
(Ord. No. 107, § VI, 8-21-2002)  
Sec. 6-66. - Implementation and enforcement of remedies. 
(a)  Order implementation. In the event of the failure or refusal of the owner or party in interest to comply with the decision of the Township Board, the Township Board may, in its discretion, contract for the demolition, making safe or maintaining the exterior of the building or structure, or grounds adjoining the building or structure. 
(b)  Reimbursement of costs. The costs of the demolition, making the building safe or maintaining the exterior of the building or structure, or grounds adjoining the building or structure, incurred by the Township to bring the property into conformance with this article, shall be reimbursed to the Township by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records. 
(c)  Notice of costs. The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the Township Assessor of the amount of the costs of the demolition, making the building safe or maintaining the exterior of the building or structure, or grounds adjoining the building or structure, by first class mail at the address shown on the Township records. 
(d)  Lien for unpaid costs. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the costs within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the costs, in the case of a single-family or two-family dwelling, the Township shall have a lien for the costs incurred by the Township to bring the property into conformance with this article. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided by law. A lien provided for in this subsection does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the costs shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax act, Public Act No. 206 of 1892 (MCL 211.1 et seq.). 
(e)  Court judgment for unpaid costs. In addition to other remedies under this article, the Township may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of the demolition, making the building safe or maintaining the exterior of the building or structure, or grounds adjoining the building or structure. In the case of a single-family or two-family dwelling, the Township shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to this subsection. The lien provided for in this subsection shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed and recorded as provided for by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. 
(f)  Enforcement of judgment. A judgment in an action brought pursuant to subsection (e) of this section may be enforced against assets of the owner, other than the building or structure. 
(g)  Lien for judgment amount. In the case of a single-family or two-family dwelling, the Township shall have a lien for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to subsection (e) of this section against the owner's interest in all real property located in the state that is owned, in whole or in part, by the owner of the building or structure against which the judgment is obtained. A lien provided for in this subsection does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law, and the lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. 
(Ord. No. 107, § VII, 8-21-2002)  
Sec. 6-67. - Appeals. 
An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the Township Board under section 6-65 may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 107, § IX, 8-21-2002)  
Secs. 6-68—6-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-2012, § 3, effective Jan. 4, 2013, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 6-101, 6-102, and the ordinance enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 83, § 1, adopted Aug. 18, 1973; and Ord. No. 83, § 3, adopted Aug. 13, 1993. 
 
Sec. 6-101. - International Property Maintenance Code adoption. 
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Township Clerk, being marked and designated as the 2009 International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of Green Oak Charter Township for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Green Oak Charter Township clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 6-102 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-2012, eff. 1-4-2013)  
Sec. 6-102. - Additions, insertions and changes to the International Property Maintenance Code. 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of Green Oak Charter Township, herein referred to as "this Code". 
Section 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this Code shall be as adopted by resolution of the Township Board. 
Section 106.4 Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted as a municipal civil infraction. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed by the township building official and/or his designee to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine as prescribed by Chapter 20, Article II, Section 20-37. 
Section 302.4 Weeds. For provisions regarding weeds and grasses see Chapter 10, Article V, Sections 10-141 and 10-142 of the Green Oak Charter Township Code of Ordinances. 
Section 304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to November 1, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screen of not less than 16 mesh per inch (15 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed. 
Section 602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the Michigan Plumbing Code. 
2.  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 
Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from September 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(Ord. No. 05-2012, eff. 1-4-2013)  
Secs. 6-103—6-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION 
 
Sec. 6-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Property identification number means the address or a lot number established for any developed property within the Township by a recognized authority. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 2.00, 4-27-1977) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-132. - Purpose. 
The Township Board hereby determines that to provide proper police, fire, health, welfare and emergency services, public or private, to residences and businesses, it is necessary to provide for property identification numbers to be visible from the public roadways adjacent to residences and businesses in the Township. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 1.00, 4-27-1977)  
Sec. 6-133. - Number required. 
All property upon which houses, dwellings, buildings, businesses and other such structures are constructed within the Township shall have a property identification number which shall be posted in a fashion so that it is a minimum of four inches in height for residential structures, and a minimum of six inches in height for commercial structures. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 3.00, 4-27-1977)  
Sec. 6-134. - Existing structures. 
All existing developed property must be identified as required in section 6-133 within 60 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 4.00, 4-27-1977)  
Sec. 6-135. - New construction. 
All applicants for building permits for new construction of residences or businesses, or other such structures shall be required to submit a plan showing the proposed location of their property identification number before any building permit will be issued and compliance with this article shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 5.00, 4-27-1977)  
Sec. 6-136. - Responsibility for compliance. 
The owner, occupant, lessee or other person in control of any developed property shall be responsible for the compliance of such property with this article. 
(Ord. No. 59, § 6.00, 4-27-1977)  
Secs. 6-137—6-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Residential building contractor's license, MCL 339.2401 et seq.; local regulation and licensing of contractors allowed, MCL 338.886; licensing plumbers and regulation of plumbing, MCL 338.901 et seq.; mechanical contractors, MCL 338.971 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-171. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Builder and contractor mean all building, electrical, heating and cooling, roofing, plumbing, masonry, carpentry and other similar contractors. 
(Ord. No. 60, § 1.00, 5-11-1977) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-172. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any builder or contractor licensed by an appropriate authority may be registered by filing proof of such licensing with the Township and by paying a fee to be set by resolution of the Township Board. 
(b)  A list of all registered builders or contractors shall be kept on file at the Township offices. 
(Ord. No. 60, § 2.00, 5-11-1977)  
Sec. 6-173. - Required. 
(a)  All builders or contractors must be registered with the Township before such builder or contractor may engage in construction, repair or other such exercise of their occupation or trade within the Township. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for any work to be done by any nonregistered builder or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 60, § 3.00, 5-11-1977)  
Sec. 6-174. - Revocation. 
The registration of any builder or contractor may be revoked if the builder or contractor commits any building or other code or ordinance violation while working within the Township. 
(Ord. No. 60, § 4.00, 5-11-1977)  
Chapter 7 - CEMETERIES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 7-1—7-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TOWNSHIP CEMETERIES 
 
Sec. 7-21. - Title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the Green Oak Charter Township Cemetery Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 1, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-22. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult burial space shall consist of a land area four feet wide and ten feet in length. 
Cemetery plot shall consist of burial spaces sufficient to accommodate from one to six burial spaces. 
Infant or stillborn burial space shall consist of a land area four feet wide and 3½ feet in length in areas set aside specifically for such burials. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 2, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-23. - Sale of plots or burial spaces. 
(a)  Cemetery plots or burial spaces shall be available for sale to any individual or family for the purpose of the burial of such purchaser or his or her heirs at law or next of kin. No sale shall be made to funeral directors or others. 
(b)  All sales shall be evidenced by a form approved and executed by the Township Clerk or the Clerk's designee. Sales of cemetery plots or burial spaces grant a right of burial only and do not convey any other title to the lot or burial space sold. 
(c)  Burial rights may only be transferred to those persons eligible to be original purchasers of cemetery lots or burial spaces and may only be accomplished by endorsement of an assignment of such burial permit upon the original burial permit form issued by the Township Clerk or the Clerk's designee, approved by said clerk, and entered upon the official records of said clerk. Upon such assignment, approval and recording, the clerk shall issue a new burial permit to the assignee and shall cancel and terminate upon such records, the original permit. 
(d)  Burial space owners shall not allow interments in their plots or spaces in return for remuneration of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 3, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-24. - Purchase price and transfer fees. 
(a)  Each burial space fee shall be determined by motion by the Township Board setting the schedule of fees for nonresidents and for Township residents. A Township resident is defined as a person who has lived in the Township for a minimum of one year and provides corresponding documentation. A Township resident is also defined as a former resident who lived in the Township for a period of five or more years and provides corresponding documentation. 
(b)  Any transfer of one or more burial spaces from an original purchaser to a qualified assignee shall cost $100.00. 
(c)  The charges set forth in subsection (b) of this secton shall be paid to the Township Treasurer and shall be deposited in the cemetery fund for the particular cemetery involved in the sale or transfer. 
(d)  The Township Board, by resolution, may periodically alter the fees to accommodate increased costs and needed reserve funds for cemetery maintenance and acquisition. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 4, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-25. - Grave opening charges. 
(a)  The opening and closing of any burial space, prior to and following a burial therein, and including the interment of ashes, shall be at a cost to be determined by the Township Clerk, payable to the Township. A fee schedule shall be maintained at the Township office. 
(b)  No burial spaces shall be opened and closed except under the direction and control of the Township Clerk who shall coordinate with the cemetery sexton. This provision shall not apply to proceedings for the removal and reinterment of bodies and remains, which matters are under the supervision of the local Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 5, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-26. - Markers or memorials. 
(a)  All markers or memorials must be of stone or other equally durable composition. 
(b)  All markers or memorials must be located upon a suitable foundation as approved by the Township Clerk. 
(c)  Only one monument, marker or memorial shall be permitted per individual burial space with the exception of veteran's markers which may be placed at the foot of the burial space. 
(d)  No more than four markers per grave site for four individual cremains or one marker for all cremains shall be permitted. Individual markers for cremains shall be flush with ground and shall be no more than 12 inches by 18 inches. 
(e)  Should any monument or memorial become unsightly, dilapidated or a safety hazard, the Township Board shall have the right, at the expense of owner, to correct the condition or remove same. 
(f)  The footing or foundation upon which any monument, marker or memorial must be placed shall be constructed by the Township at cost to the owner of the burial right. Cost shall be determined by the Township Clerk, payable to the Township. A fee schedule shall be maintained at the Township office. 
(g)  Winter wreaths or grave blankets may be placed on the burial spaces from November 1 to March 15 yearly. All cemetery lot decorations will be removed during spring cleanup each year. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 6, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-27. - Interment regulations. 
(a)  Only one adult casket or four cremation urns may be buried in a burial space except for a mother and infant or two children. 
(b)  Not less than 36 hours notice shall be given in advance of any funeral to allow for the opening of the burial spaces. 
(c)  The appropriate permit for the burial space involved, together with appropriate identification of the person to be buried therein, where necessary, shall be presented to either the Township Clerk or the cemetery sexton, who then shall deliver same to Township Clerk, prior to interment. Where such permit has been lost or destroyed, the Township Clerk shall be satisfied, from his or her records, that the person to be buried in the burial space is an authorized and appropriate one before any interment is commenced or completed. 
(d)  All burial spaces shall be located in an orderly and neat appearing manner within the confines of the burial space involved. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 7, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-28. - Ground maintenance. 
(a)  No grading, leveling, or excavating upon burial space shall be allowed without the permission of the Township Clerk or the Clerk's designee. 
(b)  No flowers, shrubs, trees or vegetation of any type shall be planted without the approval of the Township Clerk or the Clerk's designee. Any of the foregoing items planted without such approval may be removed by the Township Clerk or the Clerk's designee. 
(c)  The Township Board reserves the right to remove or trim any tree, plant or shrub located within the cemetery in the interest of maintaining proper appearance and the use of the cemetery. 
(d)  Mounds which hinder the free use of a lawn mower or other gardening apparatus are prohibited. 
(e)  The cemetery maintenance personnel shall have the right and authority to remove and dispose of any and all growth, emblems, displays or containers therefor that through decay, deterioration, damage or otherwise become unsightly, a source of litter or a maintenance problem. 
(f)  Surfaces other than earth or sod are prohibited. 
(g)  All refuse of any kind or nature including, among others, dried flowers, wreaths, papers, and flower containers must be removed or deposited in containers located within the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 8, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-29. - Forfeiture of vacant cemetery plots or burial spaces. 
(a)  As of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, cemetery plots or burial spaces sold and remaining vacant 40 years from the date of their original sale, last recorded transfer or usage of another burial space by the same owner shall automatically revert to the Township upon occurrence of the following events: 
(1)  Notice shall be sent by the Township Clerk by first class mail to the last known address of the last owner of record informing that owner of the expiration of the 40-year period and that all rights with respect to said plots or spaces will be forfeited if said owner does not affirmatively indicate in writing to the Township Clerk within 60 days from the date of mailing of the said notice the owner's desire to retain said burial rights. 
(2)  If no written response to said notice indicating a desire to retain the cemetery plots or burial spaces in question is received by the Township Clerk from the last owner of record of said plots or spaces, or from the heirs or legal representative of said owner, within 60 days from the date of mailing of said notice, a notice shall be published in the Township publication of record. 
(b)  The published notice shall contain a listing of the name of the last owner of record informing of the expiration of the 40-year period and that all rights with respect to said plots or burial spaces will be forfeited if no indication in writing is received by the Township Clerk within 60 days from the date of publication of the notice of the desire of the owner to retain said burial rights. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 9, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-30. - Repurchase of lots or burial spaces. 
The Township can repurchase any cemetery plots or burial space from an owner for one-half of the current price upon written request of said owner or the owner's legal heirs or representatives. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 10, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-31. - Records. 
The Township Clerk shall maintain records concerning all burials, issuance of burial permits, and any perpetual care fund, separate and apart from any other records of the Township and the same shall be open to public inspection at all reasonable business hours. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 11, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-32. - Vault. 
All casket burials shall be within a standard concrete vault installed or constructed in each burial space before interment. Cremain burials shall be in a vault made of material approved by the Township Clerk or cemetery sexton. In no case shall a new burial or re-interment take place without a vault. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 12, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-33. - Cemetery hours and restrictions. 
(a)  Cemeteries shall be open to the general public from the hours of sunrise to sunset each day. 
(b)  No person shall be permitted in the Township cemeteries at any time other than the foregoing hours, except upon permission of the Township Clerk or the Clerk's designee. 
(c)  No alcohol or pets are allowed in the cemeteries. 
(d)  No firearms are allowed in the cemeteries, except in cases of military funerals or ceremonies by official veterans' organizations on federal holidays. All military funerals and ceremonies using firearms must be preapproved by the Township Clerk or the Clerk's designee. 
(e)  No person shall create any improper noise, disorderly conduct, carelessness, or any other activity that destroys the peace, tranquility and attractiveness of any Township cemetery. 
(f)  The Township Clerk shall approve any group use of the cemeteries other than for the purpose of an organized interment. In every case, the use must be in accord with the principles of respect and honor for the deceased. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 13, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-34. - Cemetery maintenance. 
(a)  Maintenance of cemeteries is under the supervision of the Township Building and Grounds Department. 
(b)  The Township Board must approve all major projects for the cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 14, 6-27-2006)  
Sec. 7-35. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 02-2006, § 15, 6-27-2006)  
Chapter 8 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 12; floods, ch. 14; law enforcement, ch. 20; water emergency, § 34-61 et seq. 
State Law reference— Emergency management act, MCL 30.401 et seq.; governor's emergency powers, MCL 10.31 et seq.; continuity of government during an emergency, Mich. Const. art. IV, § 39. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8-1—8-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management act, MCL 30.401 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coordinator means the County Emergency Services Coordinator appointed to coordinate emergency planning and services within the County. 
Deputy Coordinator means the person appointed to assist with the coordination of emergency planning and services within the Township. 
Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or manmade cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm, tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion or hostile military action or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots or civil disorders. 
Disaster relief forces means all agencies of state, county and municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees, and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this article or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this article. 
Disaster relief volunteer means any person duly registered and appointed by the Coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity. 
District Coordinator means the State Police Emergency Management Division District Coordinator. 
Emergency means any occasion or instance in which the governor determines state assistance is needed to supplement local efforts and capabilities to save lives, protect property and the public health and safety, or lessen or avert the threat of a catastrophe in any part of the state. 
Emergency Management Coordinator means a person appointed pursuant to section 8-33 to coordinate emergency management within the County or municipality. The Emergency Management Coordinator includes a Civil Defense Director, Civil Defense Coordinator, Emergency Services Coordinator, Emergency Program Manager or other person with a similar title and duties. 
Emergency operations plan means the Township's emergency operations plan which has been prepared to coordinate disaster response and recovery within the Township. 
Emergency services means and includes preparations for, and relief from, the effects of natural and manmade disasters as defined in this section, and includes civil defense. 
Local state of emergency means a proclamation or declaration that activates the response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable local or interjurisdictional emergency operations plans and authorizes the furnishing of aid, assistance and directives under such plans. 
State of disaster means an executive order or proclamation that activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the state, local and interjurisdictional emergency operations plans applicable to the counties or municipalities affected. 
State of emergency means an executive order or proclamation that activates the emergency response and recovery aspects of the state, local and interjurisdictional emergency operations plans applicable to the counties or municipalities affected. 
Supervisor means the chief elected official of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 73, art. 2.0, 5-20-1987) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, MCL 30.402.  
Sec. 8-32. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of this article to establish an organization that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all Township resources during periods of emergency and disaster. 
(b)  The provisions of this article provide the means through which the Township Board may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in the Township Board by the emergency management act, Public Act No. 370 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.). 
(c)  This article will not relieve any elected official or department of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or local ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 73, art. 1.0, 5-20-1987)  
Sec. 8-33. - Organization for emergency services. 
(a)  The Supervisor, with the approval of the Township Board, is authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disasters utilizing, to the fullest extent, existing agencies within the County and Township. The Supervisor shall be director of emergency management forces of the Township and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operation, working through the Coordinator. 
(b)  The Supervisor, with the approval of the Township Board, shall make the following appointments: 
(1)  The Deputy Emergency Services Coordinator, who shall be responsible for the administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency preparedness activities in the Township. He shall maintain liaison with county, state and federal authorities and the authorities of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective emergency operations. His duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Development of the Township emergency operations plan, and any other appropriate disaster plans, for the immediate use of all the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the Township for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property, and protecting and restoring to usefulness, governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare. 
b.  Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the Township for emergency purposes. 
c.  Through public information programs, educating the population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in case of a disaster. 
d.  Conducting practice alerts and exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the Township's emergency organization and familiarize residents of the Township with emergency regulations, procedures and operations. 
e.  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief program. 
f.  Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters. 
g.  Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local radiological defense program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international wartime disasters. 
h.  Coordinating municipal emergency preparedness activities with those at the county level and adjacent municipalities. 
(2)  The Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator, who shall assist the Coordinator in the administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency preparedness activities in the Township. The deputy Coordinator shall assume the duties of the Coordinator whenever he is unavailable during disasters or local state of emergency situations. 
(3)  Assistant Emergency Management Coordinators from various Township departments, as deemed appropriate, who shall assist the Coordinator and deputy Coordinator in the planning and operation of emergency preparedness activities in the Township. 
(4)  The Disaster Planning Committee, which shall assist in the development and ongoing review of the Township emergency operations plan. The committee shall consist of the Supervisor, Clerk, Treasurer, Fire Chief, Building/Ordinance Official, Coordinator and Police Chief. 
(5)  All officers and employees of departments, commissions, boards and other agencies of the Township government designated by the Supervisor, with the approval of the Township Board, as disaster relief forces, who shall cooperate with the Emergency Management Coordinator in the formulation of the emergency operations plan, and shall assist the Coordinator in all matters pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 73, art. 3.0, 5-20-1987) 
State Law reference— Emergency Management Coordinator's duties, MCL 30.409, 30.410.  
Sec. 8-34. - Powers and duties of Supervisor. 
(a)  The Supervisor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified in this article. Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require, that the Supervisor invoke such power and authority, he shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the Township Board to perform its legislative and administrative duties, as the situation demands, and shall report to the Township Board relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the Township Board unless specifically provided in this article. 
(b)  Under the following circumstances, the Supervisor may declare a statement of emergency exists in the Township and may assemble and utilize the disaster relief forces in accordance with the Township emergency operations plan, and he may prescribe the manner and conditions of the use of such disaster relief forces: 
(1)  Whenever, on the basis of information received from authoritative sources, he feels that a large-scale disaster or emergency situation in the Township or state is imminent. 
(2)  During any period of disaster in the Township or state and thereafter as long as he shall deem it necessary. 
(c)  Whenever the Supervisor deems that any condition in the Township is beyond the control of local public or private agencies or has attained or threatens to attain the proportions of a major disaster, he may request the governor to declare a state of disaster exists in the Township by instructing the Coordinator to contact the District Coordinator in accordance with section 14 of Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.414). 
(d)  The Supervisor, with the approval of the Township Board, is hereby empowered and has the authority to: 
(1)  Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, and obtain and distribute equipment, materials and supplies for disaster purposes. 
(2)  Provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. 
(3)  Assign and make equipment available for duty, the employees, property or equipment of the municipality relating to firefighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, police, transportation, construction and similar items or service for disaster relief purposes within or without the physical limits of the Township. 
(4)  In the event of a foreign attack upon the state, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of permanent and temporary workers, the utilization of volunteer workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution, with or without compensation or supplies, materials and facilities, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
(e)  When the Supervisor is unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of his office with respect to this article, the succession of authority to act in his behalf shall be vested in the Fire Chief, Police Chief or Senior Fire Department Official available, unless otherwise designated by the Township Board. 
(f)  The Supervisor may delegate such duties as he deems necessary in the performance of his responsibilities. 
(g)  When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of relief activity, the Supervisor may, until the Township Board convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities and expenditure of existing funds, and the Township Board is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
(Ord. No. 73, art. 4.0, 5-20-1987) 
State Law reference— Authority to act, MCL 30.410.  
Sec. 8-35. - Volunteers. 
(a)  Each department, commission, board or other agency of the Township government may, at any time, appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such Township department, commission, board or agency in a time of emergency. Such individuals shall be enrolled as disaster relief volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the respective department, commission, board or agency head for such volunteers. 
(b)  The Coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service for which the Township has no counterpart, or to temporarily augment personnel of the Township engaged in emergency activities. The Coordinator shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for workmen's compensation purposes. 
(Ord. No. 73, art. 5.0, 5-20-1987)  
Sec. 8-36. - Rights of Township employees. 
Township employees assigned to duty as a part of the disaster relief forces pursuant to the provisions of this article shall retain all of the rights, privileges and immunities of Township employees, and shall receive the compensation incident to their employment. 
(Ord. No. 73, art. 6.0, 5-20-1987) 
State Law reference— Employee rights and immunities, MCL 30.411.  
Sec. 8-37. - Governmental and private liability. 
(a)  This article is an exercise by the Township of its governmental functions for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. As such, neither the Township, nor agents and representatives of the Township, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, acting in good faith carrying out, complying, or attempting to comply, with this article, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of such activity. 
(b)  A person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the state or a political subdivision of the state a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the state or a political subdivision of the state to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of the real estate or other premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, mock or practice disaster, together with his successors in interest, if any, is not civilly liable for negligently causing the death of, or injury to, any person on or about the real estate or premises under the license, privilege or permission, or for loss or damage to the property of the person. 
(c)  A person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who has gratuitously granted the use of the real estate or other premises for the purposes stated in this section is legally obligated to make known to the licensee any hidden dangers or safety hazards that are known to the owner or occupant of the real estate or premises that might possibly result in the death or injury, or loss of property to a person using the real estate or premises. 
(Ord. No. 73, art. 7.0, 5-20-1987) 
State Law reference— Liability of personnel, MCL 30.411.  
Chapter 10 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANTIBLIGHT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-16. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle includes, without limitation, any vehicle which has remained on private property for a period of 48 continuous hours or more, without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, or for a period of 48 continuous hours or more after the consent of the owner or occupant of the property has been revoked. 
Blighted structure includes, without limitation, any dwelling, garage or outbuilding, or any factory, shop, store, office building, warehouse or any other structure, or part thereof, which, because of fire, wind or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for the purpose for which it may have been intended. 
Building material includes, without limitation, lumber, brick, concrete or cinderblocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other material used in constructing any structure. 
Junk includes, without limitation, parts of machinery or motor vehicles, broken and unusable furniture, stoves, refrigerators or other appliances, remnants of wood, metal or any other cast-off material of any kind, whether or not it could be put to any reasonable use. 
Junk motor vehicle includes, without limitation, any vehicle which is not licensed for use upon the highways of the state for a period in excess of 30 days, and shall also include, whether licensed or not, any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason for a period in excess of 30 days, provided that there is excepted from this definition unlicensed, but operative, vehicles which are kept as the stock in trade of a regularly licensed and established new or used automobile dealer or other motorized vehicle, and, provided, further, that the time limit such vehicles may remain upon the premises of a motor vehicle repair garage shall be a period of 120 days, rather than 30 days, with extension of an additional 30-day period upon presentation to the enforcing officer of written proof the offending vehicle is involved in insurance claims litigation or a similar matter and additional time is required for settlement before the vehicle can be moved. 
Person includes all natural persons, firms, copartnerships, corporations and all associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. All persons who violate any of the provisions of this article, whether as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, servant or employee, shall, except as otherwise provided in this article, be equally liable as principals. 
Trash and rubbish include any and all forms of debris not otherwise classified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 5C, § 1, 4-2-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-17. - Determination of detriment. 
It is hereby determined that the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk vehicles, abandoned vehicles or building materials, and the maintenance of blighted structures upon any private property within the Township tends to result in blighted and deteriorated neighborhoods, the spread of vermin and disease, and the increase in criminal activity, and, therefore, is contrary to the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 5C, § 2, 4-2-2003)  
Sec. 10-18. - Storage of trash, rubbish, junk, junk vehicles and abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or to permit the storage or accumulation of, trash, rubbish, junk, junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles on any private property in the Township, except within a completely enclosed building or upon the premises of a properly zoned, licensed or approved junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts or dealer in secondhand goods or junk. 
(b)  On properties used for single-family residential purposes, domestic refuse originating from such premises may be stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance for a period not to exceed 30 days. The refuse shall be stored in suitable containers so as to protect it from wind, rain and animals, and shielded from view of adjacent areas, except when placed at the property line for removal on the day of removal. The proprietor of the premises shall provide for removal of all domestic refuse at least every 30 days or more often, if necessary, to prevent the creation of a nuisance. 
(c)  In any area used for business or multiple residential purposes, domestic refuse originating on such premises may be stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance for a period not to exceed ten days. The refuse shall be stored in appropriate watertight, commercial-type containers, and shielded from view of adjacent areas. 
(d)  The proprietor of business or multiple residential premises shall keep the premises, including parking lots and rights-of-way adjoining the premises, free of junk, trash, rubbish, debris or refuse of any kind and shall provide containers for discards for public use. 
(Ord. No. 5C, § 3, 4-2-2003; Ord. No. 04-2008, § I, eff. 6-30-2008)  
Sec. 10-19. - Blighted and vacant buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or vacant structure, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store or warehouse unless the structure is kept securely locked, the windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up, and otherwise protected to prevent entrance by unauthorized persons or unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the Township and unless such construction is completed within one year after issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 5C, § 4, 4-2-2003)  
Sec. 10-20. - Building materials. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or accumulation of building materials on any private property, except in a completely enclosed building or except where such building materials are part of the stock in trade or business located on the property, or except where such materials are being used in the construction of a structure on the property in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the Township and unless such construction is completed within one year after issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 5C, § 5, 4-2-2003) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6.  
Sec. 10-21. - Removal of junk vehicles and abandoned vehicles. 
The Township Supervisor, Clerk or Building Inspector, or the duly authorized representative of such officials, may remove, or cause to be removed, any junk vehicles, abandoned vehicles, trash, rubbish, junk or building materials, or parts thereof, from any unenclosed private property after having notified, in writing, the owner or occupant of such property of his intention to do so at least 48 hours prior to such removal. Such notice shall be served personally upon the owner or occupant of the property, if occupied, or may be posted in a conspicuous place upon vacant or unoccupied property. Such junk vehicle or abandoned vehicle, trash, rubbish, junk or building materials, or parts thereof, shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with law. Such removal by the designated enforcement official shall not excuse or relieve any person of the obligation imposed by this article to keep his property free from storage or accumulation of junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles, trash, rubbish, junk or building materials, or parts thereof, nor from the penalties for violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 5C, § 6, 4-2-2003; Ord. No. 04-2008, § II, eff. 6-30-2008) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 32.  
Sec. 10-22. - Notice, nuisance and abatement, charges and liens. 
(a)  Notice. It shall be the duty of the Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer or his designee to serve, or cause to be served, a written notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which storage or accumulation of junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles, trash, rubbish, junk or building materials, or parts thereof, are stored in violation of the provisions of this article and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten days. 
(b)  Nuisance and abatement. In addition to any other remedy provided, the violation of the terms of this section shall constitute a public nuisance per se, and: 
(1)  If the owner or occupant does not abate the nuisance within ten days, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or his designee may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged and paid by the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(2)  The Township Maintenance/Building Personnel shall have the duty to remove or abate storage or accumulation of junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles, trash, rubbish, junk or building materials, or parts thereof, under this section, unless they are unavailable, in which case, a contracted trash hauler, or towing company shall be hired to remove or abate such junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles, trash, rubbish, junk or building materials, or parts thereof. All expenses of the abatement shall be charged to, and paid by, the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(c)  Lien. 
(1)  Charges for removal of junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles, trash, rubbish, junk or building materials, or parts thereof, shall be a lien upon the premises from which such junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles, trash, rubbish, junk or building materials, or parts thereof were removed. Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered, the Township Clerk may file with the County Register of Deeds, a statement of lien claim. The statement shall contain a legal description of the premises, the expenses and costs incurred, the date the junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles, trash, rubbish, junk, or building materials, or parts thereof, were removed and a notice that the Township claims a lien for such amount. Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known; provided, however, that failure of the Clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the Township's right to collect for such charges as provided. 
(2)  Any such charges which have been assessed, but not paid when due, shall constitute a lien upon the subject real property. Such a lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by state statute for general law Township real property and shall include accrued interest and penalties. The Township Treasurer shall verify on March 1 of each year, and certify to the Township Assessor, the fact that such charges are delinquent and unpaid. The Township Assessor shall then enter the delinquent amount on the next general ad valorem tax roll as a charge against the affected property, and the lien thereon shall be enforced in the same manner as provided and allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid real property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 5C, § 8, 4-2-2003; Ord. No. 04-2008, § III, eff. 6-30-2008)  
Secs. 10-23—10-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-2010, § 2, effective Aug. 13, 2010, repealed Art. III, §§ 10-29—10-32, 10-39—10-49, 10-56—10-74, which pertained to stormwater management and derived from Ord. No. 04-2007, § 1(8-39—8-73), adopted Oct. 14, 2007. 
 
Secs. 10-29—10-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WETLAND PROTECTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Wetland protection, MCL 324.30301 et seq. 
 
Secs. 10-90—10-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NOISE CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Noise limits, § 38-357. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle mufflers, MCL 257.707 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambient sound level means the A-weighted sound level of all sound associated with a given environment, exceeded 90 percent of the time (L90) measured with a sound level meter set to the fast-time-weighting and being a composite of sounds from many sources during the period of observation, which shall be at least ten minutes, and shall be while the sound from the noise source of interest is not present. 
A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The standard notation is dB(A). 
Commercial property means any land parcel with buildings where the use of less than 50 percent of the gross floor area meets the definition of residential property as contained in this section. The term "commercial property" includes those uses permitted as of right or by special approval in the CB, GB, HC and RO districts as set forth in chapter 38. 
Commercial use means the use of property in connection with the purchase, sale, barter, display or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or personal services. 
Decibel (dB) means a logarithmic unit of measure often used in measuring magnitudes of sound. 
Dwelling unit means any building, or portion thereof, having cooking facilities, which is occupied wholly as the home, residence or sleeping place of one family, either permanently or transiently, but in no case shall a travel trailer, motor home, mobile home, trailer coach, automobile chassis, tent or other portable building be considered a dwelling in single-family, multiple-family or two-family residential areas. In cases of mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling unit, and shall comply with the provisions of this article relative to dwellings. 
Emergency power generator means the equipment used to generate electrical power in the event of an interruption, malfunction or failure of the electrical power supplied by the service provider. 
Emergency vehicle means an authorized motor vehicle that has audible warning devices such as whistles, sirens and bells which can lawfully be used when responding to an emergency, or during a police, fire or medical activity or which is required by state or federal regulations (e.g., train horn). 
Emergency work means activity made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from exposure to imminent danger. The term "emergency work" includes work by private or public entities for providing or restoring immediately necessary service as well as all situations deemed necessary by the Township. 
Impulsive sound means sound characterized by brief excursions of sound pressure (acoustic impulses) that significantly exceed the ambient environmental sound pressure. The duration of a single impulsive sound is usually less than one second. 
Industrial property means any premise where manufacturing, processing or fabrication of goods or products takes place. The term "industrial property" includes those uses permitted as of right or by special approval in the LI and GI districts as set forth in chapter 38. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled, and is used primarily for transporting persons or property. 
Muffler means an apparatus consisting of a series of chambers, baffle plates or other mechanical devices designed for the purpose of receiving and transmitting exhaust gases and which reduce sound emanating from such an apparatus by at least 15 decibels when measured using the A-weighting network dB(A), from the nonmuffled condition. 
Noise means sound that is unwanted and which causes or tends to cause adverse psychological or physiological effects on human beings. The definition of noise shall include sound for which the sound level is in excess of the limits herein (section 10-105(b) or (c) or are prohibited by section 10-105(d) or (e). 
Octave means any two frequencies whose ratio is exactly two to one. 
Octave bands means a spectrum of sound frequencies between band edge frequencies of an octave apart. The band center frequencies shall be: 31.5 Hz, 63 Hz, 125 Hz, 250 Hz, 500 Hz, 1000Hz, 2000 Hz, 4000 Hz, and 8000 Hz. 
Off-road motor vehicle. 
(1)  The term "off-road motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle that can be operated cross-country without benefit of a road or trail, over land, snow and other natural terrain and includes all of the following: Multitrack and multiwheeled vehicles, ATVs, motorcycles and related two-, three- and four-wheeled vehicles, amphibious machines, hovercraft, and any other vehicles that use mechanical power, including two- and four-wheel drive vehicles that are highway registered, when said vehicles are operated off road. 
(2)  The term "off-road motor vehicle," from the state DNR, does not include the following: snowmobiles; farm, construction, and logging vehicles when being used in normal work practices; military, fire, emergency, and law enforcement vehicles. 
On-road motor vehicle. 
(1)  The term "on-road motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle which is used upon public roadways and required to be licensed according to motor vehicle registration laws. 
(2)  The term "on-road motor vehicle" does not include: aircraft, watercraft, motor vehicles operated on private property for recreational or amusement purposes, vehicles used exclusively on stationary rails, or specialized utility vehicles normally used only on private property in the daily course of business such as forklifts and pallet movers. 
Ordinance Enforcement Official means the person designated by the Township Board to enforce this article. 
Person means any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user or owner; and shall include any municipal corporation, state or federal governmental agency, district or any officer or employee thereof. 
Plainly audible means any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or vehicular sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The noise control officer need not determine the title, specific words or the artist performing the song. 
Power equipment means any device or mechanical apparatus operated by fuel, electric, or pneumatic power in the excavation, construction, repair or demolition of any building, structure, land parcel, street, alley, waterway or appurtenance thereto, excluding snow removal equipment. 
Premises means any building, structure, land, utility or portion thereof, including all appurtenances, and also includes yards, lots, courts, inner yards and real properties without buildings or improvements, owned or controlled by a person. 
Prominent discreet tone means and shall be identified as present when the equivalent-continuous sound pressure level in any one-third octave band exceeds the average equivalent-continuous sound pressure level for the two adjacent one-third octave bands by 15 dB for the one-third octave bands between 25 and 125 Hz inclusive, by 8 dB for the one-third octave bands between 160 and 400 Hz inclusive, and by 5 dB for the one-third octave bands between 500 and 10,000 Hz inclusive. 
Property line. 
(1)  The term "property line" means that real or imaginary line and its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled by any person from contiguous real property owned or controlled by another person. 
(2)  The term "property line" does not include the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit in a multidwelling unit building, condominium or townhouse complex, separating one premises from another. 
Public land includes land that is primarily designated for use by the public such as natural areas, unimproved of undeveloped open spaces, public buildings or public activities. 
Public land uses includes those uses permitted as of right or by special approval in the PL district as set forth in chapter 38. 
Receiving property means the premises (residential, commercial, industrial, or public) as listed in tables I or II in section 10-104(b) which is receiving noise emitted from the source premises after crossing one or more property lines. 
Residential property means any premises where single- or multiple-dwelling units exist including any commercial premises where the use of more than 50 percent of the gross floor area meets this definition of residential property. Residential property would include those uses permitted as of right or by special approval in the RF, RE, R1, R2, R3, RZA, RM and RMH districts as set forth in chapter 38. 
Rounding means that if the fractional part of the measured level is 0.5 dB or greater, then the reported number becomes the next whole integer, or if the fractional part is less than 0.5 dB, then the reported number remains the existing whole integer. 
Snow removal equipment means any equipment used for removing snow from land or building surfaces and includes snow plows, snow blowers, snow sweepers and snow shovels. 
Sound means an oscillation in pressure, stress, particle displacement or particle velocity which induces auditory sensation. 
Sound level meter means an apparatus or instrument including a microphone, amplifier, attenuator, output meter and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels. The sound level meter shall be of a design and have the characteristics of a type 2 or better instrument as established by the American National Standards Institute, publication ANSI S1.4-1983 (R2006) American National Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters, and shall be capable of measuring L90 using fast-time-weighting in addition to measuring sound pressure level. For measurement of octave-band or one-third-octave-band spectra, the sound level meter shall have filters meeting at least the Class 2 requirements of ANSI S1.11-2004 (R2009) American National Standard Specification for Octave-Band and Fractional-Octave-Band Analog and Digital Filters. 
Sound pressure level means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of a sound to the reference pressure of 20 micronewtons per square meter (20 × 10 -6 Newtons/meter 2 ), and is expressed in decibels (dB). Alternate sound pressure level shall be the level measured by a sound level meter and as defined in ANSI S1.13. 
Source property means the premises (residential, commercial, industrial, or public) as listed in table I or II in section 10-104(b) that is emitting noise that is crossing one or more property lines and impacting the receiving property. 
Tree maintenance equipment means any equipment used in trimming or removing trees only and shall not be limited to chainsaws, chippers and stump removers. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, § 2(II), eff. 8-27-2010)  
Sec. 10-102. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this article shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction in accordance with article II of chapter 20. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, § 3, eff. 8-27-2010)  
Sec. 10-103. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace and quiet for the citizens of the Township through the reduction, control and prevention of noise. It is the intent of this article to establish standards that will eliminate and reduce unnecessary and excessive community noises from motor vehicles, industrial, commercial and residential properties, etc. These noises are physically harmful and otherwise detrimental to individuals and the community in the enjoyment of life, property and conduct of business. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 2, 9-16-1992; Ord. No. 04-2010, § 2(I), eff. 8-27-2010)  
Sec. 10-104. - Regulations. 
(a)  General prohibition of noise. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall cause or create any unreasonable or unnecessarily loud noise or disturbance, injurious to the health, peace or quiet of persons within the Township. 
(b)  Numerical property line noise limits. No person shall emit or cause to be emitted any sound which leaves the premises on which it originates, crosses one or more property lines, and enters onto any other premise, resulting in a sound pressure level or levels in excess of those permitted by tables I or II in this subsection. 
(1)  Table I in this subsection shall apply to all sound sources. 
(2)  Table II in this subsection also shall apply to constant sound sources such as fans, blowers, and compressors, which may or may not cycle between levels, or on and off. 
(3)  When it is determined that the ambient sound level at the receiving premises equals or exceeds the maximum allowable sound pressure level specified in table I in this subsection, then the ambient sound level plus 3 dB is the standard which cannot be exceeded by the source. 
(4)  When it is determined that the received sound contains a prominent discrete tone, then the limits in tables I and II in this subsection all shall be reduced by 5 dB for all receiving property categories except for the industrial receiving property category. 
Table I. Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels 
Receiving 
Property 
Category 	Residential Property 	Schools, Houses of Worship, Public or Community Service 
Facility or Similar Uses 	Commercial Property and Nonresidential portion of Multi-use Property 	Industrial Property 	Public Land 
Time 	7:00 a.m. 
— 
10:00 p.m. 	10:00 p.m. 
— 
7:00 a.m. 	24 hrs. 	24 hrs. 	24 hrs. 	24 hrs. 
Maximum 
A-weighted, 
fast sound 
level (dB) 	60 	50 	60 	70 	75 	75 
 
Table II. Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels (dB) 
Receiving 
Property 
Category 	Residential Property 	Schools, Houses of Worship, Public or Community Service Facility or Similar Uses 	Commercial Property and Nonresidential portion of Multi-use Property 	Industrial Property 	Public Land 
Octave Band 
Center 
Frequency (Hz) 	Octave Band Sound Pressure Level (dB) 
Time 	7:00 a.m. 
— 
10:00 p.m. 	10:00 p.m. 
— 
7:00 a.m. 	24 hrs. 	24 hrs. 	24 hrs. 	24 hrs. 
31.5 	75 	75 	75 	80 	85 	85 
63 	75 	71 	75 	80 	85 	85 
125 	71 	61 	71 	80 	85 	85 
250 	64 	54 	64 	74 	79 	79 
500 	58 	48 	58 	68 	73 	73 
1,000 	55 	45 	55 	65 	70 	70 
2,000 	52 	42 	52 	62 	67 	67 
4,000 	50 	40 	50 	60 	65 	65 
8,000 	48 	38 	48 	58 	63 	63 
Exceedance of any one or more octave band limits for the receiving category in question shall constitute a violation of this article. 
 
(c)  Motor vehicle noise limits. 
(1)  On-road limits. No person shall operate a motor drive vehicle on public roads so as to exceed the limits in the following table III at or beyond 50 feet from the vehicle: 
Table III. On-Road Motor Vehicle Sound Level Limits* 
Vehicle 	Weight 	Maximum Limit 
dB(A) 
Trucks and buses 	Over 10,000 lbs. gross weight 	82 
Trucks and buses 	Under 10,000 lbs. gross weight 	74 
Passenger cars 	Any weight 	74 
Motorcycles, and minibikes 	Any weight 	82 
Snowmobiles and all other self- 
propelled motor vehicles 	Any weight 	74 
*All sound emitted from motor driven vehicles on public roads shall be measured at a height of 4 to 4.5 feet and whenever possible at a distance of at least 50 feet or 15 meters from a noise source located within the public right-of-way. If measurements at 50 feet (15 meters) are not feasible, measurements may be made at 25 feet (7½ meters) and if this is done, six dB(A) shall be added to the limits provided in this table. 
 
(2)  Off-road vehicle rules and sound level limits. 
a.  During the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m, the maximum A-weighted fast sound level from any off-road vehicle operating off-road shall not exceed 66 dB within 30 feet of any residence, and shall not exceed 72 dB within any residential property line. During the hours from 10:00 p.m to 8:00 a.m all off-road vehicle sound shall not exceed the limits of table I in subsection (b) of this section. 
b.  When operating off-road, off-road vehicle speeds shall be less than ten mph when within 200 feet of any residential property. 
c.  All off-road vehicles shall comply fully with all noise and noise-related rules of the state DNR. 
(3)  Boats and PWC rules and sound level limits. 
a.  During the hours from 8:00 a.m to 10:00 p.m, the maximum A-weighted fast sound level from any boat or PWC shall not exceed 72 dB at the shoreline when measured in accordance with SAE J1970. During the hours from 10:00 p.m to 8:00 a.m all boat and PWC sound shall not exceed the limits of table I in subsection (b) of this section. 
b.  All boat and PWC speeds shall be less than five mph when operating within 250 feet of the shoreline. 
c.  All boats and PWC shall comply fully with all noise and noise-related rules of the state DNR. 
(4)  Snowmobile rules and sound level limits. 
a.  Limits during certain hours. During the hours from 8:00 a.m to 10:00 p.m, the maximum A-weighted fast sound level from any snowmobile operating off-road shall not exceed 70 dB within 30 feet of any residence. During the hours from 10:00 p.m to 8:00 a.m all snowmobile sound shall not exceed the limits of table I in subsection (b) of this section. 
b.  Speed limit in certain places. When operating off-road, snowmobile speeds shall be less than ten mph when within 150 feet of any residence. 
c.  State noise rules to apply. All off-road vehicles shall comply fully with all noise and noise-related rules of the state DNR. 
(d)  Prohibited noises. Notwithstanding the provisions of tables I and II in subsection (b) of this section, the following standards shall apply to the sources of sound set forth as follows: 
(1)  Power equipment. No person, excluding emergency work, shall operate power tools, landscaping, or yard maintenance equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekends, from any category of property, that exceed the sound level limits set forth in tables I and II in subsection (b) of this section. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler. At all other times, the sound level limits set forth in tables I and II in subsection (b) of this section do not apply to power tools, landscaping, tree maintenance or yard maintenance equipment. 
(2)  Compacting and trash, compost, and recycling collection. No person shall operate any trash compacting mechanism on any motor vehicle or on any premises, nor shall any person engage in any trash, rubbish, garbage, compost, or recycling collection activity between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., when such compacting or collection activity takes place on any premises adjacent to or across the street or alley from a residential property. 
(e)  Prohibited activities. Notwithstanding the provisions of tables I and II in subsection (b) of this section, the following standards shall apply to the activities set forth as follows: 
(1)  Snow removal. No person shall operate motorized snowblowers, snow throwers, or lawn equipment with attached snow plows without a muffler. 
(2)  Vehicle mufflers. No person shall modify or change the exhaust muffler, air intake muffler or any other sound reducing device in such a manner that the sound level emitted from the motor vehicle is increased above the sound pressure level of the vehicle as originally manufactured. Muffler cutouts, bypasses or other devices which increase sound pressure levels, or change the original manufactured exhaust system of any motor vehicle shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(f)  Exceptions. All railroad yard operations shall be subject to the maximum permissible sound levels allowed in industrial districts, regardless of the zone where they are located. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 3, 9-16-1992; Ord. No. 04-2010, § 2(III), eff. 8-27-2010)  
Sec. 10-105. - Enforcement. 
(a)  General requirements. Property line based tests shall be conducted in accordance with all of the following procedures and motor vehicle based tests shall be conducted in accordance with subsections (a)(2) through (4) of this section: 
(1)  The investigator shall, to the extent practicable, identify major sources contributing sound to the point of measurement. 
(2)  The measuring device calibration shall be checked before going to the field for measurements and shall be checked in the field before and after each series of measurements and at least hourly. 
(3)  No outdoor measurements shall be made under any condition which allows the measuring device, especially the microphone, to become wet. 
(4)  No outdoor measurements shall be made if the meter cannot be maintained within the range specified by the manufacture. 
(b)  Measurements. 
(1)  For property line based measurements, the noise source shall be measured at any point along the property line or within the property line of the receiving property to determine compliance with this article. 
(2)  Time-varying sounds shall be measured using the fast-time-weighting. Continuous sound levels or motor vehicle sound levels shall be measured using the slow-time-weighting. 
(3)  All measurements shall be rounded to the nearest whole decibel. 
(4)  All measurements shall be corrected for the ambient as follows: 
a.  Time-varying sound. When making measurements of time-varying sounds, the measuring official shall observe the meter rise to its maximum while he hears the sound rise to a maximum for the measurement to be valid. 
1.  Case 1. When the difference in any given five-minute period between the maximum level and the minimum level is 11 dB or more, then the offending sound level shall be taken to be the maximum level and no correction for the ambient is required. 
2.  Case 2. When the difference between the maximum level and the minimum level in any five-minute period is between 3 dB and 10 dB, then the noise sound level plus the ambient shall be taken to be the maximum level. The ambient shall be determined in accordance with subsection (b)(4)b of this section. The maximum level, which is the noise sound level plus ambient, shall be corrected to noise sound level alone using table IV in subsection (b)(4)b.4 of this section. 
3.  Case 3. When the difference in any given five-minute period between the maximum level and the minimum level is less than 3 dB, then the noise sound level is too near to the ambient and no violation is demonstrated. 
b.  Ambient sound level. When required, the ambient sound level alone shall be determined using one of the following four methods, in hierarchical order: 
1.  If possible, the noise in question should be turned off, and with the sources of noise off, the ambient sound level shall be measured. 
2.  If the noise source cannot be turned off, then a five-minute measurement of L90 shall be made and used as a trial correction for the ambient sound level. If after this trial correction, a violation of the limits is shown, then the measurements are complete and nothing else need be done; else, the methods set forth in this subsection (b)(4) or subsection (b)(3) of this section shall be used to determine the ambient sound level. 
3.  If the sources of noise turn off some other time of day, then with the sources of noise off, the ambient sound level shall be measured within 24 hours of the noise measurement. For example, for daytime measurements at a plant or factory that operates only during daytime hours, measurement of the ambient sound level might occur just before work begins, during lunch, or just after work ends. For this method of determining the ambient, 5 dB shall be added to the measured ambient levels before they are used to adjust the measured noise sound levels (that includes the ambient). 
4.  If the sources of noise never turn off, then the ambient sound level shall be measured at a like site, at a like day of the week, and at a like time of day. For this method of determining the ambient, 5 dB shall be added to the measured ambient levels before they are used to adjust the measured noise sound levels (that includes the ambient sound). 
Table IV. 
Correction in dB that shall be subtracted from the noise sound level plus ambient sound level measurement so that the result is just the sound level of the noise in question. See note 1 below. 
? 	Difference (dB) 	>3 	3—4* 	5—6 	7—10 	>10 
K 	Correction (dB) 	Note 2 	3** 	2 	1 	0 
1. This table provides a simple correction to measurements that are affected by ambient sound. For example, the sound of an industrial fan, along with the ambient sound which is always present, is measured as 65 dB(A) and the ambient sound level alone (without the fan) is measured as 59 dB(A). Then ?, the difference in decibels is 6 dB* and the corresponding correction is 2 dB**. That is, 2 dB are subtracted from the measured 65 dB(A) level, and it is adjusted to and reported as 63 dB(A). 
2. If the difference between the noise sound level plus ambient sound level and the ambient sound level alone is less than 3 dB, then it shall not constitute a violation of this article. 
 
c.  Constant noise. Constant noises, possibly cycling, such as the sound from fans, blowers, or compressors shall be measured, if cyclic, during the loudest cycle. This measurement is of the noise sound level plus the ambient sound level. The ambient sound level alone shall be determined using the method of subsection (b) of this section. The maximum level, which is the noise sound level plus ambient sound level, shall be corrected to noise sound level alone using table IV in subsection (b)(4)b.4 of this section. 
1.  If it is not possible to demonstrate an exceedance of table I in section 10-104(b), limits using the procedure set forth in subsection (b)(4) of this section, then one may proceed to use table II in section 10-104(b). Using table II shall involve the exact same steps as described for using table I, but with the measurements being the octave band levels indicated in table II in lieu of the A-weighted measurements indicated in table I. The measured octave band noise sound level plus ambient sound levels shall be corrected using the methods of table IV. 
2.  The officer shall verify that the measured sound truly is the offending sound. As he walks further from the offending sound source, the levels must fall. 
3.  If the offending noise is suspected of containing a prominent discrete tone, enforcement officials may elect to measure a one-third-octave-band spectrum. This measurement, if conducted, will consist of the noise sound level plus the ambient level. If this measurement is conducted, then the ambient level alone shall be measured, and the noise sound level plus the ambient sound level shall be corrected to noise sound level alone using the method in table IV. The method of ANSI/ASA S12.9-1993, part 3 (R2008), American National Standard Quantities and Procedures for Description and Measurement of Environmental Sound, part 3: Short-Term Measurements with an Observer Present; appendix C: Determination of the Presence of Prominent Discrete Tones, shall be used to determine the presence of prominent discrete tones. 
d.  Motor vehicle noise. Motor vehicle noise shall be measured in the following fashion. The enforcement official shall continually observe the sound level meter. For a valid violation, the meter shall reach a maximum that exceeds the limits in table IV in subsection (b)(4) of this section, rise from a level that was at least 7 dB below the maximum observed, and decay from the maximum level observed to a level that is at least 7 dB below the maximum. No correction for the ambient is required. 
(c)  Equipment requirements. 
(1)  Sound level meter. 
a.  Measurements of continuous, time-varying, impulsive or tonal sound shall be made either with a class 1 (precision), or a class 2 (general purpose) sound level meter manufactured to the requirements of ANSI S1.4-1983 (R2006) American National Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters or its successor. 
b.  Measurements of sound by octave bands or one-third octave bands shall be made with a sound level meter with fractional-octave band frequency filter set that conforms to the requirements of class II as specified in ANSI/ASA S1.11-2004 (R2009) American National Standard Specification for Octave-Band and Fractional-Octave-Band Analog and Digital Filters or its successor. 
(2)  A calibrator shall be used as recommended by the manufacturer of the sound level meter. 
(3)  The fundamental level of the calibrator and the sensitivity of the sound level meter shall be verified annually by a laboratory using procedures traceable to the National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
(4)  A wind screen shall be used as recommended by the sound level meter manufacturer. 
(5)  An anemometer with a range of five to 15 mph (2.2 to 6.7 meters per second) and plus or minus two mph (plus or minus 0.9 meters per second) accuracy. 
(6)  A compass for measuring wind direction to at least an eight-point resolution: N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W, NW. 
(d)  Microphone position. 
(1)  For A-weighted measurements, the microphone shall be placed in one of three positions: 
a.  The most preferred position is at least 15 feet from any large reflecting surface and at a height of four to 4.5 feet above ground. 
b.  If subsection (f)(1)a of this section is not possible, then the second choice of microphone position is to locate it up against a hard wall of the affected structure and at the height of the middle of the first floor windows. Six dB shall be subtracted from all measurements at this position. 
c.  The least desirable choice for microphone position is to locate the microphone three to six feet from any large reflecting surface. The microphone height at this position shall be four to 4.5 feet above ground. Three dB shall be subtracted from all measurements at this position. 
(2)  For octave or one-third-octave-band measurements the microphone is to be located at least 30 feet from any large reflecting surface and at a height of four to 4.5 feet above ground. 
(e)  Measurement uncertainty. The measurement uncertainty shall be taken to be as indicated in table V in subsection (e)(2) of this section. 
(1)  If the limit in question in table I or II of section 10-104(b) equals or exceeds the ambient, then the appropriate value from table V in subsection (e)(2) of this section shall be added to the limit in tables I or II and noise sound levels, after correction for the ambient, if any, that exceed the applicable limit, plus the corresponding measurement uncertainty from table V shall be deemed a violation of this regulation. 
(2)  If the ambient exceeds the limit in question in table I or II of section 10-104(b), then the limit shall be the ambient plus the corresponding measurement uncertainty from table V of this subsection. Noise sound levels, after correction for the ambient sound level, that exceed this newly calculated limit shall be deemed a violation of this regulation. 
Table V. Measurement Uncertainty (dB) 
	A-Weighted Measurements 	Octave Band Measurements 	1/3 Octave Band 
Measurements 
	15 ft. from large reflecting surfaces 	Flush against a hard reflecting surface (wall) 	3 to 6 ft. from a large reflecting surface 	30 ft. from any large reflecting surface 	30 ft. from any large reflecting surface 
Type 1 meter 	2 	3 	4 	3 	4 
Type 2 meter 	3 	4 	5 	4 	5 
 
(f)  Reporting requirements. 
(1)  Reports shall be provided on forms approved by the Township. 
(2)  The report for each test shall include: 
a.  The date and day of the week on which the test is made. 
b.  The time of the measurements. 
c.  The times of calibration checks of the measuring devices while on site. 
d.  The weather conditions. 
e.  The temperature. 
f.  The wind speed and direction. 
g.  The identification of all measurement equipment by manufacturer, model number and serial number. 
h.  If applicable, the duty cycle of source of interest. 
i.  The total sound level in dB(A) or dB if in octave bands. 
j.  The neighborhood ambient sound level in dB(A) or dB if in octave bands, at the measurement point, except for time varying sound where the difference between the maximum and minimum in a five-minute period is 11 dB or greater. (See subsection (b)(4)a, case 1, of this section.) 
k.  A sketch of the site, not necessarily to scale, orienting the facility of interest, the points of measurement, topographic features and relevant distances, containing sufficient information for another investigator to repeat the measurements under similar conditions. 
l.  A description of the sound sources by character and location. 
m.  A description of the neighborhood ambient sound by the character and location, to the extent feasible. 
(g)  The ordinance enforcement officials and their qualifications and training. 
(1)  All acoustical measurements will be made by the Ordinance Enforcement Official. 
(2)  Training in A-weighted sound level measurements shall be conducted for approximately one half day annually by a qualified noise control engineer, e.g., a member firm of the National Council of Acoustical Consultants (NCAC) or a member of the Institute of Noise Control Engineering of the USA who is board certified. 
(3)  Octave and one-third octave band measurements shall be performed by an individual with training in the measurement of environmental noise. 
(Ord. No. 04-2010, § 2(IV), eff. 8-27-2010)  
Sec. 10-106. - Temporary exemptions. 
(a)  The Township Board is authorized to grant temporary exemption permits from the provisions of this article if such exemption would be in the public interest and there is no feasible and prudent alternative to the activity for which the exemption is sought. 
(b)  The temporary exemption permit may not be renewed more than three times. Each permit may be granted for a period of no longer than 30 days and the permit shall state the character of the event or activity, the dates and times of the proposed activity or event, the location of the proposed activity or event, and the name of the permittee. 
(c)  Any temporary exemption permit granted pursuant to this section may be subject to, and may prescribe any conditions, limitations or requirements which the Township Board deems necessary to minimize the adverse effects upon the community, persons within the community or the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)  The Township may summarily revoke the exemption if such conditions, limitations or requirements are not met. 
(e)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to grant the exemption: 
(1)  The proximity of any residence or other use which may be adversely affected. 
(2)  Whether the sound is unusual or usual for the location. 
(3)  The density of population of the area. 
(4)  The time of day or night for which the activity or event is proposed. 
(5)  The intensity, frequency and duration of the sound, including, but not limited to, whether the sound will be steady, intermittent, impulsive or repetitive. 
(6)  The balancing of the hardship between the person seeking the exemption if the exemption is not granted and the hardship to others if the exemption is granted. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 5, 9-16-1992; Ord. No. 04-2010, § 2(V), eff. 8-27-2010)  
Sec. 10-107. - Variances. 
(a)  Persons wishing to continue activities which commenced prior to the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived and which create noises or disturbances in violation of this article may seek a variance from the Township Board. 
(b)  A variance may be granted if the Township Board finds that strict application of this article would cause a hardship and that there is no reasonable and prudent alternative method of engaging in that activity. 
(c)  Any variance granted pursuant to this section may be subject to, and may prescribe, any conditions, limitations or requirements which the Township Board deems necessary to minimize the adverse effects upon the community, persons within the community or the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 6, 9-16-1992; Ord. No. 04-2010, § 2(VI), eff. 8-27-2010)  
Secs. 10-108—10-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NOXIOUS WEEDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Noxious weeds includes Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1), poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron) and poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix). 
(Ord. No. 108, § 2, 9-18-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-142. - Regulations. 
(a)  Weed growth. 
(1)  No person owning or occupying any subdivision, or platted or commercial lot less than one acre in size, shall permit or maintain on any such premises any growth of noxious weeds, nor any growth of grass or other rank vegetation to a height greater than six inches on the average, nor any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. On subdivisions, or platted or commercial lots in R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, RO, LB or GB districts in excess of one acre in size, no person owning or occupying any such premises shall permit or maintain, within 50 feet from the edge of the street or road right-of-way, any growth of noxious weeds, nor any growth of grass or other rank vegetation to a height greater than six inches on the average, nor any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, brush or yard waste. 
(2)  No person owning or occupying any premises shall permit or maintain on any such premises any growth of noxious weeds, nor any growth of grass or other rank vegetation or yard waste, composting or seasonal accumulation stored in or near an area that is frequented by water, or accumulate waste or compost materials in such a manner as to impede the natural flow of water. Rank vegetation, yard waste, composting or seasonal accumulations of yard materials shall not be permitted to accumulate on property lines or within the front yard setback of any parcel. Nothing in this section shall apply to weeds in fields devoted to growing any small grain crops, such as, but not limited to, wheat, oats, barley or rye. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of the Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer or his designee to serve, or cause to be served, a written notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds, grasses or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this subsection (a) and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten days. 
(b)  Nuisance and abatement. In addition to any other remedy provided in this section, the violation of the terms of this section shall constitute a public nuisance per se, and: 
(1)  If the owner or occupant does not abate the nuisance within ten days, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or his designee may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged and paid by the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(2)  The Township Maintenance/Building Personnel shall have the duty to abate weeds, grasses or yard waste under this section, unless they are unavailable, in which case, a contracted lawn service shall be hired to abate such weeds, grasses or yard waste. All expenses of the abatement shall be charged to, and paid by, the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(c)  Lien. 
(1)  Charges for weed, grass or yard waste removal shall be a lien upon the premises from which such weed, grass or yard waste was removed. Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered, the Township Clerk may file with the register of deeds of the county a statement of lien claim. The statement shall contain a legal description of the premises, the expenses and costs incurred, the date the weeds were cut and a notice that the Township claims a lien for such amount. Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his address is known; provided, however, that failure of the clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the Township's right to collect for such charges as provided. 
(2)  Any such charges which have been assessed, but not paid when due, shall constitute a lien upon the subject real property. Such a lien shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by state statute for general law Township real property and shall include accrued interest and penalties. The Township Treasurer shall verify on March 1 of each year, and certify to the Township Assessor, the fact that such charges are delinquent and unpaid. The Township Assessor shall then enter the delinquent amount on the next general ad valorem tax roll as a charge against the affected property, and the lien thereon shall be enforced in the same manner as provided and allowed by law for delinquent and unpaid real property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 3, 9-18-2002)  
ARTICLE VII. - SOIL REMOVAL ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 10-151. - Title and purpose. 
This article shall be known as the Soil Removal Ordinance. This article is enacted for the purpose of promoting the public health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Township and to preserve the natural resources and to prevent the creation of nuisances and hazards to the public health, welfare and safety. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-152. - Interpretation. 
The provisions of the article shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, or general welfare. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance, or with any rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted, or issued, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law. Where this article imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations, or permits, the provisions of this article shall control. The provisions of this article shall not be applied to residential development, commercial development, industrial development and or composting facilities. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-153. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mining or excavation means the removing of any sand, soil, gravel, stone or similar material from the property. Mining does not mean the moving, grading or leveling of the aforesaid materials if carried on for the immediate use or development of the land upon which these substances are found or pursuant to a building permit. 
Quarry means any tract or parcel of land, or part thereof, used for the purpose of searching for or the extraction of stone, gravel, marl, peat, topsoil, or similar materials including stripping and pit-type operations. 
Site or premises means a parcel of land, or portion of a parcel of land, or multiple parcels of land, where mining, excavation or quarrying is proposed to take place. 
Soil means soil, subsoil, sand, gravel, land, earth or any other material proposed to be moved from or onto the site. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-154. - Penalties. 
(a)  The Township may institute injunctive or other proceedings to prevent or enjoin any violation of the provisions of this article. The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to other remedies provided by law. 
(b)  The use of any land located in the Township or the operation of any vehicle done in violation of this article or any provisions thereof, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  In addition to other penalties provided, any person, persons, corporation or business entity that violates this article or shall refuse to comply with the requirements of this article shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction and subject to the penalties provided in the municipal civil infractions ordinance, chapter 20, article II of the Green Oak Charter Code, as the same may be amended from time to time. As to each violation designated as a municipal civil infraction the Township may, at its sole discretion, proceed directly with the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation or take such other enforcement action as is authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-155. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a quarry, mining operation or sand and gravel pit as hereinbefore defined or remove, process or mine sand, clay, gravel, or similar material without a permit from the Township. No permit will be required where the moving, grading or leveling of the aforesaid materials is carried on for the immediate use or development of the land upon which these substances are found pursuant to a building permit issued by the Township. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-156. - Construction sites; removal of less than five thousand yards of material; small seasonal operations. 
Soil, sand, gravel or stone may be removed from a construction site strictly conditioned upon the following requirements: 
(1)  Not more than 5,000 yards of material may be removed from any site unless an extraction permit shall first have been issued. 
(2)  The removal of soil in excess of 20 yards and less than 5,000 yards shall not be undertaken unless and until first approved by the Township Board. The request for approval shall contain a description of the site and method of removal signed by the owners of the property from which the soil is to be removed. The application shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer and any other necessary consultants, with all costs for the review to be paid by the applicant, prior to review by the Township Board. In reviewing the application, the Township Board will consider, among other things, whether the removal would endanger the safety of drainage, structures, adjoining property, persons or environment, as well as the report of the Township Engineer and/or other consultants. The application for removal shall be made and approved at least 30 days prior to commencement of the operation. 
(3)  No approval for soil removal as described in paragraphs (1) and (2) shall be permitted for a time period in excess of 90 days unless the Township Board approves the proposed time extension for good cause shown. 
(4)  The Township Board shall approve the proposed traffic flow, security fencing, vehicle and equipment operations, and signs and may impose any necessary conditions to ensure the public safety of such location and operation. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-157. - Application for removal of more than five thousand yards of material; large scale mining operations. 
Before granting an extraction permit, the Township Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing concerning such application and file its recommendations with the Township Board. A separate permit shall be required for each quarry or excavation site. Five copies of an application for a permit shall be submitted to the Township Clerk and shall contain all the following information before the application will be submitted to the Township Board for consideration: 
(1)  Names and addresses of parties of interest in the site setting forth their legal interest in the site. 
(2)  Full legal description of the site wherein operations are proposed. 
(3)  Detailed statement as to method of operation, such as wet or dry method, what type of machinery or equipment will be used, and estimated period of time that such operation will cover. 
(4)  Detailed statement as to exactly what type of deposit is proposed to be extracted. 
(5)  Proposed method of filling excavation where quarrying results in extensive dangerous undersurface excavation. 
(6)  Topographical survey map. 
(7)  Restoration plan with proposed after-use shall be included. 
(8)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the Township Board to base an opinion as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(9)  Payment of the required fees as set forth in section 10-158. 
(10)  Mining operations located on State or Federal owned property are exempt from site plan approval and must submit the required above application to the Township Clerk for Board approval. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-158. - Fees. 
The required fees, as set by the Township Board by resolution, shall accompany the application for an extraction permit. In addition, the applicant shall escrow funds at the Township to cover the engineering costs as estimated by the Township Engineer or the costs of any other consultants that the Township believes are necessary to review the proposed application. The fees will be used to defray the cost of engineering services or other consultant services, investigation, publication charges, and other miscellaneous administrative expenses occasioned by processing such application. No application will be processed until all required fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-159. - Term of extraction permit. 
An extraction permit issued by the Township Board shall be for a period of two years from the date of approval by the Township Board by resolution. The excavation permit shall be renewed, after the operation is inspected to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and/or the approval conditions attached to such permit, as well as payment of an annual inspection fee as set by the Township Board by resolution, and if the permittee has complied with all of the provisions of this article and/or other conditions of the permit during its operation. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-160. - Issuance, denial. 
After reviewing all of the information submitted by the applicant and such other information as may be in the hands of the Township Board, the Board shall at a regular or special meeting determine whether or not an excavation permit will be issued. The permit will be issued in the event the Township Board determines that the issuance of the permit would not detrimentally affect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of Green Oak Charter Township, and after approval by the Township Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-161. - Application required for existing extraction operations. 
Extraction operations in existence upon the date of adoption of this ordinance have one year to come into compliance with this ordinance and the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-162. - Mandatory requirements. 
The following requirements shall be mandatory: 
(1)  Pit operations. 
a.  Where an excavation in excess of five feet below the average road elevation from such operations the applicant shall erect a fence completely surrounding the portion of the site where the excavation extends, such fence to be not less than five feet in height which gates shall be kept locked when operations are not being carried on. The Township Board may waive this requirement if it determines that other suitable barriers exist to protect the health, welfare and safety of the public. 
b.  Any roads used for the purpose of ingress and egress to the excavation site which are located within 300 feet of occupied residences shall be kept dust free by hard topping with cement, bituminous substance or chemical treatment. 
c.  The slopes of the banks of the excavation shall in no event exceed a minimum of three feet to one foot vertical, and where a slope results from the operation, this slope must be maintained and extended into the water to a depth of five feet. 
d.  Where excavation operations result in a body of water, the owner or operator shall place appropriate "Keep Out—Danger" signs around the premises not more than 200 feet apart. In order to protect water wells and water supply of the Township the pumping or draining of water from such quarrying operations is absolutely prohibited. A dragline or other method of quarrying approved by the Township Board shall be followed. 
e.  No cut or excavation shall be closer than 50 feet from the nearest street or highway right-of-way line nor nearer than 20 feet to the nearest property line. However, the Township Board may prescribe more strict requirements in order to give sub lateral support to surrounding property where soil or geographic conditions warrant it. Where two or more mining operations exist on opposite sides of a common property line, the setbacks along the common property line(s) may be eliminated with mutual written consent of the affected property owners and with the approval of the Township Board. A grading plan and restoration plan integrating the contours of the contiguous properties is required. 
f.  The Township Board shall require such other performance standards where because of peculiar conditions they deem it necessary for the protection of health, safety, morals and well-being of the citizens of the Township. 
(2)  Regulations for stripping operations. 
a.  No soil, sand, gravel, clay or similar materials shall be removed below a point six inches above the mean elevation of the centerline of the nearest existing or proposed street or road established or approved by the county road commission, except as required for the installation of utilities and pavements. 
b.  No soil, sand, clay, gravel or similar materials shall be removed in such manner as to cause water to collect or to result in a place of danger or a menace to the public health. The premises shall at all times be graded so that surface water drainage is not interfered with. 
c.  Sufficient topsoil shall be stockpiled on the site so that the entire site, when stripping operations are completed, may be recovered with a minimum of four inches of topsoil and the replacement of such topsoil shall be made immediately following the termination of the stripping operations. In the event such stripping operations continue over a period of time greater than 30 days, the operator shall replace the stored topsoil over the stripped areas as work progresses. 
d.  The Township Board shall require such other and further requirements as is deemed necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the Township. 
e.  The above requirements do not apply to residential or commercial development projects. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-163. - Performance guarantee. 
The Township Board shall, to ensure strict compliance with all regulations contained herein or any conditions attached to the issuance of an excavation permit either for quarrying or stripping, require the permittee to furnish a performance guarantee in the form of cash or an automatically renewing irrevocable letter of credit in an amount determined by the Township Board, after recommendation by the Township Engineer, plus an administrative fee of 25 percent. In fixing the amount of such performance guarantee, the Township Board shall take into account the size and scope of the proposed operation, probable cost of rehabilitating the premises upon default of the operator, estimated expenses to compel operator to comply by court decree, and such other factors and conditions as might be relevant in determining the sum reasonable in the light of all facts and circumstances surrounding each application. In the event that the permittee shows, through evidence acceptable to the Township Board, that it lacks the ability to post the required performance guarantee, the Township Board, in its sole discretion, may waive the requirement for the performance guarantee if the permittee agrees to place and record a lien on the site in the amount of the performance guarantee required to ensure compliance with this article. Such lien shall be approved by the Township Attorney and shall remain in place until all requirements of this article and the excavation permit have been satisfied, and the Township authorizes the release of the lien in writing. 
When an extraction operation is proposed on lands owned by the State, County or Township, the Township Board may waive the requirement for a performance guarantee. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-164. - Building line for operation structures. 
To reduce the effects of airborne dusts, dirt and noise, all equipment for sorting, crushing, loading, weighing, and other operations structures shall not be built closer than 300 feet from any public street, right-of-way, or from any adjoining residentially zoned district. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-165. - Entrance requirements. 
All means of access to the property shall be from major or secondary thoroughfares and shall not be held from residential streets. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-166. - Speed limits. 
The products of the excavation operations shall not be transported in any vehicle on the streets or roadways of Township in excess of a posted speed determined by Township, county road commission, and Michigan Highway Department while going to or coming from the pickup or delivery of the product described above, and vehicles in transit to a pickup of such materials and product shall likewise be limited to the speed limit, in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-167. - Clean and visible license or registration plates. 
The operator of any mining or soil removal, etc., operation must require, prior to the exit from the operator's premises, the drivers of all vehicles carrying the product described above, to clean thoroughly the license plates of their vehicles, and the failure of the drivers to do so prior to existing the premises of the operators described above shall be a violation of this article by the operators. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-168. - Hours of operation. 
None of the described operations, i.e., mining and soil removal and in particular the removal of sand, gravel, limestone, or similar materials by excavations, stripping, mining or otherwise taking and including on-site operations appurtenant to the taking, including washing, grading, sorting, grinding operations, and the transport of the above-described product within the Township, shall be conducted except at the following times: From 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily, Monday through Saturday only. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-169. - Explosives. 
The use of explosives shall be done in accordance with the regulations for storage and handling of explosives as published by the State Police, Fire Marshall Division. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-170. - Dumping of soil, sand, clay, gravel or other materials. 
The dumping of any soil, sand, clay, or gravel on any parcel of land within the limits of the Township is hereby prohibited, except when done in accord with the following requirements: 
(1)  Permits required. A separate filling permit shall be required for any dumping of fill on any property within the Township. 
(2)  Applications. Shall be filed with the Township Clerk with plans and specifications which shall clearly give the legal description of the site of the proposed fill, the amount of fill proposed, method for filling, a list of materials to be deposited in the fill and shall be accompanied with the applicable material required in section 10-157 above for removal. 
(3)  Fill materials. Shall be "inert materials" only as approved in the department of natural resources list of approved materials. The Board of trustees shall require that a log of materials be maintained in which the amount, type of materials and the date of deposits shall be accurately described with photographs of the same if required by the Board of Trustees. 
(4)  Inspections. All fill sites shall be inspected on a schedule established by the Board of Trustees and by the Township Engineers with all costs for such inspections paid by the permittee prior to the inspections. 
(5)  Reclamation. All fill sites shall be reclaimed to provide proper drainage to leave the ground fit for growing turf and to allow for all land uses dictated by the zoning district in which any such property is located. Any filling of land within a floodplain, wetland or adjacent to a river or lake shall not commence unless and until all required approvals and permits have been issued by the department of natural resources. 
(6)  Performance Guarantee. A performance guarantee shall be required by the Township Board, to ensure compliance with the conditions of the permit and with the provisions of this article. The performance guarantee shall be in an amount as required in section 10-163. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-171. - Excavations or holes. 
Any extraction or quarrying done pursuant to this article that creates the existence within the limits of the Township of any unprotected, unbarricaded, open or dangerous excavations, holes, pits, or wells, or of any excavations, holes, pits, or wells, which constitute or are reasonably likely to constitute a danger or menace to the public health, safety or welfare, are hereby prohibited and declared a public nuisance. However, this article shall not prevent excavations under a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article or the building code of the Township where such excavations are properly protected and warning signs and lights are located in such manner as may be approved by the Township Board. This section shall not apply to drains created or existing by authority of the state, county, Township, or other governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 10-172. - Abatement of nuisance. 
Where the building official and/or his/her designee determines a nuisance exists as herein defined, he shall notify the owner as shown on the latest tax rolls in writing of such finding and require the owner to abate such nuisance. The building official may abate or cause to be abated such nuisance within a reasonable time, in no event less than 30 days, if the property owner fails to abate or cause to be abated such nuisance, and the cost or reasonable value of such work shall be placed as an assessment against the property on the next assessment role. 
(Ord. No. 06-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Chapter 12 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency service cost recovery, § 2-191 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; civil emergencies, ch. 8; fires within Huron-Clinton Metropolitan Authority land, § 26-35. 
State Law reference— State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq.; Township fire protection, MCL 41.801 et seq.; open burning, MCL 324.11522. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Fire hydrant use. 
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use by the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures a permit for such use from the fire official and the water company having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed, and authorized to make such use, by the water company having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 7D, § 13, 9-9-1981) 
State Law reference— Fire protection, MCL 41.805.  
Sec. 12-2. - Disturbing fire suppression equipment; replacement of defective and nonapproved fire appliances and equipment. 
(a)  A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire prevention code, except for the purpose of extinguishing fires, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as permitted in this subsection, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. 
(b)  Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 7D, § 14, 9-9-1981) 
State Law reference— Fire system maintenance, MCL 29.29.  
Sec. 12-3. - Street obstructions. 
A person shall not erect, construct, place or maintain any bump, fence, gate, chain, bar, pipe, or any other type of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the Township. The term "street," as used in this section, means any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 7D, § 15, 9-9-1981) 
State Law reference— Fire protection, MCL 41.805.  
Secs. 12-4—12-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; interfering with fire department operations, § 22-52. 
State Law reference— Fire protection, MCL 41.801 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-31. - Created and established. 
There is hereby created and established, in accordance with the provisions of Public Act No. 33 of 1951 (MCL 41.801 et seq.), a Fire Department consisting of a Fire Chief and such other members of the Fire Department as may be provided from time-to-time as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 17, § 1, 4-9-1968)  
Sec. 12-32. - Supervision and direction. 
(a)  The Township Board shall have general supervision and direction of the Fire Department and shall make all proper rules and regulations for the government and discipline of such department. 
(b)  The Township Board shall exercise its control through the Fire Chief, who shall be responsible for the direction of all actual firefighting, training and fire protection work. 
(c)  The Township Board may change titles and/or create such offices and positions within the Fire Department as the needs of the Fire Department shall require. 
(Ord. No. 17, § 2, 4-9-1968) 
State Law reference— Fire protection, MCL 41.805.  
Sec. 12-33. - Fire chief. 
(a)  The Fire Chief shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the pleasure of, the Township Board. 
(b)  The Fire Chief shall have custody and control of all property, books, records and equipment belonging, or pertaining, to the operation of the Fire Department, except records normally kept by the Township Clerk or Township Treasurer. 
(c)  At such time as the Township Board shall require, the Fire Chief shall render a complete report of the operations of the Fire Department. Such report shall contain sufficient information in order to enable the Township Board to judge the level of performance of the Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 17, § 3, 4-9-1968) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 12-34. - Membership. 
(a)  The Fire Department shall be composed of firefighters who shall be appointed as provided in this section. 
(b)  No person shall be employed as a member of the Fire Department unless he has resided in the state for a period of one year, is able to read and write the English language and has never been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  The Fire Chief shall require each member of the Fire Department to take the constitutional oath of office and shall provide for a registry of a certificate thereof and a book to be kept for such purpose. 
(d)  The Fire Chief may, subject to confirmation by the Township Board, appoint firefighters in such numbers as he may deem necessary to perform firefighting duties. 
(e)  Firefighters shall wear such badges, uniforms and/or insignias as the Fire Chief shall direct, and shall be equipped in the manner he deems necessary for the proper discharge of their duties. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any firefighter to exercise his authority to wear his uniform or insignia, or display any badge in an attempt to exercise his authority, except during the performance of actual authorized firefighting duty, or during authorized drill or training sessions. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any firefighter, knowingly, willfully and with proper excuse, to neglect and refuse to respond for firefighting duty in accordance with the regulations of the Fire Department. 
(h)  While on actual firefighting duty, firefighters shall be considered to be employees of the Township and shall be entitled to the same rights and immunities as other employees of the Township, including rights to benefits under the state workmen's compensation law. 
(Ord. No. 17, § 4, 4-9-1968)  
Sec. 12-35. - Disciplinary measures; appeals. 
(a)  Discipline and discharge. The Fire Chief may impose upon any member of the Fire Department such disciplinary measures as are appropriate, including, but not limited to, discharge, suspension without pay, reduction in rank or position, etc. All discipline shall be imposed by written order, stating therein the reasons for such action, the disciplinary measure taken and the date such disciplinary measure shall become effective. Such order shall be personally delivered to the member, or, if personal delivery is impractical, delivery may be made by enclosing a copy of the order in a sealed envelope and mailing it by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the member at his last known address, on which envelope there is listed a return address to which it can be returned in case delivery cannot be made. 
(b)  Appeal board. 
(1)  There shall be a Fire Appeal Board which shall consist of five members to be appointed by the Township Board. The term of office of the members of the appeal board shall be for three-year staggered terms, with the initial terms to be as follows: 
a.  Two members for a term ending December 31, 1978. 
b.  Two members for a term ending December 31, 1979. 
c.  One member for a term ending December 31, 1980. 
(2)  Members of the appeal board shall serve without compensation and may be removed from office for good cause shown after a hearing before the Township Board. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the Township Board for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(3)  The Fire Appeal Board shall hear all appeals by a member of the Fire Department from any disciplinary measure imposed upon such member by the Fire Chief. In exercising its authority granted in this subsection (b), the appeal board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as is necessary to effectuate its purpose, and to that end, shall have all the powers of discipline of the Fire Chief from whom the appeal is taken. 
(c)  Appeals. 
(1)  A member of the Fire Department shall have the right of appeal to the Fire Appeal Board from disciplinary measures imposed upon such member by the Fire Chief. Appeals shall be made in writing on a form to be provided by the Township Clerk and shall be made by filing a completed form with the Township Clerk within seven days of the date on which the disciplinary measure is imposed. After an appeal has been filed, the Township Clerk shall provide written notification of such fact to the members of the Fire Appeal Board. 
(2)  An appeal to the appeal board shall not be deemed as a stay of the imposition of the disciplinary measure of the Fire Chief. The Fire Appeal Board shall act as promptly as is consistent with the principles of fairness and good order of the Fire Department in resolution of the matters brought before it. The Fire Appeal Board shall adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its hearings and resolution of appeals. With the approval of the Township Board, the Fire Appeal Board may utilize the services of the Township attorney and Township employees, should they be required for the execution of the duties of the Fire Appeal Board. 
(Ord. No. 17A, § 1, 10-12-1977) 
State Law reference— Administrative board, MCL 41.805, 41.806.  
Secs. 12-36—12-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-71. - Adopted by reference. 
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Township Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the Township for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the Township, and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the Township Clerk, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 7E, § 1, 10-16-2002; Ord. No. 02-2010, § 1, eff. 5-21-2010)  
Sec. 12-72. - Amendments. 
The following sections of the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, are hereby amended as follows: 
Section 109.3 Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work, or cause the same to be done, in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction and penalties thereof pursuant to the Green Oak Charter Township Code, Chapter 20, Article II. 
Section 111.4 Insertion that the fees shall be as dictated by Township ordinance or Board resolution. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2, 8-18-1993; Ord. No. 02-2010, § 2, eff. 5-21-2010)  
Sec. 12-73. - Limits established. 
The limits referred to in section 3304 of the International Fire Code, in which the storage of explosive materials is specified, shall be determined by the Township Fire Chief in accordance with the International Fire Code and the conditions existing at each storage site, and the Fire Chief may issue a permit for such storage. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 4, 8-18-1993)  
Secs. 12-74—12-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE HYDRANT SPECIFICATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Fire protection, MCL 41.805. 
 
Sec. 12-101. - Established. 
(a)  All fire hydrants installed in the Township shall be AWWA (American Water Works Association) current standard, Mueller Super Centurion Model A-423, or any compatible fire hydrant with a breakable flange. The operating nut shall be NFPA (National Fire Protection Association) standard, with a 1½-inch counterclockwise pentagon nut opening, a minimum 5¼-inch valve opening and a six-inch inlet. All fire hydrants shall be buried a depth of five feet, six inches. 
(b)  All fire hydrants shall have two 2½-inch diameter hose connections and one 4½-inch pumper connection, which is compatible with a five-inch Storz coupled large diameter fire hose. All fire hydrant outlets shall have caps with pentagon nuts and chains. 
(c)  All fire hydrants shall be constructed with a companion butterfly or gate valve and shall include an adjustable cast iron valve box. All fire hydrant water mains shall have an eight-inch minimum. Any plans submitted for the installation or construction of fire hydrants shall indicate the finished grade of all fire hydrants in accordance with USGS (United States Grading Schedule) datum. 
(Ord. No. 105, § 1, 12-6-2000)  
Sec. 12-102. - Connections and nozzles. 
(a)  All hose connections shall be made of brass materials, with 2½-inch ID (inside dimensioned), NST (national standard thread), 3½-inch OD (outside dimensioned) and 7½ threads per inch. 
(b)  All pumper connections shall be Fire Flow 2000 Series nozzles, manufactured by the RLS Group, Inc., and shall be designed as a one-piece unit with 4½-inch ID, which is compatible with a five-inch Storz coupled large diameter fire hose. All nozzles shall be made of a lead-free brass alloy, which ensures the long life of the nozzle, free from any oxidation and lead that could contaminate the public water supply. All nozzles shall be colored red, using a baked powder finish coat. All nozzle caps shall be color coded with the color that is indicative of the water main size, as established by the Township Fire Department. All nozzles shall be considered an integral part of the fire hydrant assembly and shall be resistant to any tampering or removal by unauthorized persons. Add-on Storz compatible adapters shall not be acceptable. 
(c)  All Mueller fire hydrants shall use Fire Flow Model 45T40 nozzles and all East Jordan fire hydrants shall use Fire Flow Model 4550 nozzles. 
(Ord. No. 105, § 2, 12-6-2000)  
Chapter 14 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; civil emergencies, ch. 8; environment, ch. 10; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 34; waterways, ch. 36; zoning, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Natural resources and environmental protection act, MCL 324.101 et seq.; building and construction in floodplain, MCL 324.3103; soil conservation districts, MCL 324.9301 et seq.; subdivision within floodplain, MCL 560.138; subdivision within floodplain, conditions for approval, MCL 560.194. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Agency designated. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the Township is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the Township under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended. The Township assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout the corporate limits of the community adopting the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Ord. No. 05-2008, § 1, 7-17-2008)  
Sec. 14-2. - Code appendix enforced. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the Township. 
(Ord. No. 05-2008, § 2, 7-17-2008)  
Sec. 10-3. - Designation of regulated floodprone hazard areas. 
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled Livingston County, Michigan and dated September 17, 2008, and the flood insurance rate maps (FIRMS) panel numbers of 26093C: 0345D, 0363D, 0364D, 0368D, 0456D, 0457D, 0458D, 0459D, 0470D, 0476D, 0477D, 0478D, 0479D, 0481D, 0483D, 0490D, and 0495D and dated September 17, 2008, are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the state construction code, and declared to be a part of section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the flood hazards section of table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-2008, § 3, 7-17-2008)  
Secs. 14-4—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Water resources protection, MCL 324.3101 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard area means land which, on the basis of available floodplain information, is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of the Township, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards have been designated as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of the Township, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the Township. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood and may include a flood boundary-floodway map. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See Flood and flooding . 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas which must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood. 
Regulatory flood datum (RFD) means the 100-year floodplain contour line synonymous with the base flood elevation. 
State department of environmental quality (DEQ) means the state department responsible for environmental quality. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, gas or liquid storage facility, as well as a mobile home. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, a substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" does not include either any: 
a.  Project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 1, 10-3-1984) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-32. - Legal authorization. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority conferred by the Township zoning act, Public Act No. 184 of 1943 (MCL 125.271 et seq.), and the Township ordinances, Public Act No. 246 of 1945 (MCL 41.181 et seq.), requiring that any activity which proposes to alter a floodplain area shall obtain a building and land use permit from the Township. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 1.3, 12-16-1992)  
Sec. 14-33. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to any parcel of land deemed to contain a floodplain and any person applying to the Township for a building and land use permit. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 1.4, 12-16-1992)  
Sec. 14-34. - Alteration or modification of floodplain without a permit. 
(a)  If a floodplain area is altered or modified in any way, or changes are made to the earth surface without the proper Township permits, the Township may hire, in consultation with the DEQ, a consultant, who shall recommend remedial measures. The Township shall attach all such consultation fees as a tax lien to the property. 
(b)  If the violator does not, for any reason, restore the floodplain surface to its original condition within one year of the conviction under this article, then the Township may contract with a landscape professional to restore the disturbed areas to their original condition and place a tax lien on the affected properties to cover the cost of restoration, plus all costs incurred by the Township to prosecute and administer the case. 
(Ord. No. 82, §§ 1.5.1, 1.5.2, 12-16-1992)  
Secs. 14-35—14-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURES AND REQUIRED INFORMATION 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Filing procedure. 
Any person desiring a building and land use permit for an activity requiring such a permit, such as land balancing or grading, constructing a building, filing a tentative preliminary plat, submitting a site plan, a planned unit development, a condominium, a special use approval permit or requesting a lot split which would involve a floodplain, a wetland, a woodland or a change of earth surface, must make application with the administrator, which would involve a floodplain. No filling or alteration of a floodplain shall be allowed unless and until all necessary permits for the project are requested and approval is granted. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.1, 12-16-1992) 
State Law reference— Unlawful construction, MCL 324.3108.  
Sec. 14-62. - Regulation of floodplains. 
Flood losses due to the periodic inundation of floodplain areas within the Township, which result in a loss of life or property, pose health and safety hazards, disrupt commerce and governmental services, require extraordinary public expenditures to provide flood protection and relief, and impair the local tax base, adversely affect the general public health, safety and welfare. Such flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstruction of the floodplain area, which causes increases in flood elevations and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses which are vulnerable to floods or create hazards to other lands which are inadequately protected from flood damages. This division is established to: 
(1)  Protect human life, prevent or minimize property losses and reduce public costs of rescue and relief efforts from the effects of flood conditions; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which, when located in designated flood hazard areas, are dangerous to health, safety and property in times of flooding, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(3)  Require that uses of structures, including public facilities, which are vulnerable to floods, which are located in designated flood hazard areas, be protected against flood damage at the time of construction; 
(4)  Alert the public to lands which are unsuitable for certain uses and structures because of potential flood hazards; and 
(5)  Permit reasonable use of property located within designated flood hazard areas. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.2, 12-16-1992)  
Sec. 14-63. - Delineation of floodplain areas. 
(a)  Floodplain area regulation shall be an overlay to the existing zoning districts delineated on the official zoning map of the Township. The boundaries of the floodplain areas are identified in the report entitled the "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)—Green Oak Township, Michigan," prepared by Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) through its National Flood Insurance Program. The study and accompanying maps are adopted in this division by reference, appended, and declared to be part of this section. 
(b)  The standards which establish the floodplain area are delineated by the regulatory flood elevation. In areas associated with flooding, a floodway is designated within the floodplain area. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.3, 12-16-1992)  
Sec. 14-64. - Applicability. 
(a)  In addition to other requirements of this division which may be applicable to development in the underlying zoning district, compliance with this division shall be required for all development occurring within designated floodplain areas. Conflicts between the requirements of this division and other requirements of this article or any other ordinance shall be resolved in favor of this division, except where the conflicting requirement is more stringent and would further the objectives of this division. In such cases, the more stringent requirement shall be applied. 
(b)  Upon application for a building and land use permit, the administrator shall determine whether such use is located within a designated floodplain area by referring to the documents cited in this division. The issuance of a land use permit within the floodplain area shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The requirements of this division shall be met; 
(2)  The requirements of the underlying zoning districts and all other applicable provisions of this division shall be met; and 
(3)  All necessary development permits shall have been issued by the appropriate local, state and federal authorities, including a floodplain permit, approval or letter of authority from the DEQ under authority of part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.). Where a development permit cannot be issued prior to the issuance of a building and land use permit, a letter from the issuing agency, indicating the intent to issue contingent only upon proof of land use compliance, shall be acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.4, 12-16-1992)  
Sec. 14-65. - Duties of administrator. 
(a)  With regard to the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), and the regulation of development within the flood hazard area zone as prescribed in this division, the duties of the administrator shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Notification to adjacent communities and the DEQ when the alteration or relocation of any watercourse is proposed, and the submission of such notifications to the NFIP; 
(2)  Verification and recording of the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new or substantially improved structures constructed within the flood hazard area. In the case of floodproofed structures, the elevation to which the structure was floodproofed shall be recorded; and 
(3)  Recording of all certificates of floodproofing and written notification to all applicants to whom variances are granted in a flood hazard area zone, indicating the terms of the variance, the increased danger to life and property, and the increased cost of flood insurance commensurate with the increased flood risk. A record of all variance notifications and variance actions shall be maintained with the written justification for each variance. 
(b)  All records and maps pertaining to the NFIP shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. It shall be the responsibility of the administrator to obtain and utilize the best available flood hazard data for purposes of administering this division in the absence of data from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.5, 12-16-1992) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 14-66. - Required information. 
The following information shall be provided with an application for a certificate of zoning compliance for any lot, use or structure located either in whole or in part within a designated flood hazard area: 
(1)  Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures. The elevation shall be referenced to National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
(2)  If a structure is to be floodproofed, an indication of the elevation to which floodproofing will be applied. The elevation shall be referenced to NGVD. In such a case, a certificate from a professional engineer or architect registered in the state shall be submitted, indicating therein that the floodproofing criteria of this division shall be met. 
(3)  A description of any alteration or relocation of any watercourse. 
(4)  Proof of floodplain permit approval from the DEQ under authority of part 31 of the Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.). 
(5)  100-year flood elevation data for any lot subject to the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), or any condominium unit subject to the condominium act, Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
(6)  Additional information necessary to determine compliance with this division. 
(7)  In the case where the reach of any stream, drain or other watercourse is not mapped by the FIRM, a certification by a registered professional engineer of the 100-year floodplain elevation and the 100-year floodway limits. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.6, 12-16-1992)  
Sec. 14-67. - General standards for designated floodplain areas. 
The following standards shall apply to all land within a designated floodplain area: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements, including the placement of, addition to or expansion of prefabricated structures and mobile homes, shall be: 
a.  Designed and anchored to prevent the flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
b.  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; and 
c.  Constructed by methods and practices that reduce flood damage to the maximum reasonable extent. 
(2)  New and replacement water supply systems shall reduce infiltration of floodwaters into the systems to the maximum reasonable extent. 
(3)  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development, shall be prohibited in a floodway. Exceptions to this subsection shall be made only upon certification by a professional engineer registered in the state or the DEQ (in cases in which the department has jurisdiction) that the encroachment or other development will not result in any increase in flood levels during the discharge of a base flood, and that the encroachment or other discharge complies with part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.). 
(4)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall reduce infiltration of floodwaters into such systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters to the maximum reasonable extent. On-site disposal systems shall be located to avoid system impairment or contamination during flooding. 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed and located to reduce flood damage to such utilities and facilities to the maximum reasonable extent. 
(6)  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. Positive drainage away from all structures shall be provided. 
(7)  A watercourse located within a designated flood hazard area shall not be relocated until approval has been obtained from the DEQ or the county department of public services, whichever has jurisdiction. Evidence of such approval shall be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency by the person relocating the watercourse. Such person shall be responsible for obtaining FIRM revisions from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(8)  The Township Planning Consultant shall review all development proposals to determine compliance with the standards in this section, and shall transmit the consultant's determination to the administrator. 
(9)  Land shall not be divided in a manner which creates parcels or lots which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this section. 
(10)  The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse not subject to state and federal regulations shall be designed to ensure flood-carrying capacity shall be maintained. 
(11)  Available flood hazard data from federal, state or other sources shall be used in meeting the standards of this division. Data furnished by the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall take precedence over data from other sources. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.7, 12-16-1992)  
Sec. 14-68. - Specific base flood elevation standards. 
(a)  The lowest floor level, including the basement level, of all new construction and substantial improvements to residential structures, including the placement of, addition to or expansion of prefabricated structures and mobile homes, shall have an elevation at least one foot above the base flood level. 
(b)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall meet either of the following standards: 
(1)  The lowest floor, including the basement level, shall have an elevation at least one foot above the base flood level; or 
(2)  The portion of the structure, including utility and sanitary facilities, which is located one foot above the base flood level shall be watertight and have walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. Structural components shall have the capability to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A professional engineer or architect registered in the state shall certify that the standard of this subsection is satisfied. The engineer shall also certify that the floodproofing methods employed are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact, uplift forces and other factors associated with a base flood which may occur at the structure's location. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.8, 12-16-1992) 
State Law reference— Building and construction in floodplain, MCL 324.3108.  
Sec. 14-69. - Mobile home standards. 
The following general standards and requirements shall be applied to mobile homes located within floodplain areas: 
(1)  All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties in accordance with the following specifications: 
a.  Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, and two additional ties per side shall be provided at intermediate locations. However, mobile homes less than 50 feet in length shall be required to provide one tie per side. 
b.  Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home and five additional ties per side shall be provided at intermediate points. However, mobile homes less than 50 feet in length shall be required to provide four ties per side. 
c.  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds. 
d.  All additions to a mobile home shall be similarly anchored. 
(2)  An evacuation plan, which indicates alternate vehicular access and escape routes for mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions, shall be filed with the Township Police Department. 
(3)  Mobile homes within A zones on the FIRM shall be located in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  All new and replacement mobile homes shall be placed on stands or lots which are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be one foot above the base flood level. 
b.  Adequate surface drainage away from all structures and access for a mobile home hauler shall be provided. 
c.  When the mobile home is to be elevated on pilings: 
1.  Lots shall be large enough to permit steps; 
2.  Piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and 
3.  Reenforcement shall be provided for piers more than six feet above ground level. 
d.  For mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions which exist at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived, any repair, reconstruction or improvement of streets, utilities and pads, which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, shall comply with the standards set forth in subsections (3)a—c of this section. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.9, 12-16-1992) 
State Law reference— The mobile home commission act, Public Act No. 96 of 1967, MCL 125.2301 et seq.  
Sec. 14-70. - Permitted uses within the floodway. 
The following standards shall be applied to all uses proposed to be located within the floodway portion of the floodplain: 
(1)  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, shall be prohibited. Exceptions to this prohibition shall only be made upon certification by a registered professional engineer or the DEQ that the development proposed will not result in any increases in flood levels during a base flood discharge, and in compliance with part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.). 
(2)  The placement of mobile homes or other structures for human habitation shall be prohibited. 
(3)  The land uses permitted in an underlying zoning district shall not be construed as being permitted within the regulatory floodway, except upon compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.10, 12-16-1992)  
Sec. 14-71. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
(a)  The degree of flood protection required by provisions of this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. 
(b)  The provisions of this division do not imply the areas outside the floodplain or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages, nor shall the Township, or any officer or employee thereof, be liable for any flood damages that result from the reliance on the provisions of this division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.11, 12-16-1992)  
Sec. 14-72. - Conflicting provisions. 
This division shall not preclude or diminish the restrictions posed by any other ordinance, law or other restriction. Where another standard is in conflict with this division, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.12, 12-16-1992)  
Sec. 14-73. - Variances. 
Persons wishing to continue activities which commence prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, and which violate the standards and regulations of this division, may seek a variance with the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2.14, 12-16-1992)  
Chapter 16 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 10; utilities, ch. 34; zoning, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Municipal historic commission, MCL 399.171 et seq.; local historic district act, MCL 399.201 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local historic districts act, MCL 399.201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alter and alteration mean work that changes the detail of the resource, but does not change the basic size or shape thereof. 
Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource. 
Committee means an historic district study committee appointed by the Township Board pursuant to section 16-41. 
Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect. 
Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
Historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture. 
Historic District Commission (HDC) means the Township Historic District Commission. 
Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture. 
Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture of the Township, state or United States of America. 
Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding under section 16-36(f). 
Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or manmade landscape area that provides a connective link or a buffer between resources. 
Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time-to-time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource, except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering, age and use. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for the purposes of this article. 
Proposed historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as an historic district or added to an established historic district. 
Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for the purpose of this article. 
Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or nonhistoric buildings, structures, sites, objects, features or open spaces located within an historic district. 
Standing committee means a permanent body established by the Township Board to conduct the activities of an historic district study committee on a continuing basis. 
Work means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or demolition of a resource located within an historic district. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 1(B), 6-21-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, MCL 399.201a.  
Sec. 16-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Safeguard the heritage of the Township by preserving one or more historic districts in the Township which reflects elements of its cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history. 
(2)  Assist property owners in recognizing and protecting their historic resources. 
(3)  Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the Township. 
(4)  Preserve the agricultural history of the Township. 
(5)  Foster civic beauty. 
(6)  Stabilize and improve property values in historic districts and the surrounding areas. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 1(A), 6-21-2000) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 399.202.  
Sec. 16-33. - Boundaries. 
The Township historic districts shall be the areas legally described in records maintained by the Township Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 2, 6-21-2000) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish districts, MCL 399.203.  
Sec. 16-34. - Construction, etc., regulated. 
There shall be no construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or demolition of a resource within any designated historic district within the Township, unless such action complies with the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 3, 6-21-2000) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6.  
Sec. 16-35. - Historic District Commission. 
(a)  Created. In order to execute the purposes declared in this article, and prior to establishing any historic district within the Township, there shall be created a commission to be known as the "Township Historic District Commission (HDC)." 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  The HDC shall consist of seven members whose residences are located in the Township. HDC members shall be appointed by the supervisor for terms of office of three years, provided that two of the initial members shall be appointed for one year, two for two years and three for three years. After the initial terms expire, each member shall be appointed for three years. Members of the HDC may be reappointed after their terms expire. 
(2)  At least one member of the HDC shall be appointed from a list of citizens submitted by a duly organized and existing preservation society and at least one member of the HDC shall be a graduate of an accredited school of architecture, who has two years of architectural experience or who is an architect duly registered in the state, if such person resides in the Township and is available for appointment. A majority of the members of the HDC shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in, or knowledge of, historic preservation. 
(3)  A vacancy occurring in the membership of the HDC for any cause shall be filled within 60 calendar days by a person appointed by the supervisor for the unexpired term. The members of the HDC shall serve without compensation. 
(4)  Any member of the HDC may be removed by vote of the Township Board for inefficiency, neglect of duty, unresolved conflict of interest or malfeasance in office, after due consideration by the Township Board. The Township Board shall issue its directive to any member being considered for removal, indicating the time, date and place for consideration by the Township Board, along with a specification of grounds upon which removal is being considered. At the time and place set, such member shall have an opportunity to be heard and may be represented by counsel. Decisions by the Township Board shall be final and shall be based upon the record of such show cause proceeding. The record of all such proceedings shall be taken and preserved for one year unless a longer retention is requested by the member under consideration for removal. 
(5)  Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the HDC shall automatically operate to vacate the seat of a member of the HDC, unless the absence is excused by the HDC by resolution setting forth such excuse. 
(c)  Duties and powers. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the HDC to review all plans for the construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or demolition of structures in the historic district, and the HDC shall have the power to pass upon such plans before a permit for such activity can be granted. In reviewing the plans, the HDC shall follow the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings, as set forth in 36 CFR 67, or the equivalent thereof as approved or established by the State Bureau of History of the Department of State, and shall also give consideration and significance to: 
a.  The historical or architectural value and significance of the historic resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area; 
b.  The relationship of the exterior architectural features of such historic resource to the rest of the resources and the surrounding area; 
c.  The general compatibility of the exterior design, arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used; 
d.  The proposed major changes to open spaces in an historic district. The HDC shall review plans for major changes to such open spaces, such as removal of large trees over 12 inches in diameter as measured four feet above ground, or making of major contour changes in terrain features. The HDC may use its discretion to decide whether or not such proposed changes are major in nature; 
e.  Any other factor, including aesthetic value, which it deems pertinent. 
(2)  In addition to the secretary of interior standards, the HDC shall also refer to principles for rehabilitation and restoration guidelines adopted by the HDC. 
(3)  The HDC shall review and act upon exterior features of a resource, and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless interior work will cause visible changes to the exterior of the historic resource. The HDC shall not disapprove applications, except in regard to considerations as set forth in subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) of this section. 
(d)  Rules. 
(1)  The HDC shall elect from its membership a chairman and a vice-chairman, whose terms of office shall be fixed by the HDC. The chairman shall preside over the HDC and shall have the right to vote. The vice-chairman shall, in the case of the absence or disability of the chairman, perform the duties of the chairman. 
(2)  A secretary shall be appointed and shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings and actions of the HDC and report regularly to the Township Board. 
(3)  A majority of the members of the HDC shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and a two-thirds vote of the members is needed to carry an issue. The HDC shall adopt rules or bylaws for the transaction of its business, which shall provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings. Such rules or bylaws shall provide for the calling of special meetings by the chairman or by at least two members of the HDC. All meetings of the HDC shall be open to the public and any person or his duly constituted representative shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before the HDC reaches its decision. 
(4)  Public notice of the time, date and place of meetings shall be given in the manner required by Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.264). Each notice shall contain the name and address of the HDC. The notice must be posted at the Township bulletin board, in addition to any other location deemed appropriate by the Township Board, including on cable television. A meeting agenda shall be a part of the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the HDC. The requirements of Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.264) include the following: 
a.  For regular meetings of a public body, there shall be posted within ten days of the first meeting of the HDC in each calendar or fiscal year, a public notice, stating the dates, times and places of its regular meetings; 
b.  For a rescheduled regular meeting, special meeting or emergency meeting of the HDC, a public notice, stating the date, time and place of the meeting shall be posted at least 18 hours before the meeting; 
c.  For a change in the schedule of regular meetings of the HDC, a notice shall be posted within three days after the meeting at which the change is made, stating the new dates, times and places of its regular meetings; 
d.  An emergency meeting of the HDC may be called when two members of the HDC decide that a delay would be detrimental to efforts to lessen or respond to the threat to an historic resource. 
(5)  The HDC shall keep a record, which shall be open to public view, of its resolutions, proceedings and actions. The concurring affirmative vote of four members shall constitute approval of plans before it for review or for adoption of any resolution, motion or other action of the HDC. 
(6)  The HDC shall submit an annual report to the Township Board of the general activities of the HDC and shall submit such special reports as requested by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 4, 6-21-2000; Ord. No. 102A, § 1, 11-15-2000) 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-141 et seq. 
State Law reference— Historic District Commission, MCL 399.204; commission powers, MCL 399.205.  
Sec. 16-36. - Plan review procedure. 
(a)  Filing application. 
(1)  Application for a building permit to construct, alter, repair, move, add to, excavate or demolish any structure in an historic district shall be made to the Building Department. The application shall state whether the property is in an historic district. Plans shall be submitted, showing the structure in question and its relation to adjacent structures or properties. 
(2)  Upon the filing of such application, the Building Department shall immediately determine the zoning classification of the parcel and determine if it is located within a residential zoning district and involves work on a new or existing residence or existing residential accessory structure. The Building Department shall immediately notify the HDC of the receipt of such application and shall transmit the application, together with accompanying plans and other information, to the HDC. If the parcel is determined to be within a nonresidential zoning district or involves work other than single-family residential, then processing requirements for site plan review, as set forth in chapter 38, article II, division II of this Code, must be completed and approved prior to review by the HDC. The Planning Commission may, however, at any time during its review, refer such application to the HDC for the HDC's preliminary review. Upon approval of the required site plan, in accordance with chapter 38, article II, division II of this Code, the Building Department shall immediately notify the HDC of the application and shall transmit the application to the HDC for its review. 
(3)  The Building Department shall not issue a permit and no proposed work shall proceed until the HDC has acted on the application by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed, except as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Action upon application. 
(1)  The HDC shall meet within 35 days after a complete application has been received by the Building Department, and shall review the plans according to the duties and powers specified in this article. In reviewing the plans, the HDC must make every effort to confer with the applicant for the building or demolition permits. No fees shall be charged to process a permit application through the HDC beyond the existing Building Department fees. 
(2)  The failure of the HDC to approve or disapprove such plans within 60 days from the date of a completed application for a permit, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the HDC in writing, shall be deemed to constitute approval and the Building Department shall proceed to process the application without regard to a certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)  Approval of application. 
(1)  If the HDC approves the plans, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness, which is to be signed by the chairman, attached to the application for a building permit and immediately transmitted to the Building Department. The chairman shall also stamp all prints submitted to the HDC, signifying its approval. 
(2)  After the certificate of appropriateness has been issued and the building permit granted to the applicant, the Building Department shall from time-to-time inspect the work approved by such certificate and shall take such action as is necessary to ensure compliance with the approved plan. 
(3)  The HDC may delegate the issuance of certificate of appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to the building official. The term "minor classes of work" shall be defined by the HDC. The HDC shall provide the building official with specific written standards/guidelines for issuing certificate of appropriateness. On at least a quarterly basis, the HDC shall review the certificate of appropriateness, if any, issued for work by the building official to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should be continued. 
(4)  In case of an application for work affecting the appearance of a resource or for the alteration, moving or demolition of a resource which the commission deems so valuable to the Township that the loss thereof will adversely affect the Township's historical interests, the HDC shall endeavor to work out with the owner an economically feasible plan for preservation of the historic resource. 
(d)  Denial of application. 
(1)  If the HDC disapproves of the plans, it shall state its reasons for such disapproval and shall transmit a record of such action and reasons therefor in writing to the Building Department and the applicant. The HDC may advise what it thinks is proper if it disapproves of the plan submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to his plan and shall have the right to resubmit the application at any time after making such modifications. A denial of a permit application shall be binding on the Building Department, Building Inspector or any such other relevant authority. 
(2)  The denial of the plan shall also include a notice to the applicant of his right of appeal to the State Historic Preservation Review Board and the circuit court. 
(e)  Ordinary maintenance and prior permit work. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance of a resource within an historic district or to prevent work on any resource under a permit issued by the building inspector or another duly delegated authority before the ordinance from which this article is derived was enacted. 
(f)  Notice to proceed. Under special conditions and emergencies, work within an historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a notice to proceed by the HDC if any of the following conditions prevail, and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the HDC to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following: 
(1)  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or the occupancy of a structure; 
(2)  The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program which will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approval, financing and environmental clearances; 
(3)  Retention of the resource would cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God or other event beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner; or 
(4)  Retention of the resource would not be in the interests of the majority of the community. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 5, 6-21-2000) 
State Law reference— Definitions, MCL 399.202a; permit, notice to proceed, MCL 399.205; ordinary maintenance and repair, MCL 399.210.  
Sec. 16-37. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any permit applicant aggrieved by a decision of the HDC may file an appeal with the State Historic Preservation Review Board of the State Historical Commission within the Department of State. The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. 
(b)  A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State Historic Preservation Review Board may appeal the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction over the HDC whose decision was appealed to the State Historic Preservation Review Board. The applicant may only appeal to the circuit court after appealing to the State Historic Preservation Review Board. 
(c)  In addition, any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the Township, other than the resource property owner, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the HDC, may appeal the decision to the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 6, 6-21-2000) 
State Law reference— Administrative appeal from decision, MCL 399.205; citizen appeal, MCL 399.211.  
Sec. 16-38. - Demolition by neglect. 
Upon a finding by the HDC that an historic resource either in the historic district or in a proposed historic district, which is subject to HDC review pursuant to the terms of section 16-41, is threatened by demolition by neglect, the HDC may do either of the following: 
(1)  Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect; or 
(2)  If the owner does not make the repairs within a reasonable time, the HDC or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner and may be levied by the Township as a special assessment against the property. The HDC or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this subsection, upon obtaining an order from the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 7, 6-21-2000) 
State Law reference— Repairs by owner or commission, MCL 399.205.  
Sec. 16-39. - Township acquisition of historic resources. 
If all efforts by the HDC to preserve a resource fail, or if it is determined by the Township Board that public ownership is most suitable, the Township Board, if considered to be in the public interest, may acquire the resource, using public funds, public or private gifts, grants or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. Such an acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation of the HDC or standing committee. The HDC or standing committee may be assigned the responsibility for maintaining publicly owned resources, using its own funds, if not specifically designated for other purposes, or public funds committed for that use by the Township Board. Upon recommendation of the HDC or standing committee, the Township may sell resources acquired under this section with protective easements included in the property transfer documents, if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 8, 6-21-2000) 
State Law reference— Acquisition of historic resource, MCL 399.207.  
Sec. 16-40. - Failure to obtain a permit. 
(a)  When work has been done upon an historic resource without a permit and the HDC finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the HDC may require an owner to restore the resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work was conducted or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  If the owner does not comply with such restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the HDC may seek an order from the circuit court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)  If the owner does not or cannot comply with the order of the court, the HDC or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The cost of the work shall be charged to the owner and may be levied by the Township as a special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to such order of the circuit court, the HDC or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 9, 6-21-2000) 
State Law reference— Failure to obtain permit, MCL 399.205.  
Sec. 16-41. - Historic District Study Committee. 
(a)  Appointment. Before establishing, amending, adding to, removing properties from or eliminating any historic district, the Township Board shall appoint an historic district study committee. The Historic District Study Committee shall contain a majority of persons who have a clearly demonstrated interest or knowledge of historic preservation, and shall contain representation from one or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations. 
(b)  Duties. 
(1)  The Historic District Study Committee, or consultants employed by the committee, shall do all of the following: 
a.  Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district, following procedures established or approved by the state historic bureau; 
b.  Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the historic resources located within that district; 
c.  Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources within the proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of the historic resources, the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 CFR 60.4. Such criteria includes: 
1.  The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association, and that: 
i.  Are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; 
ii.  Are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; 
iii.  Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction; that represent the work of a master; that possess high artistic values; or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
iv.  Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 
2.  Criteria established or approved by the State Historic Bureau, if any. 
d.  Prepare a preliminary Historic District Study Committee report that addresses, at a minimum, all of the following: 
1.  The charge of the committee; 
2.  The composition of the committee membership; 
3.  The historic district or district study area; 
4.  The boundaries for each proposed historic district, in writing and on maps; 
5.  The history of each proposed historic district; 
6.  The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient number of individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria. 
e.  Transmit copies of the preliminary Historic District Committee report for review and recommendation to the Township Planning Commission, the Department of State, the State Historic Commission and the State Historic Preservation Review Board. 
(2)  Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the Historic District Study Committee shall hold a public hearing. Notice will be published of the time, date and place of the hearing. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail, not less than 14 calendar days before the hearing, to the owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the Township. 
(c)  Actions to be taken. After the date of the public hearing, the Historic District Study Committee and the Township Board shall have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the Township Board, to take the following actions: 
(1)  The Historic District Study Committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its recommendation and the recommendation, if any, of the Township Planning Commission to the Township Board. If the recommendation is to establish an historic district, the final report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance. 
(2)  After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of an historic district, the Township Board, at its discretion, may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance. If the Township Board passes an ordinance establishing one or more historic districts, the Township Board shall file a copy of that ordinance, including a legal description of the properties located within the historic districts, with the register of deeds. The Township Board shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as listed on the Township tax rolls, have approved the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a written petition. 
(3)  All writings prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained by the Historic District Study Committee, in the performance of any official function, shall be made available to the public. 
(d)  Elimination of districts. If considering elimination of an historic district, the Historic District Study Committee shall follow the procedures set forth in this section for issuing a preliminary report, holding a public hearing and issuing a final report, but with the intent of showing one or more of the following: 
(1)  The historic district has lost the physical characteristics that enabled establishment of the district. 
(2)  The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined. 
(3)  The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 10, 6-21-2000) 
State Law reference— Historic districts, committee recommendations, MCL 399.203; elimination of districts, MCL 399.214.  
Sec. 16-42. - Proposed historic districts. 
(a)  Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic, architectural, archeological, engineering or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the Township Board may adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed historic district be referred to the HDC as prescribed in sections 16-34 and 16-36. The HDC shall review permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic district was an established historic district for not more than one year, or until such time as the Township Board approves or rejects the establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  If the Township Board determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to resources located within an established historic district or a proposed historic district, the Township Board may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six months. The Township Board may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period, not to exceed six months, upon a finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 11, 6-21-2000) 
State Law reference— Elimination of existing district, MCL 399.214.  
Sec. 16-43. - Amendments. 
Any amendment to this article may be made from time-to-time by the Township Board, provided that, prior to the adoption of any amendments, a study committee, appointed pursuant to the provisions of this article, makes the study reports and recommendations required in section 3 of Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCL 399.203), and meets the requirements for amending chapter 38 of this Code, if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 12, 6-21-2000)  
Sec. 16-44. - Acceptance of gifts, grants or bequests. 
(a)  The Township Board may accept gifts, grants or bequests from the state or federal government for historic restoration or historic purposes. The Township may participate in any state or federal programs that benefit historic preservation. The Township Board may accept public or private gifts, grants or bequests for such purposes; provided, however, that such gifts, grants or bequests are not prohibited by other Township codes and are not used for the purpose of paying any fees or expenses arising out of any litigation. The Township Board may appoint the HDC to administer, on behalf of the Township, such gifts, grants or bequests for the purposes provided in this article. 
(b)  The Township Treasurer shall be custodian of funds of the HDC and authorized expenditures shall be certified by the Township Treasurer, the secretary or other officer designated by the HDC. The HDC shall annually report to the Township Board any money it shall receive or expend. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 13, 6-21-2000) 
State Law reference— Gifts and grants, MCL 399.206.1.  
Sec. 16-45. - County jurisdiction. 
If a county historic district commission is in existence or becomes existing, then coordination between the County Historic District Commission and the Township Historic District Commission shall be maintained. The overall historic district plans for the Township shall be submitted to the County Historic District Commission for review. The day-to-day activities of the Township Historic District Commission shall not be reviewed unless the activities affect resources of importance to the County Commission. 
(Ord. No. 102, § 14, 6-21-2000)  
Chapter 17 - ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Purpose and application. 
It is also the specific intent of this article to provide the Engineering Design Standards for all applicable projects in Green Oak Charter Township. When reference is made in any other provision of the Green Oak Charter Township Code of Ordinances, including the Zoning Ordinance, to Engineering Design Standards, engineering standards, or review by the Township Engineer, these standards shall apply. 
These Engineering Design Standards are intended to provide a reasonable and proper basis for the design and construction of subdivision and other project site improvements, including sanitary sewer, water main, storm water management, paving and grading. 
The Green Oak Charter Township Standard Details and Specifications shall be considered a part of the design standards. 
Approval of engineering plans (also known as detailed construction plans) shall be for a period of two years from the date of the approval letter. Permits for construction must be obtained and substantial construction shall take place within two years of the approval letter, or the approval shall expire and plans must be resubmitted for review. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-2. - General. 
(a)  All plans submitted shall bear the seal of the registered professional engineer licensed in the State of Michigan who is responsible for the design. 
(b)  Signed contracts for all improvements shall be submitted to the Township Engineer prior to start of construction. 
(c)  Performance guarantees shall be provided in accordance with section 38-47 of the Green Oak Charter Township Zoning Ordinance in the form of cash, certified check, or an automatically renewing irrevocable letter of credit. 
(d)  Additionally, a two-year maintenance bond shall be furnished to the Township before any development is approved and accepted. The term of the bond shall begin on or after the date of acceptance of the work by the Township. The amount of the bond shall be equal to 50 percent of the construction cost for water main, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and paving. A sewer cleaning bond of $5,000.00 shall also be deposited into escrow and any remaining funds after the acceptance of the project shall be returned to the developer, proprietor, person, or company that deposited the funds. 
(e)  All public improvements must be staked under the supervision of a registered land surveyor licensed in the State of Michigan according to the latest approved plans. All plans used by the contractor for construction must be stamped "for construction" by the Township. Cut sheets must be prepared for all construction work by the engineer or land surveyor responsible for the staking. 
(f)  Record drawings of sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, retention/detention basin(s), paving and grading shall be provided to the Township and to such county agencies as required prior to acceptance of the improvements by the Township (See article IX, record drawings). 
(g)  Performance guarantee. 
(h)  Insurance. The proprietor and its contractors shall furnish to Green Oak Charter Township evidence of public liability and property damage insurance coverage with a responsible insurance company which meets the approval of the Township and is licensed to do business in the State of Michigan. The amount of insurance shall be adequate to protect the public and the Township. Green Oak Charter Township, individual members of the Township Board, Township Employees and Agents for the Township and all parties of interest, and shall not be less than the limits set forth herein: 
Type of Insurance 	Limits 
(a) Social Security 	As required by laws of Michigan 
(b)  Workman's Compensation and 
Employers Liability 	As required by laws of Michigan 
(c)  Bodily Injury (including death) 	$1,000,000.00 
(d)  Property Damage 	$1,00,000.00 
(e)  Owner's and Contractor's Protective 	Same as (c) and (d) 
(f)  Motor Vehicle (including owned hired and non-owned vehicles) 	Same as (c) and (d) 
 
Policies shall be presented to Green Oak Charter Township for examination as to their validity and any undesirable exclusions deemed improper by legal opinion rendered to the Township regarding same. Underground construction, where applicable, shall be specified in the coverage. 
Commercial General Liability Insurance as described in (c), (d) and (e) above shall include an endorsement stating that the following shall be Additional Insureds: Green Oak Charter Township, all elected and appointed officials, all employees and volunteers, all boards, commissions, and consultants. 
Certificates of coverage signed by the insurance carriers shall include a guarantee that 30 days written notice shall be given by the insurance carrier to Green Oak Charter Township prior to cancellation of, or any change in, the respective policies. In the event that insurance is canceled, operations shall cease on the cancellation date and shall not resume until evidence is provided that the proper insurance is again in effect. 
(i)  Permits—Jurisdiction—Notification. The proprietor shall obtain, or cause his contractor(s) to obtain all required permits, post all required performance guarantees, and pay all required fees for each and all permitting governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the land and rights-of-way involved in the project. These permits, performance guarantees and fees shall be provided to the Township prior to the scheduling of a pre-construction meeting. Proper notification shall be given to each governmental agency and utility company prior to beginning of construction. Green Oak Charter Township shall require a minimum 48-hour notice prior to commencement of any construction after a pre-construction meeting has been held. 
(j)  Pre-construction Meeting. A pre-construction meeting will be scheduled when all permits, bonds and insurance have been submitted to the Township Engineer and all required escrow deposits are submitted to the Green Oak Charter Township Building Department. 
(k)  Certificate of Completion. The record drawings furnished by the Design Engineer shall contain a statement certifying that all surface grades, roads and structures are in substantial conformance with the approved engineering plans. This statement shall be signed by a registered professional engineer prior to acceptance of the improvements by the Township. 
(l)  Plans in Electronic Form. Upon final approval of the engineering plans the proprietor's engineer shall provide the Township with an electronic copy (AutoCAD, Microstation, or shapefile) of the proposed plans. This is required so that the proposed improvements can be added to Green Oak Charter Township's GIS database. 
(m)  Required Easements. A proprietor shall provide the Township, at no cost to the Township, with the necessary easements to allow maintenance of any water mains, sanitary sewers or storm drains that are to be located on developed property for those improvements that will be public improvements to be maintained by the Township. The form of such easements shall be subject to the approval of the Township. Sufficient evidence of title shall be provided by the grantor along with the easement in the form of a policy of title insurance, acceptable to the Township, to show that the grantor of the easement is the owner of the property. All parties having a legal interest in the property shall execute and grant the easement. Easements shall be of a minimum 20-foot width, unless a more narrow width is approved by the Township engineer. The engineer may approve a narrower width upon a determination that strict adherence to the 20-foot standard will result in undue hardship to the developer/proprietor/applicant, and that all necessary maintenance functions can be adequately and efficiently performed within a more narrow easement; likewise, the Township Engineer may require a wider easement for the future maintenance of utilities that are over 12 feet deep. All necessary off-site easements shall be executed and submitted to the Township engineer for review and approval prior to approval of the final site plan or subdivision engineering drawings. All necessary on-site easements shall be executed and submitted to the Township engineer for review and approval prior to issuance of building permits for site condominium projects and prior to issuance of a temporary or final certificate of occupancy for any aspect of the project. 
(n)  Inspection. All site improvements are subject to daily inspection by the Township Engineer, including but not limited to: sanitary sewers, water main, storm sewers, parking lots, private roads, grading, etc. to ensure that they have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Secs. 17-3—17-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SUBMITTAL, REVIEW, APPROVAL AND CONSTRUCTION PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 17-21. - General. 
All improvements to vacant land, expansions and/or modifications to existing developed parcels, and improvements or extensions to water main systems, sanitary sewers, storm water management systems, paving, mass grading or other grading of more than 25 cubic yards as described in article VI will require the review and approval of detailed engineering design plans prior to the issuance of Township permits and construction commencement. 
The plan review and approval process consists of two separate review submittals. The first review is of the site plan and the second review is the engineering plan review. 
This standard establishes the basic submittal, review and permit processing procedures in the Township. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-22. - Submittals for review of site plans and preliminary plats. 
See chapter 18 (land divisions and subdivisions) of the Green Oak Charter Township Code for site plan/preliminary plat submittal information. 
(1)  Depending on the scope of work, the following engineering related items are to be incorporated in the plans or submitted as applicable to the project: 
a.  Calculations for volume, outlet restrictor size, sediment loading, percolation rates, etc. for detention or retention storm water management systems. 
b.  Drainage district maps showing the various areas contributing to the points of inlet and total area drained (including off-site contributions). 
c.  Other information/calculations pertinent to the project as requested by the Township Engineer. 
(2)  Plan submittal requirements. 
a.  Information required, if any, by the Livingston County Drain Commissioner, as outlined in the "Livingston County Drain Commissioner Procedures and Design Criteria for Storm Water Management Systems." 
b.  Location map drawn to scale no less than one inch equals 2,000 feet; 
c.  Zoning classification of parcel; 
d.  Location and description of on-site features, including: 
1.  Existing topography with contours at two-foot intervals or less based on USGS datum; 
2.  Natural and artificial watercourses, wetlands, wetland boundaries, environmental features, floodplains, lakes, bays, existing storm water features, swales, etc. 
3.  Woodlands; 
4.  Designated natural areas; 
5.  Drains, sewers, water main and other utility information; 
6.  Existing and proposed easements; 
7.  Proposed site improvements; 
(3)  The Township Engineer will review the plans for conformance to chapter 18 of the Green Oak Charter Township Code of Ordinances and provide a letter of recommendation to the Township Planning Department. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-23. - Submittals for engineering/construction plans. 
All applicable materials shall be submitted to the Township Building Department for distribution. See article VIII (plan requirements) of these standards for the detailed information required on each drawing sheet. 
(1)  The following items are common for all projects being submitted for engineering review: 
a.  Three sets of engineering plans with applicable Township Standard Detail Sheets and project specific details. Plans shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Michigan. 
b.  The projects tree survey information shall also be provided. The developer/proprietor's engineer shall be responsible for coordinating tree removal plans with construction plans. Grading limits shall be shown on the tree removal plan. 
c.  Easements for off-site work must be submitted prior to construction. Appropriate notes shall be provided. 
d.  Two copies of the sanitary sewer basis of design (gravity or low pressure sewer). 
e.  The calculations for volume, outlet restrictor size, sediment loading, percolation rates, etc. for detention/retention/infiltration storm water management systems. 
f.  Drainage district maps showing the various areas contributing to the points of inlet and total area drained (including off-site contributions). 
g.  Soil boring logs and geotechnical report. 
h.  Detailed storm sewer/open drain calculations. 
i.  All wetlands are to be delineated by a wetland specialist. The Township may verify all of the wetland delineations at the cost of the proprietor. If there is a question or a discrepancy between the Township and the proprietor/applicant on the status of a wetland, a determination will be required to be made by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
j.  A cost estimate for the site construction signed and sealed by a professional engineer. 
k.  Any other information/calculations pertinent to the project, including but not limited to: structural calculations; wellhead protection plan delineations; septic/on-site WWTP basis of design; the use of best management practices or other information as requested by the Township Engineer. 
l.  Floodplain limits based on the Green Oak FIRM map. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-24. - Other agency reviews. 
(a)  With the exception of public water main and sanitary sewer plans, the proprietor/applicant shall be responsible for submitting plans to any public utility and any state or county agency whose facilities or rights-of-way may be affected by or has jurisdiction over the proposed construction. 
(b)  Proprietor/applicant is responsible to submit the changes requested by any state or county agency back to the Township for approval. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-25. - Final approvals. 
(a)  If the Township Engineer finds that the revised plans and related material conform to the standards of the Township, he/she will stamp the plans "recommend approval" and return two sets to the Township, one set to the proprietor/applicant, and retain one set. An approval letter will be prepared by the Township Engineer that lists all fees, permits, insurance and bonds that will be required for the project. 
(b)  If minor corrections are still required, at the discretion of the Township Engineer, the plans may be stamped "recommend approval as noted". Plans so stamped will be required to be revised prior to the pre-construction meeting. An approval letter will be prepared by the Township Engineer that lists all fees, permits, insurance, bonds and performance guarantees that will be required for the project. It must be understood that fees and performance guarantees may increase during the course of the project as a result of the developer/proprietor failing to construct in accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Proprietor/applicant must submit copies of the documentation from other agencies (as applicable to the project) to the Township Engineer indicating that the plans have received their approval for work within, and/or modifications to, their facilities prior to the Township Engineer granting any engineering construction plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-26. - Permits/construction. 
(a)  A preconstruction meeting will not be scheduled until all of the required items listed in the engineering approval letter are received by the Township Engineer. 
(b)  When engineering construction plans have been approved, the proprietor/applicant may apply for a building permit from the Township Building Department. Prior to the start of construction, the proprietor/applicant must secure all necessary permits from other agencies as applicable to the project and attend a pre-construction meeting. 
(c)  For projects where the water main will become part of the public system, the Township Engineer shall notify the proprietor/applicant for additional copies of the plans, including current standard detail sheets, signed and sealed by a Michigan Registered Professional Engineer for processing and eventual issuance of a MDEQ construction permit for water main systems. No construction may commence on the public water system until the MDEQ Act 399 has been issued. 
(d)  For projects where the sanitary sewer will become part of the Township owned public sanitary system, the Township Engineer shall notify the proprietor/applicant for additional copies of the plans, including current standard detail sheets and a completed Part 41 permit application, signed and sealed by a Michigan Registered Professional Engineer for processing and eventual issuance of a MDEQ construction permit for sanitary sewer systems. No construction may commence on the public sanitary sewer system until this permit is issued. 
(e)  All other permits and payment of associated fees required to perform the work shall be the responsibility of the proprietor/applicant . No construction may commence until permits, as applicable to the project, are secured from the appropriate agencies. Such permits include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Livingston County Road Commission permit for work within the county road right-of-way, including discharges from storm water management systems to county road drainage facilities. 
(2)  Livingston Community Water Authority or other water system owner water main permit. 
(3)  MDEQ permit for public water mains. 
(4)  Livingston County Road Commission permit for approach work in the County right-of-way. 
(5)  Livingston County Road Commission permit for utility, curb and sidewalk work within the County right-of-way. 
(6)  Livingston County Drain Commissioner permit for storm water improvements, discharge and/or taps to county controlled drainage facilities. 
(7)  Livingston Community Water Authority or other water system owner permit for connection(s) to existing public water mains 
(8)  MDEQ Part 41 Permit for public sanitary sewers. 
(9)  N.P.D.E.S. permit for storm water discharge for areas disturbed greater than five acres. 
(10)  MDEQ permit for all work and/or storm water discharges to a regulated wetland or floodplain. 
(11)  Livingston County Drain Commissioner permit for soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(12)  Livingston County Health Department and/or Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Permit for septic field construction. 
(f)  Other requirements. 
(1)  Temporary construction easements from adjacent property owners and/or permanent easements for off-site facilities shall be obtained by the proprietor/applicant. Documents shall be in a form acceptable to the Township Attorney. Copies shall be submitted to the Township Engineer prior to construction plans being approved. 
(2)  A maintenance and guarantee bond shall be submitted for all of the public improvements (i.e. storm, sanitary, water main and private road paving). 
(3)  Insurance (See article I, section 1-2(8)). 
(4)  Engineering inspection escrow deposit to the Green Oak Charter Township Building Department, in accordance with the current consulting engineering contract. 
(5)  Performance guarantees as required by the Township. 
(g)  Acceptance of improvements. 
(1)  Final acceptance requirements for project improvements are outlined in each individual section of the standards. 
(2)  Building permits can be issued prior (at the discretion of the Building Official) to final acceptance of site improvements if a monetary bond covering the cost of installing the remaining improvements is provided to the Township. 
(3)  Certificates of occupancy will not be issued for any residential or commercial developments until all project improvements have been accepted (per requirements). 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Secs. 17-27—17-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER MAIN 
 
Sec. 17-41. - General. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for the design of water main in the Township. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-42. - Design considerations. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Water mains shall be looped whenever possible. 
(2)  Water mains in new developments shall be installed from boundary to boundary in abutting roads and interior streets, and at other locations as may be deemed necessary by the Township for future extensions. 
(3)  All water mains shall be installed with a minimum cover of 5½ feet below finish grade. Whenever water mains must dip to pass under a sewer or other obstruction, the sections that are deeper, shall be kept to a minimum length by the use of vertical 11¼ degree bends properly anchored. 
(4)  A 5½-foot minimum horizontal clearance at all open drain crossings are required between the bottom of the drain and the top of the water main. 
(5)  Where water main is constructed in pavement areas or within a one-on-one influence of pavement, compaction of backfill to 95 percent maximum density is required and shall be tested by an independent laboratory. 
(6)  Where the water main crosses another utility, provide class II backfill material in 12-inch compacted lifts to the top of the higher utility. 
(7)  All water mains shall be Class 54, cement lined ductile iron pipe. High Density Polyethylene Pipe SDR 11 may be used under certain circumstances and upon approval by Township Engineer. 
(8)  All water mains shall be designed for 150 p.s.i. minimum working pressure. 
(9)  Concrete thrust blocks or other approved restraint systems shall be provided at all bends, tees, hydrant shoes, at plugs and caps and at any crosses where necessary to prevent lateral movement of the pipe. Thrust blocks shall bear against undisturbed earth and shall have sufficient bearing area to develop the full resultant axial thrust of the pipe at test pressure. 
(10)  No house or hydrant leads shall be made to a transmission main 16-inch or larger without approval of the Township Engineer. 
(11)  The current Green Oak Charter Township Standard Details must be included with the plan set. 
(12)  All water mains 12 inches and larger must be profiled. 
(13)  The minimum separation (barrel to barrel) of water main to sewers shall be ten feet horizontal and 18 inches vertical. 
(14)  Water mains shall be designed using two 45-degree bends rather than 90 degree bends when possible. 
(15)  All water mains must end with a hydrant or blow-off, and gate valve. 
(16)  Sites shall identify any wellhead protection areas within the boundaries of their site. The water system owner shall review the overall site plan as part of their review. 
(b)  Design flows. The Design Engineer shall arrange a meeting with the Township Engineer and the Fire Chief to discuss specific fire protection needs. 
(1)  Single family residential . Water mains shall have the ability to provide a fire demand of at least 1,200 gallons per minute. Design calculations shall be furnished upon request to the Engineer. 
(2)  Multiple family and institutional. Water mains shall have the ability to provide a fire demand of at least 2,000 gallons per minute in multiple family, institutional, and school areas. Design calculations shall be furnished upon request to the Engineer. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial. Water mains shall have the ability to provide a fire demand of at least 3,500 gallons per minute in commercial, industrial, office and shopping center developments. Design calculations shall be furnished upon request to the Township Engineer. 
(c)  Minimum size. 
(1)  Single family residential. Water mains within new single family residential developments shall be eight inches in diameter minimum or larger as design dictates. 
(2)  Major roads. Water mains within major roads shall be minimum 12 inches in diameter. Larger mains will be required as indicated on the Township's Water Main Master Plan. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial. Within commercial, office, industrial and multiple family residential developments, 12 inches in diameter water main is considered to be the minimum, except in a looped system of 1,500 feet or less where eight inches in diameter mains may be permitted. 
(d)  Location of water mains. 
(1)  In street right-of-way. Water mains shall generally be located on opposite sides of streets from sanitary and storm sewers. Water mains shall be located seven feet inside the public right-of-way line in existing subdivisions and other establishments. 
(2)  In easements. All water mains, fire hydrants, valves, service valve boxes and other appurtenances shall be located in a 20-foot wide easement, centered on the water main. The easement shall extend ten feet beyond a hydrant. Such easement shall be dedicated to the Township, with restriction against use or occupation of easements by the property owners and/or by other utilities in any manner which would restrict water main maintenance or repair operations. 
A written description and drawing of the easement shall be prepared by the Design Engineer and be presented to the Township for examination before recording. 
a.  Easements for possible extensions shall be provided to the property lines at locations designated by the Township Engineer. 
b.  Water mains shall preferably be constructed outside of paved parking areas, streets, drives, and rear-yards. 
c.  Within unplatted projects, water mains shall be installed parallel to the property lines or building lines. 
(e)  Gate valves. 
(1)  General. 
a.  When connecting to an existing water main, a tapping sleeve, gate valve and well will be required unless connection to the existing water main can be made without interrupting service. Only mechanical joint tapping sleeves shall be used. 
b.  All valves greater than two inches, except hydrant shut-off valve, shall be installed in a gate well (not in a box). 
(2)  Location. 
a.  In single family residential areas, valves shall be arranged so that no single water main failure will require more than 1,000 feet of water main, not more than 26 homes and not more than two hydrants to be out of service. 
b.  In multiple housing, commercial and industrial areas, valves shall be so arranged that no single water main failure will require more than 800 feet of water main or more than one hydrant to be out of service. 
c.  Valves shall be so arranged such that any section can be isolated by closing not more than four valves. 
d.  Valves shall generally be located at street intersections, and such that the gate well structure will clear sidewalks, five feet from the intersecting street right-of-way line. 
e.  On all water mains to be extended in the future, install a ten-foot stub with gate valve and plug for future connection. 
f.  Gate valves are not permitted in pavement area. 
g.  At high points in water mains where air can accumulate, provisions shall be made to remove the air by means of air relief valves. 
(f)  Hydrants. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Spacing of hydrants around multiple family, institutional, commercial and industrial areas shall be considered as individual cases and the design engineer is encouraged to arrange a meeting with the Township Engineer and Fire Chief to review specific fire protection requirements. The Fire Chief shall have final approval for number and arrangement of hydrants. 
b.  Hydrant nozzles shall face the road. 
c.  Hydrant leads shall be six-inch diameter minimum with a maximum length of 20 feet. Hydrant leads longer than 20 feet must be eight-inch diameter and have an eight-inch gate valve and well installed at the tee. 
d.  Hydrants shall be plumb and set to grade before final acceptance. 
e.  No service leads are allowed to extend from a six-inch hydrant lead. 
f.  No parking spaces shall be located within ten feet of a hydrant. 
(2)  Location. 
a.  In single family residential areas, hydrants shall be generally located ten feet off the street right-of-way line, and spaced along the water main so that all dwelling units are within 300 feet of a hydrant. 
b.  In multiple-family, institutional, commercial, and industrial areas, hydrants shall be arranged so that all exterior parts of a building are within 250 feet of a hydrant. 
c.  In single family residential areas, hydrants shall be located at the center of the lot or at lot lines. 
d.  When near a street intersection, hydrants shall be located 15 feet from the intersecting street right-of way. 
e.  Hydrants shall be located at least 25 feet from any exterior wall of a masonry building and at least 50 feet from any exterior wall of frame or equivalent construction including brick and stone veneer. 
f.  Hydrants located in parking areas shall be protected with a six inches (minimum) concrete curb or standard guard posts. 
g.  All dead end water mains shall end with a hydrant blow-off, gate valve and minimum ten feet of stub and plug for future extensions. A temporary blow-off in lieu of a hydrant will be considered based on hydrant spacing and future extension of the water main. 
h.  Hydrants shall be spaced a maximum of 500 feet from each other per the current edition of the International Fire Code. 
(g)  Service leads. 
(1)  Service leads shall be type "K" copper or HDPE pipe with a minimum of 1" in diameter. Service leads shall be sized according to the volume and pressure requirements of the development structure. 
(2)  Service leads must be a separate/individual connection to the water main. Domestic service and fire service lines to the buildings must have separate taps, separate shut-off valves, and separate services. 
(3)  All leads for irrigation purposes must tap and branch from the existing domestic lead. A tap to the fire service lead is not acceptable. 
(4)  All services shall include a corporation valve at the main and a curb stop valve and box inside the right-of-way or easement. 
(5)  No house leads shall be made to a transmission main without approval from the Township Engineer or water main system owner. 
(6)  All water service connections two inches and smaller may be made by the water main system owner or by private contractors under the supervision of the water main system owner with an approved permit. 
(7)  All water taps greater than two inches require a gate valve and well (i.e. no valve boxes). 
(8)  Fire suppression lines shall be separate from domestic lines and will typically be parallel to domestic lines to the public water main. 
(9)  A "detecto" meter is required on all fire service lines. 
(10)  A cross connection control plumbing detail (riser diagram) must be provided to the water system owner. 
(h)  Pressure reducing valves. 
(1)  In systems where two or more pressure districts are to be interconnected, the plans shall include a pressure reducing valve near the point of connection to the higher pressure district to balance pressures across the new water system. The PRV shall conform to the Township's standards for such facilities. 
(2)  A line gate valve shall be installed both upstream and downstream of each pressure reducing valve to permit isolation of the pressure reducing valve for maintenance and repair. A bypass line that is equivalent in pipe size to the water main and an additional bypass gate valve and well shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-43. - Final acceptance. 
(a)  No water main taps shall be made to existing water main lines until pressure testing and bacteria testing is approved and accepted by the water main system owner. 
(b)  Water main pressure testing, bacteria testing, and final taps shall be scheduled through the Livingston Community Water Authority or other water system owner with notification to the Township Engineer. 
(c)  Water mains shall be flushed and cleaned, and followed by chlorination and bacteria testing. Water main sterilization shall be in accordance with all local, state and federal regulations. 
(d)  A set of approved record drawings, an approved bill of sale, and a copy of any recorded easements required for construction, shall be submitted to the Township prior to final acceptance of the water main. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Secs. 17-44—17-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SANITARY SEWER 
 
Sec. 17-61. - General. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for the design of sanitary sewer systems in the Township. 
Sanitary Sewers are also subject to chapter 34 (utilities), article III (sewers), of the Township Code of Ordinances. 
Prior to starting any sanitary sewer design, the design engineer is encouraged to make use of maps and information available at the Township offices. It shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to verify utility locations provided by the Township or any other parties. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-62. - Design considerations. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  No connection receiving storm water, surface water, water softener backwash discharge, or ground water shall be made to sanitary sewers. 
(2)  A minimum vertical clearance of 18 inches shall be provided at all crossings with other utilities. A minimum horizontal separation of ten feet shall be provided between the sanitary sewer and any water main or storm sewer. 
(3)  Sanitary sewers shall be located so as to provide unrestricted access for maintenance and inspection purposes. 
(4)  A fats/oils/grease interceptor will be required for all food service operations. No connections for domestic waste will be allowed to the interceptor. Interceptor sizing requirements shall be found in the Township's Utility Ordinance. 
(5)  The current Green Oak Charter Township Standard Details must be included with the plan set. 
(6)  Types of piping: 
Gravity sewer - PVC SDR 26, truss pipe; A2000 
Low pressure sewer - HDPE SDR 9, HDPE SDR 11, Ductile Iron Pipe CL 54 interior lined and coated. 
Gravity sewer leads - PVC SDR 23.5 
(b)  Location of gravity, force main and low pressure sanitary sewers. 
(1)  In street right-of-way. Sanitary sewers for existing subdivisions and other establishments shall generally be located on opposite sides of streets from water mains, seven feet inside the public right-of-way line. 
Sanitary sewers shall be located a minimum of ten feet horizontally away from water mains. 
(2)  In easements. All sanitary sewers shall be located within a minimum 20-foot wide, or 1:1 depth of the sewer easement (whichever is greater), centered upon the sewer. Such easement shall be dedicated to the Township, with restrictions against use or occupation of easements, by the property owners and/or by other utilities, in any manner that would restrict sewer maintenance or repair operations. The easements shall be dedicated at no cost to the Township prior to issuance of any building permits for the project. 
A written description and drawing of the easement shall be prepared by the Design Engineer and be presented to the Township for examination before recording. 
a.  Easements for possible extensions shall be provided to the property lines at locations designated by the Township Engineer. 
b.  Sewers shall preferably be constructed outside of paved parking areas, streets, drives and rear-yard areas. Should a property owner and their representatives propose the sanitary sewer under pavement, the Township shall not be responsible for any pavement repair or restoration as a result. 
c.  Within unplatted projects, sewers shall be installed parallel to the property lines, or building lines, with clearance distances to accommodate the full width of the proposed easement or the distance necessary to accommodate a slope of one horizontal to one vertical from invert of sewer to ground surface, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Sewer capacity. 
(1)  Tributary area. Sanitary sewers shall be designed to serve all natural tributary areas with due consideration given to topography, the Township Sanitary Sewer Master Plan, established zoning, and the adopted Township Master Land Use Plan. Sanitary sewers serving a tributary area beyond the project limits shall extend to the boundary of the project site to provide for future extension. 
(2)  Population. For design purposes, population shall be based on a minimum of 2.69 (per the most current SEMCOG Census Data) persons per detached single-family home site. Population figures for all other dwelling units and buildings shall be based upon the current REU Unit Factor Table as approved by the Township Board of Trustees. The adopted unit factors shall be used to convert the different occupancy types to equivalent single-family units. 
Submission for review shall include a tabulation of occupancy (usage) types and the conversion of these into terms of equivalent single-family units. The tributary area, in acres, may be used to calculate dwelling units based on density allowed in the Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  Sewage quantities for pipe design. Sewer design capacity per capita shall be based on the following formula: 
Ave. Flow = People * 100 gal/day 
Peaking Factor =  18 + SQ RT [(P)] 
____________ 
4 + SQ RT [(P)] 
Q (peak flow) = Ave Flow * Peaking Factor 
Q = Design capacity in gallons per day 
P = Design population expressed in thousands 
(d)  Minimum pipe size. 
(1)  Minimum pipe size for gravity sanitary sewers shall be eight inches in diameter. 
(2)  Minimum pipe size for low pressure sanitary sewers shall be two inches in diameter. 
(e)  Hydraulics. 
(1)  Calculations. For gravity sanitary sewer, Manning's Formula, with n = 0.013, shall be used for hydraulic calculations. 
For low pressure sanitary sewer and force main trunk sewers, the Hazen-Williams formula with C = 120, shall be used for hydraulic calculations. 
(2)  Minimum and maximum velocities. Minimum design velocity for gravity and low pressure sanitary sewers shall be two feet per second, and maximum design velocity shall be ten feet per second, with pipe flowing full. The slope of the sewer between the last two manholes at the upper end of any gravity lateral shall be increased above the minimum permissible pipe slope, wherever possible, to obtain cleansing velocity. 
(3)  Allowable pipe slopes for gravity sewers. 
PIPE DIAMETER 
(INCHES) 	MINIMUM SLOPE 
(FEET PER 100 FEET) 
8 	0.40 
10 	0.28 
12 	0.22 
14 	0.17 
15 	0.15 
16 	0.14 
18 	0.12 
21 	0.10 
24 	0.080 
27 	0.067 
30 	0.058 
36 	0.046 
 
(4)  Allowances for changes in pipe size in gravity sewers. Maximum flow velocity for pipe flowing full shall be maintained by matching the 0.80 of the diameter depth above invert for pipe size increases. 
(5)  Allowances for direction change in gravity sewers. Provide a drop of 0.10 feet in the downstream sewer invert for a direction change of 30 degrees or greater to compensate for velocity head loss of the incoming flow. 
(f)  Basis of design-low pressure sanitary sewer. 
(1)  Low pressure sanitary sewer systems consisting of individual grinder pump stations at each building site, connecting to a common pressurized sewer to convey domestic waste to an acceptable outlet will be considered for use in the Township. 
(2)  The use of a low pressure sanitary sewer system in any development within the Township will require preliminary approval by the Township. A request for approval shall be submitted to the Township, together with a preliminary plan of the proposed development which delineates the extent of the proposed pressure sewer system, including future extension. The preliminary plan shall include existing ground contours at two feet intervals, proposed grades over the site, and the outlet for the pressure sewer system. 
(3)  Upon securing the Township's preliminary approval for use of a low pressure sanitary sewer system and prior to commencing with final construction plans and specifications for the system, the project's Design Engineer shall submit for review and approval a basis of design for the low pressure sewer system. The basis of design shall include as a minimum but not necessarily limited to the following: 
Layout of development and pressure sewer system, including future extension, indicating: 
a.  Proposed grades over the site. 
b.  Sewer pipe sizes and lengths. 
c.  Sewer line numbering system for each branch of sewer by pipe size. 
d.  Elevation along centerline of sewer approximately 100-foot intervals, and with maximum centerline of pipe denoted. 
e.  Elevation at each individual grinder pump station. 
f.  Location and elevation (or hydraulic grade line) at connection of pressure sewer to source of outlet. 
Tabular system analysis which is similar to and provides the system data as required on the following exhibit sheet "Low pressure Sewer System Pipe Schedule and Branch Analysis". (Reference: Low Pressure Sewer Systems Using Environment One Grinder Pumps, February, 1995). 
Tabular system analysis shall be provided for the initial and ultimate service areas along with an initial and ultimate exhibit showing the branches corresponding to the tabular analysis. The tabular system analysis shall be divided into branches with an increasing number of "pumps on" (1, 2, 3…) 
(4)  Submissions for review shall include a tabulation of occupancy (usage) types and the conversion of these into terms of equivalent single-family units. The tributary area, in acres, may be used to calculate dwelling units based on density allowed in the Zoning Ordinance. The adopted "Schedule of Unit Assignment Factors" shall be used to convert the different occupancy types to equivalent single-family units. 
(5)  Property owners will be required to use the approved Township Contractor to connect to the low pressure sewer, grinder pump installation, and the installation of the sewer lead. Connections to the low pressure sewer shall be initiated through the Township Building Department. 
(6)  Property owners will also be required to use the approved Township grinder pumps when connecting to the low pressure sewer. The approved grinder pump will be determined by the Township Engineer after an on-site inspection. 
(g)  Depth of sewers. 
(1)  No sanitary sewer shall have less than four feet of cover. 
(2)  In general, gravity sanitary sewers shall have a minimum depth of ten feet from top of curb (or centerline if uncurbed) to the invert of sewer. The sewer shall have sufficient depth to serve a standard depth basement by gravity. 
(h)  Special backfill requirements. Granular material meeting the requirements for MDOT Granular Material, Class II or Class IIA, shall be required for full depth backfill of trenches, above a horizontal line one-foot above the pipe, under existing or planned road surfaces, pavements, curbs, driveways, parking areas and sidewalks, and where the trench edge is within three feet of the edge of existing or planned pavements. Backfill shall be compacted to a minimum of 90 percent maximum dry density from above the pipe to 18 inches below grade. Compaction shall be 95 percent of maximum dry density for top 18 inches of trench. The compaction results will be determined by a Modified Proctor Test, ASTM Designation D-1557. House lead trenches shall have compacted granular backfill within the entire street right-of-way where sidewalks are required. Compacted granular backfill shall be provided between all utility crossings. 
(i)  House leads. 
(1)  Unless otherwise approved, construction of house leads from a gravity sanitary sewer to the easement and/or property line, for each fronting parcel in which the sewer is designed to serve, shall be included with the construction of the sanitary sewer. 
(2)  Where construction of house leads to the property line is not required concurrently with gravity sanitary sewer construction, a wye branch with riser, and water-tight stopper or plug, shall be installed for every lot or building site which the sewer is designed to serve. 
(3)  Minimum size for house leads shall be six inches in diameter. 
(4)  Minimum slope for house leads shall be one-eighth inches per foot (1.00 percent). 
(j)  Manholes—Gravity sewer. 
(1)  Location. Manholes shall be constructed at every change in sewer grade, alignment and pipe size, and at the end of each sewer line. Generally maximum distance between manholes shall be as follows: 
Diameter of Sewer 	Maximum Manhole Spacing 
8" — 21" 	400' 
24" — 30" 	450' 
36" — 42" 	500' 
 
(2)  Monitoring manholes are required for all non-residential connections to the sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  Drop connections. Internal drop connections are required at new manholes where the outlet pipe is 18 inches or more below the inlet pipe. Inverts shall be matched at the flow line whenever possible if 18 inches or less. 
A minimum five-foot diameter manhole is required for any drop connection. 
Generally, drop connections are discouraged and will be considered only if other alternatives are not acceptable. 
(4)  The most downstream manhole in a gravity sewer system shall have a two-foot sump for infiltration testing when required. This sump shall be filled in prior to final acceptance of the system. 
(5)  Where future connections to a manhole are anticipated, stubs or blind drop connections, with watertight bulkheads, shall be provided. Stubs shall be five-foot minimum in length. 
(k)  Air release valves (ARV), intermediate flushing connections (IFC), branched flushing connections (BFC) and terminal flushing connections (TFC), low pressure and force main sewer. 
(1)  Air release valves shall be located at all high points in low pressure and force main sewers. 
(2)  Intermediate flushing connections in low pressure and force main sewers shall be located so as not to allow more than 1,000 feet between structures. Intermediate flushing connections may also be required at significant low points. 
(3)  Branched flushing connections shall be located at places where the low pressure sewer branches off. 
(4)  Terminal flushing connections shall be located at the ends of the low pressure and force main sewer system. 
(l)  Grinder pumps. 
(1)  Grinder pumps are installed and maintained by Green Oak Charter Township. A permit for installation shall be obtained through the Green Oak Charter Township Building Department. 
(2)  Location. Grinder pumps shall be located five feet away from any permanent structure including buildings, decks and sheds. 
Grinder pumps shall be located in the side yard of new residential and non-residential buildings, except for walk-out residential buildings. 
Grinder pumps for new residential and non-residential properties shall have a maximum of one four-foot extension. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-63. - Final acceptance. 
(a)  No connections shall be made to the existing sanitary sewer system until final pressure testing has been accepted by Township Sanitary Sewer System Operator or the successor operator of the sanitary sewer system and the Township Engineer. 
(b)  All sewers shall be pressure tested, videotaped and mandrel tested prior to final acceptance. All tests shall be witnessed by Township Sanitary Sewer System Operator and the Township Engineer. 
(c)  A set of approved record drawings, an approved bill of sale, and a copy of all recorded easements shall be submitted to the Township prior to final acceptance of the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Secs. 17-64—17-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 17-81. - General. 
The management of increased storm water which results from the development of vacant land or expansions to existing facilities will be considered as a critical component of all development plans which are submitted to Green Oak Charter Township for approval. The intent of this standard is to provide guidelines for the sound management of increased storm water run-off and to provide sufficient flexibility for design professionals to develop innovative solutions that protect the resources of Green Oak Charter Township while meeting the objectives of water quality preservation and flood control. 
The use of natural drainage features, shallow swales and landscape areas shall be incorporated into the drainage planning for a site whenever possible. The objective is to achieve a functional and aesthetically pleasing development that minimizes the use of extensive enclosed storm drains and large obtrusive storm water detention or retention basins while providing for the proper management of storm water runoff. 
Storm water improvements are subject to the Green Oak Charter Township Stormwater Management Ordinance or the review and approval of the Livingston County Drain Commissioner, whoever has jurisdiction. 
Development plans must present a unified design that, as a minimum, provides the following protections: 
1.  The design must show that the development will not cause any impact to downstream properties or upstream properties. Both the rate of storm water discharge and the volume of storm water discharge must be considered. 
2.  The development plan shall be fitted to the topography and soil to create the least erosion potential and to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. 
3.  The design must demonstrate the use of "best management practices" for minimizing erosion and controlling sedimentation and other pollutants through all phases of construction. 
4.  The design must demonstrate that proposed buildings or other permanent structures, on and adjacent to, a proposed development are and will remain safe from flooding. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-82. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
Under the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Act 451), Part 91, the developer/proprietor shall submit an erosion control plan to the Livingston County Drain Commissioner - Soil Erosion Control Division. The soil erosion and sedimentation control permit must be issued by the LCDC prior to any earth moving operations. An approved National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit where applicable, will be required prior to the commencement of any earthmoving operations. 
(a)  Design considerations. To provide effective erosion and sedimentation control, practical combinations of the following technical principles shall be applied to the erosion control aspects of the plan: 
(1)  Under Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act 451, Part 91, the developer/proprietor shall submit an erosion control plan to the Livingston County Drain Commissioner for permit issuance. An approved soil erosion permit from LCDC, as well as the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit where applicable, shall be required prior to the commencement of any earthmoving operations. 
(2)  The proprietor shall be responsible for maintaining temporary erosion control devices during all phases of construction. 
(3)  The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at one time during development. 
(4)  When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be kept to the shortest possible period of time. 
(5)  Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect critical areas exposed during development. 
(6)  Temporary sedimentation basins (debris basins or silt traps) shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development. 
(7)  Mud mats shall be installed at construction access points to provide a buffer area where vehicles can deposit mud and sediment prior to leaving the site, to control erosion from surface runoff and to help control dust. 
a.  Sediment basins for construction purposes shall be separated from permanent storm water detention or retention basins. 
b.  Basins shall be designed in accordance with the current Township standards for sedimentation basin design. 
c.  Construction runoff shall be directed to the basin in a controlled manner through mass grading techniques, diversion berms/swales, enclosed storm sewers or any combination thereof that would limit runoff velocities and provide for the least potential for erosion of the site. 
(8)  Areas set aside on the site for equipment storage, laydown, fuel, lubricants, chemical compounds and material stockpiles shall be contained in such a manner as to prevent any leakage or spillage from contaminating the surrounding soils and groundwater, and from entering any storm water management system or existing surface waters. 
(9)  Filters shall be provided at catch basins and culvert inlet points to prevent sedimentation of storm sewers for both new and existing systems. 
(10)  Adequate dust control shall be maintained at all times. Surface streets adjacent to the site will be cleaned of any deposits on a daily basis. 
(11)  The permanent vegetation and structures shall be installed as soon as practical in the development. 
(12)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected. 
(13)  Riprap shall be required at all pipe entrances to detention or retention basins. The minimum width of the riprap shall be twice the outside diameter of the pipe. The riprap shall extend from the bottom of the basin to the top of the pipe. Two types of materials may be use: 1. fieldstone or broken concrete of a minimum of eight inches, mortared to form a monolithic slab with a minimum thickness of four inches; 2. gabions installed per the manufacturer's specifications. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-83. - Storm water management basins and pretreatment systems. 
On-site storm water detention or retention is necessary for all developments in the Township (including private roads) whenever runoff is increased. 
The storm water management system should encourage the recharge of groundwater by promoting the infiltration of stormwater as a supplement to normal conveyance systems, where appropriate, while preventing the degradation of groundwater quality. 
Where feasible and prudent, use low impact development (LID) stormwater management principals and techniques, as described in the "Low Impact Development Manual of Michigan", in new development and redevelopment projects. 
Infiltration (recharge) basins/systems store and release run-off through permeable soils to groundwater, expressed in inches per hour. 
Retention basins do not have a positive outlet, so that the stored runoff will either percolate or evaporate. 
Detention basins temporarily store storm runoff for a period of time in which the runoff is released through a positive outlet, at a controlled rate. 
A storm water permit shall be required from the Livingston County Drain Commissioner for any storm system modifications, construction, improvements, etc. 
Any site outletting stormwater directly to a wetland area will require an MDEQ permit. Pretreatment of the stormwater is also required and shall meet the required design standards of the MDEQ. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-84. - Design considerations. 
(a)  Detention basins. 
(1)  Detention basins may only be used when the design shows that there is an adequate outlet for the storm water, and where the increased volume of storm water will not damage downstream property owners. Construction drawings must include sufficient off-site information to demonstrate the existence of an adequate outlet. 
(2)  Water originating from off-site is not required to be detained in the detention basin. Storm water originating from off-site should be diverted around the detention basin whenever practical, and where the diversion will not increase the erosion of soils and will not decrease the time of concentration to the most downstream point of the site. 
(3)  Detention basins shall be designed so that the resulting storm water discharge from the developed site does not exceed the agricultural rate of discharge from the site. The Township has defined an agricultural rate of storm water run-off as 0.20 cubic feet per second per acre; or the capacity of the existing storm drainage facilities downstream of the detention basin outlet, whichever is less. 
(4)  The volume of detention provided must be equal to or in excess of that calculated by the Livingston County Drain Commissioner's "A Simple Method of Detention Basin Design" for a 100-year frequency storm event. 
(5)  The volume and storage provided for controlling the "bankfull" flood will be equal to or in excess of the total rain from a one and one-half year, 24-hour storm. This can be determined by: 
8160 x acreage x c-factor = cubic feet 
The release rate from the "bankfull" storage volume will be such that this volume will be stored not less than 24 or more than 40 hours. 
(6)  The first flush of runoff is defined as the first one-half inch of runoff over the entire site. The majority of this volume will be captured in the sediment forebay, with the residual volume detained for a minimum of 24 hours. The volume of the first flush can be determined by: 
1815 x acreage x c-factor = cubic feet 
(7)  Detention basin volumes shall not include volumes below the invert of outlet pipe(s). Provide an additional two feet of volume below the outlet pipe invert to be used for sediment storage. 
(8)  Detention basins shall be provided with an overflow spillway or manhole set at the high water levels capable of passing a 100-year frequency storm. The overflow spillway shall be located so not to cause potential damage to adjacent properties. All overflow spillways shall be protected from erosion by surfacing with concrete, asphalt, or rip-rap. The edges of the surface shall have headers of the same or similar materials to prevent undercutting by the storm water overflow. 
(9)  One foot of freeboard shall be provided above the high water elevation. 
(10)  Side slopes for detention basins shall not be steeper than one vertical to five horizontal to a minimum depth of six feet. 
(11)  Detention basins will not be permitted within a floodplain. 
(12)  An access path for maintenance shall be provided to the detention basin control structure. 
(13)  Underground detention will not be allowed on drains controlled by the Livingston County Drain Commissioner. Underground detention shall be discouraged but will be considered on a case-by-case basis with the following conditions: 
a.  A catastrophic property loss results in the need to rebuild an existing commercial facility that was not previously equipped with detention, and the installation of an above ground detention would significantly reduce the available square footage for a replacement structure. 
b.  Regional detention is not available. 
c.  The provision for an above-ground detention on an existing commercial property less than two acres in size would preclude development of the property under its current zoning. Parcel split after January 2002 will not be permitted to utilize underground detention. 
d.  Provisions must be made in the design for the collection and removal of sediment and debris accumulated in the system. All applicable health and safety requirements shall also be incorporated in the design of systems that require access by inspection or maintenance personnel. Detailed shop drawings are required for underground detention systems, including pertinent engineering calculations and soils information. 
(14)  The maximum water level shall be controlled by gravity outlets. The use of pumps for dewatering is not allowed. 
(15)  Basin inlet/outlet design. 
a.  Engineered velocity dissipation measures based on discharge flow rates and velocities will be incorporated into basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets, to minimize the re-suspension of pollutants, and to create sheet flow conditions where feasible. 
b.  To the extent feasible, the distance between inlets and outlets shall be maximized by: 
1.  Increasing the length-to-width ratio. 
2.  Increasing the dry weather flow path within the system to attain maximum sinuosity. If possible, inlets and outlets should be offset at opposite longitudinal ends of the basin. 
(16)  The outlet will be well protected from clogging. 
(17)  Riser design. 
a.  The use of a perforated standpipe-type riser structure to assure an appropriate detention time for all storm events is required. 
b.  Orifices used to maintain a permanent pool level should withdraw water at least one foot below the surface of the water. 
c.  Hoods or trash racks shall be installed on the riser to prevent clogging. Grate openings shall be a maximum of three inches. 
d.  Orifice plates are discouraged. Where an orifice plate is to be used in the standpipe to control discharge, it will have a diameter of four inches. 
e.  The riser shall be placed near the pond embankment to provide for ready maintenance access. 
f.  Barrels and risers will be constructed of materials that will reduce future maintenance requirements. The riser pipe shall be a minimum of 36 inches in diameter for riser pipes up to four feet in height. Riser pipes greater than four feet in height shall be 48 inches in diameter. Riser pipes will be constructed with concrete bottoms. 
g.  Where feasible, a drain for completely de-watering the pond should be installed for maintenance purposes. 
(18)  Outlet design. 
a.  All outlets will be designed to be easily accessible for heavy equipment required for maintenance purposes. 
b.  All outlets will be designed to discharge at an elevation within two feet of the 100-year floodplain elevation for the receiving water body. Discharging at the "crest" of slopes will not be permitted. 
c.  Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage system shall be evaluated when designing the outlet. 
(19)  Wet detention basins will be considered if the proprietor/applicant meets the conditions of the Livingston County Drain Commissioner. 
(20)  Detention in wetland areas will be considered with the following conditions: 
a.  If in a regulated wetland, an MDEQ permit is required. 
b.  If the proprietor/applicant meets all of the requirements of the Livingston County Drain Commissioner. 
(b)  Retention basins. 
(1)  If a gravity outlet cannot be provided, then the storm water holding facility shall be designed as a retention basin with a volume capable of storing two inches of runoff from the entire tributary area, contingent on the following: 
a.  An overflow assessment will be required. The assessment should include descriptions of the surrounding areas, including nearby homes, which would be impacted in the event of an overflow. 
b.  The proprietor must submit a soil boring log taken within the basin bottom area to a depth of 25 feet below existing ground or 20 feet below proposed basin bottom elevation. 
The Livingston County Drain Commissioner may require additional storage up to that required by two consecutive 100-year storm events based on the results of soils data or the overflow assessment. If such additional storage is required, freeboard requirements may be reduced at the discretion of the Drain Commissioner. 
(2)  Off-site tributary areas: Retention basins must be sized for storm water that originates off-site and which cannot be bypassed around the proposed retention basin to a site where the storm water originally flowed to. In such cases, the retention basin must be sized using the following design parameters: 
Tributary acres: On-site area plus the off-site area 
C Factor: Weighted C factor of the entire tributary area that considers the existing off-site conditions, and the proposed on-site conditions. 
(3)  Retention basin volumes shall not include volumes below the existing groundwater table, permanent water elevation or invert of outlet pipe(s). 
(4)  Three feet of freeboard shall be provided above the high water elevation. 
(5)  Side slopes for retention basins shall not be steeper than one vertical to five horizontal to a minimum depth of six feet. 
(6)  Retention basins will not be permitted within a floodplain. 
(7)  Retention of storm water in parking lots is strictly prohibited. 
(8)  The retention basin design shall demonstrate that the soils are capable of providing necessary infiltration. A soils report will be required. 
(9)  An access path for maintenance shall be provided around the entire retention basin. 
(c)  Infiltration (recharge) systems. 
(1)  An infiltration system is the preferred storm water management approach if the design engineer can demonstrate that all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  An adequate positive outlet is not available or it is not possible to construct an off-site drainage system to convey basin discharge to the nearest outlet, and the installation of a retention basin is not feasible or practical. 
b.  The natural underlying soils are well-drained (hydrologic groups A or B) and the ground water is suitable for percolation. 
c.  The underlying soils and ground water table have the ability to move water away from the site for the area and volume being drained. 
d.  Permanent pretreatment system upstream of inlet point to prevent any material from potentially clogging the infiltration medium (both surface and subsurface). 
e.  An overflow for a 100-year storm must be provided. 
f.  Infiltration system can be easily accessed for maintenance and replacement if necessary. The use of perforated storm pipe under pavements is discouraged. 
g.  There must be a method for determining a failure in the infiltration system. The system cannot be designed such that a failure in the infiltration system results in short circuit to the emergency overflow without on-site ponding. 
(2)  The following information shall be supplied and/or incorporated in the design of infiltration systems: 
a.  Soil boring logs/sieve analysis/geotechnical report indicating type and properties of both surface and subsurface soils, suitability of surface soils for infiltration, capability of subsurface soils to conduct seepage to the underlying groundwater table, and flow from the system under mounding conditions at the maximum infiltration rate. Conditions of less than six inches/hr. percolation rate will not be allowed. 
b.  Computed percolation rate and infiltration/exfiltration calculations. 
c.  Drainage area map, including any off-site contributing areas and emergency overflow route in the event of system failure. 
d.  Construction methods to prevent compacting the surface soils which may reduce the infiltration capacity of the soils. 
(d)  Permanent pretreatment systems. 
(1)  Permanent pretreatment systems when called for on the plans, shall be sized for five percent of the 100-year storm volume based on the area tributary to the inlet. 
(2)  Pretreatment shall be in the form of open basins also known as forebays. 
a.  Open basins shall be designed with minimum side slopes of one vertical to five horizontal, one foot of freeboard above design storm water elevation, emergency sodded overflow, and outlet control devices. 
b.  Design calculations, plans and shop drawings for engineered treatment systems shall be certified by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Michigan. 
c.  Horizontal velocities through the system shall be minimized to prevent turbid flows and allow particles to settle in the pretreatment system. 
d.  Permanent pretreatment facilities will not be allowed within a floodplain. 
e.  The forebay shall be a separate basin. 
f.  Direct access to the forebay for heavy equipment shall be provided so that may be maintained in a proper manner. 
g.  Anti-seep collars shall be installed on any piping passing through the sides or bottom of the basin to prevent leakage through the embankment. 
h.  All basins will have provisions for a defined emergency spillway, routed so that it can be picked up by the main outflow channel while not discharging directly over the outlet pipe. The emergency spillway shall be set at an elevation of six inches above the design high water elevation of the basin. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-85. - Storm sewers and open drains. 
The following details and specifications shall be required for developments utilizing storm sewers and/or open drains to convey runoff from the site. All such storm drainage systems must outlet to either a detention basin, retention basin, infiltration system, or pretreatment facility as outlined in section 15-28 of this standard prior to discharging to any natural or man-made water course, wetland, drain or other body of water. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for the design of storm drainage systems in the Township. 
Design Considerations 
(a)  Storm sewer capacity. 
(1)  Sufficient capacity shall be provided in the storm sewer system to allow existing runoff from upstream drainage to "pass through" the proposed storm sewer system. 
a.  When a storm sewer is designed to provide capacity for upstream areas, the hydraulic gradient shall remain in the pipe. For storm sewer designed to take on-site drainage only, the hydraulic gradient must be no higher than one foot below storm structure rim elevations. 
b.  When the hydraulic gradient is above the top of the sewer pipe the design elevation of the hydraulic gradient shall be indicated on the profile at each manhole. 
c.  If the heights of the hydraulic gradient exceed two feet above the top of pipe, rubber joints shall be used. 
(b)  Hydraulics and hydrology. 
(1)  Storm drainage systems shall be designed for a minimum of a ten-year storm. To determine the storm water runoff, the rational method shall be used (Q=CIA) 
where Q = peak rate of runoff in cubic feet per second 
A = area in acres 
C = runoff coefficient for drainage area 
I = average rainfall intensity in inches per hour for a given time of concentration 
(2)  The formula for rainfall intensity (I) shall be determined by using the formula I = 175/(T+25), where T is the time of concentration in minutes. For residential areas, T shall usually be 20 minutes; for commercial and office areas, T shall be 15 minutes or less. 
(3)  Run-off coefficients shall be determined for each individual drainage area. Drainage area coefficient determination shall generally be based on the following: 
Surface 	C 
Agricultural/Grass 	0.20 
Pavement/Buildings 	0.90 
Residential 	0.25—0.35 
Multiple Housing 	0.55 
Commercial/Industrial 	0.75 
Open Water 	0.95 
 
The above run-off coefficients are minimum. Actual site design may require an increase in run-off coefficient. A weighted run-off coefficient can be used (provide calculations). Coefficients proposed for a project are subject to approval by the Township Engineer. 
(4)  An overland flood route for a 100-year storm frequency shall be provided and shown on the plans. A minimum freeboard of six inches shall be provided from any building's exterior finished grade (brick ledge) to the 100-year flood elevation. The overland flood route shall be located in a 20-foot easement or a public right-of-way. 
(5)  In Manning's formula, n = 0.013, shall be used for hydraulic calculations. 
(6)  Minimum design velocity shall be 2½ feet per second and maximum design velocity shall be ten feet per second, with the pipe flowing full. 
(7)  Allowable pipe slopes: 
Pipe Diameter(in) 	Minimum Slope (ft/100 ft) 
12 	0.32 
15 	0.24 
18 	0.18 
21 	0.14 
24 	0.12 
27 	0.10 
30 	0.09 
36 	0.08 
42 	0.06 
48 	0.05 
54 	0.04 
60 	0.04 
 
(8)  For changes in pipe size, the maximum flow velocity for full pipe flow shall be maintained by continuity of the 0.80 diameter depth above invert. 
(9)  For changes in direction, a drop of 0.10 feet in the downstream sewer invert shall be provided for direction changes of 30 degrees or greater to compensate for velocity head loss of the incoming flow. 
(10)  All catch basin and inlet leads shall be laid on a minimum slope of 1%. 
(11)  Wherever differences in manhole pipe invert elevations exceed two feet, a two-foot sump shall be provided to prevent channel erosion. 
(c)  Sewer pipe. 
(1)  Size—Storm sewer: 
a.  The minimum pipe size for storm sewers, catch basin leads and inlet leads shall be 12 inches in diameter. 
b.  Rear yard under drain system with no inlets: eight-inch perforated plastic pipe. 
c.  Sump leads shall be a minimum of four inches and shall connect to the storm sewer above the HGL of the pipe. 
(2)  Location. 
a.  Storm sewer shall have a minimum of four feet of cover unless an alternative is approved by the Township Engineer. 
b.  Storm sewers shall generally be located on the opposite sides of streets from water mains. Storm sewers shall be located ten feet from the right-of-way line in the public right-of-way. 
c.  A minimum ten feet horizontal separation is required between storm sewer and water mains. 
(3)  Special backfill requirements. 
a.  Granular material meeting the requirements for MDOT granular material, class II, compacted to 95 percent maximum density, shall be required for full depth backfill of trenches under existing or proposed road surfaces, pavements, curbs, driveways, parking areas, and sidewalks, and where the storm sewer is within a one-on-one influence of the edge of existing or proposed pavements. Compaction testing shall be performed by an independent laboratory. 
b.  Storm sewer leads shall have compacted granular backfill within the entire street right-of-way where sidewalks are required. Compacted granular backfill shall be provided between all utility crossings. 
(d)  Manholes. 
(1)  Location. 
a.  Manholes shall be located at: 
•  Points where the sewer changes direction 
•  Points where the size of the sewer changes 
•  Points where the slope of the sewer changes 
•  The junction of sewer lines 
•  Street intersections or other points where catch basins or inlets are to be connected 
•  The end of the sewer line 
b.  Maximum distance between manholes shall be as follows: 
Diameter of Sewer 	Maximum Manhole Spacing 
8" — 15" 	350' 
18" — 30" 	400' 
36" — 48" 	500' 
54" — 60" 	550' 
66" — 72" 	650' 
78" and larger 	1,000' 
 
(e)  Catch basins, inlets, and end-sections. 
(1)  Size. 
a.  Inlets and rear-yard catch basins up to four feet deep from invert to top of casting may be two feet in diameter. 
b.  Inlets and rear-yard catch basins more than four feet deep from the inlet to top of casting and all other catch basins shall be four feet in diameter. 
(2)  Location. 
a.  Catch basins shall be located at: 
•  At the radius return of street intersections. A maximum distance of 150 feet is allowed when drainage is required to go around a corner between a high point and a corner catch basin. 
•  At maximum intervals of 500 feet along a continuous slope. 
•  At all low points in streets, swales and ditches, where applicable. 
•  At a location to provide a maximum of 800 feet of drainage from two directions. 
b.  Standard rear yard basins shall be provided at all low points in easements. All catch basins shall be located within four feet of lot corners. Twenty-foot side yard easements to the street shall be included at all rear yard basins. 
c.  All catch basins and inlets located at low points in poor draining soils shall have a minimum of two ten-foot runs of six inches perforated pipe with pea gravel bedding and backfill. Other trench collecting underdrains may be required, as required by the Township Engineer. 
d.  Catch basin leads may tap directly into sewers 48 inches in diameter and larger. 
e.  Flared end-sections or headwalls shall be placed at all culverts and pipe inlets or outlets. 
f.  A prefabricated bar screen shall be used on all storm sewer openings 18 inches in diameter and larger. The bar screens shall be constructed according to an approved separate enlarged detail in the drawings and shall be designed to be sturdy, permanent easily maintained, non-clogging and shall have clear openings of no more than six inches. Bar screens shall not be required on driveway culverts. 
g.  Outlet protection shall employ engineered rip-rap design. Median rip-rap size, dimensions, and total quantity in square yards shall be determined based on the pipe size, design velocity, and discharge. All rip-rap shall be underlain with approved geotextile fabric. Other approved materials will be provided as necessary to prevent erosion. 
h.  The soils above and around the outlet will be compacted and stabilized to prevent piping around the structure. Riprap extending three feet above the ordinary high water mark is recommended for all outlets. 
(f)  Underdrain/sump pump systems. 
(1)  Where the proposed ground surface slope is less than two percent, supplementary drainage shall be provided by an underdrainage system. 
(2)  Locate the underdrain/sump pump systems in a six-foot drainage easement along the rear or side lot lines at three feet from the property line. Where abutting off-site property, it shall be located six feet from the property line in a 12-foot easement. 
(3)  Place underdrain at a minimum grade of 0.30 percent. 
(4)  Trench for underdrain shall have adequate depth to provide gravity flow of sump pump and softener discharge lines to underdrain, and shall have a minimum depth of three feet from the property line. 
(5)  Install two-foot diameter inlets at 400-foot maximum intervals along the underdrain and located three feet from side lot lines. 
(6)  Install a two-inch P.V.C. capped tee at each lot for the sump pump. 
(7)  Show the underdrain system with sump pump on the storm sewer plan, with a dimension to the nearest lot line for each sump pump tee. 
(8)  The sump pump collector system may be combined with the underdrain system, as noted above. 
(9)  Minimum pipe material shall be eight inch PVC constructed with a minimum of three feet of cover and 0.30 percent slope. 
(10)  Eight inch lines must not be used for the collection of surface runoff and therefore structures on these size lines must have solid covers. 
(g)  Open drain requirements. 
(1)  Open drains shall have slope protection (rip-rap) at bends with radius of 500 feet or less and other points as designated by the Township Engineer. 
(2)  The drain bottom and slopes, to the hydraulic gradient line, shall be sodded. The remainder of the drain shall be seeded. The Township will not approve the work until all turf is established. 
(3)  Specific drain cross-section and velocity control measures will be approved by the Township Engineer on an individual basis. 
(4)  Minimum design velocity for open ditches shall be 1½ feet per second and a maximum velocity of four feet per second. 
(5)  Side slopes for ditches shall not be steeper than 1'V:3'H. 
(6)  In general, a four-foot clearance will be provided between open swale/ditch inverts and underground utilities unless special provisions are employed. Special provisions, for example, could be the encasement of utility lines in concrete when crossing under the channel. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-86. - Easements. 
(a)  Provide a minimum 20-foot wide easement for access for maintenance and/or inspection of storm water management facilities. 
(b)  Easements for storm sewers and open ditches shall be centered upon the sewer or ditch. 
(c)  An easement shall be provided for the pretreatment system to allow access for maintenance and/or inspection. 
(d)  When drainage is required to flow across an adjacent lot, a 20-foot wide storm water easement, centered on the drain, must be provided. This easement shall be dedicated to the Homeowners Association or Township with restriction against use or occupation of easements by the property owners and/or by other utilities in any manner that would restrict storm system maintenance or repair operations. 
(e)  A written description and drawing of the easement shall be prepared by the Design Engineer and be presented to the Township for review and approval before recording. 
(f)  Easements for possible extensions shall be provided to the property lines at locations designated by the Township Engineer. 
(g)  The easement must be large enough to accommodate a slope of one horizontal to one vertical from the sewer invert to the edge of easement. 
(h)  The horizontal alignment of sewers that are not proposed to generally follow street, drive, or parking area pavements, shall parallel property lines or building lines. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-87. - Maintenance. 
(a)  In subdivisions, condominiums and private roads the developer/proprietor and/or owners must provide for continued maintenance of storm water management basins and permanent pretreatment facilities, through acceptance of ownership and maintenance responsibility by a home owners or a condominium association. The developer/proprietor shall be responsible for the maintenance of detention/retention basins until at least 95 percent of all homes have been constructed and sold. The subdivision covenants or condominium bylaws shall incorporate a procedure to finance this maintenance. 
(b)  Commercial, industrial and office sites: The proprietor shall maintain the storm water management basins and permanent pretreatment facilities in proper working order at all times. 
(c)  All sites shall meet the requirements of the Township's Stormwater Management Ordinance and the agreement for maintenance of stormwater management facilities. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-88. - Final acceptance. 
(a)  All sewer systems shall be subject to a final Township inspection prior to acceptance of the system by the Township Engineer. 
(b)  A set of approved record drawings and a copy of any recorded easements that were required for construction are required for final acceptance of the storm sewer. 
(c)  The entire detention/retention basin must be vegetated and turf established prior to acceptance by the Township. For detention basins designed as a dry basin, the bottom and sides up to the high water elevation shall be vegetated with a dense turf of water tolerant grass. The remainder of the side slopes and top of bank can be seeded or sodded. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-89. - Water quality alternatives. 
(a)  The above storm water standards represent the minimum criteria that are necessary in order to gain approval. The Township would like to encourage developer/proprietor's and engineers to utilize alternate approaches to site construction that improve storm water quality and reduce the quantity of runoff from the site as dictated in the "Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan." In order for the Township to consider alternate designs, documentation must be provided that presents the alternate's sustainability and long term maintenance requirements. The following list is a partial list of best management practices (BMPs): 
(1)  Green roofs; 
(2)  Bioswales; 
(3)  Cisterns; 
(4)  Rain gardens; 
(5)  Porous pavement; 
(6)  Native landscaping; 
(7)  Filter strips; 
(8)  French drains; 
(9)  Level spreaders; 
(10)  Dry wells. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Secs. 17-90—17-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GRADING 
 
Sec. 17-101. - General. 
For all new subdivisions, site plans, private roads and within existing lots or parcels, and other development proposals within the Township, a grading plan shall be submitted for review and approval. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for the design of grading and surface drainage in the Township. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-102. - Design considerations. 
(a)  The grading plan shall be designed to insure that if a failure occurs in any storm drainage system, storm waters will drain to an approved outlet in overland swales without flooding buildings or adjacent properties. 
(b)  Positive drainage of all yard areas is required for all residential developments. In special cases involving extreme vertical relief and wooded areas, isolated undrained potholes will be considered. These undrained areas must be provided with an easement for surface drainage and retention which will encompass the storm water storage level for two 100-year frequency storms plus one foot of freeboard. 
(c)  Generally, residential lot drainage shall be split at the building; drainage from the front of the building shall drain to the road and drainage from the rear of the building shall drain to the rear lot line. Rear to front surface drainage shall be avoided and will only be permitted under extreme topographic conditions. If rear to front drainage is permitted, only the drainage from the rear of the specific lot is allowed. 
(d)  Side yard swales shall be a minimum of 0.5 feet below the building brick ledge grade of the building and located a minimum of ten feet away from the building. 
(e)  Rear to front lot drainage shall have protective drainage swales around the building. The high point of the swale shall generally be located a minimum distance of 15 feet off the rear of the building and generally one foot (one-half foot minimum) below the building brick ledge grade. 
(f)  Rear-yards shall be drained with swales and shallow ditches unless topographic features prevent surface drainage. 
(g)  Meet existing ground at the property boundaries. Construct an intercepting swale to prevent drainage onto adjacent property or lots. 
(h)  All building footing drains and sump pumps shall discharge into enclosed storm systems if available. When footing drains or sump pumps are discharged onto the ground surface, the point of discharge shall generally be in the rear directed away from side lot lines and road right-of-way. 
(i)  In residential development with poor draining soils or high groundwater table, an enclosed drainage system for footing drains/sump pumps discharge is required. (See underdrain/sump pump collection systems - section 17-85(f)). 
(j)  No rear yard drainage system shall be constructed until rear yard grading is completed and approved. 
(k)  For existing homes within subdivisions and condos, grading and/or landscaping shall be allowed two feet from any property line subject to the other requirements in these standards and the Township's Ordinances. Any grading within two feet of the property line will require the written consent of the neighboring property owner prior to the commencement of such grading and/or landscaping. 
(1)  Slope requirements. 
a.  Protective perimeter slope: A minimum slope of five percent is required for areas within ten feet of building perimeter. 
b.  Minimum ground slope for any portion of the site shall be two percent. A one-percent minimum will be considered for occasional use. 
c.  Drainage swales alongside and rear property lines, and the protective swale around buildings shall generally have a two-percent slope. A one-percent minimum will be considered for occasional use. Rear yard swales shorter than 300 feet may have a minimum slope of 0.8 percent. 
d.  Maximum ground slope for any graded portion of the site shall be 25 percent (one vertical to four horizontal). A maximum slope of 33 percent (one vertical to three horizontal) will be considered for occasional use and for side slopes of landscape berms. Retaining walls will be required where these slopes cannot be met. 
e.  Retaining wall structural calculations will be required for any retaining wall greater than four feet. 
(2)  Plot plan requirements for individual lots (goes into effect 90 days upon adoption of these standards). 
a.  Prior to issuance of a building permit the permit holder shall submit a plot plan drawing to the Building Department for review and approval. All grades shown on the plot plan shall be in accordance with the approved subdivision grading plans. All plot plans shall be in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey and include the following information: 
1.  Date of plan or revision, north arrow, drawing scale, property address, sidwell number, and legal description of property. 
2.  Provide site benchmark on USGS datum. 
3.  All existing and proposed water courses, swales and ditches. 
4.  Elevations at each lot corner and grade change points. 
5.  Finish grade and finish floor elevations for first floor, garage and basement. Provide finish grade elevation of adjacent houses. Please indicate if the adjacent lot is vacant. 
6.  All overland drainage routes must be maintained. The lowest house grades are to be a minimum of one foot higher than the highest overland flow route elevation. 
7.  Location of all the new construction on the site and distances from lot lines. 
8.  Ensure architectural plan elevation and footprint match plot plan. 
9.  All proposed and existing utility structures, with as-built rim elevation and finish grade elevations for hydrants. 
10.  Sidewalks and driveways (with elevations). Please indicate driveway slopes, they shall be less than ten percent, preferred slopes for driveways are two to eight percent. Driveway locations shall match the approved plans. Show five-foot wide concrete sidewalk, if required by the proposed development, along right-of-way with proposed grading as appropriate for development. 
11.  All setback and easement locations. 
12.  Wetland boundaries, water surface and floodplain elevations. 
13.  Show and label all easements. 
14.  Sanitary sewer lead location shall be shown at the as-built location with invert elevation. Provide proposed grade of the sanitary lead. 
15.  Provide sump lead location. Sump leads shall have a minimum cover of two feet at the building and a minimum of three cover in all other locations. The sump lead must connect above all trunk line pipes at structures. 
b.  Prior to backfill inspection as-built brick grade elevations must submitted for review and approval by the Building Official. 
c.  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy a final grade certificate must be submitted and approved by the Building Official indicating that all lot grading has been done and accomplished in accordance with the approved plot plan (within an allowable tolerance of plus or minus 0.25 feet). A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building Official upon the posting by the permit holder or his authorized agent, of performance guarantee as set by resolution of the Township Board the performance guarantee will be released upon satisfactory completion of grading, soil stabilization, and the submission and approval of a grading certificate as hereinbefore provided. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-103. - Grading permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to change the grade of land so as to affect the drainage or change the drainage pattern of any land or part thereof, without first obtaining a grading permit from the Green Oak Charter Township. The existing conditions may be inspected as part of the review process. 
(b)  Where a proprietor/applicant has received a site plan approval, subdivision grading plan approval, or soil mining and filling license, in accordance with the applicable ordinances, the proprietor/applicant shall not be required to submit a separate grading plan. 
(c)  For all proposed construction where grading activities will disturb 25 cubic yards of soil by removal, re-grading, or filling, a Green Oak Charter Township Grading permit shall be required through the Building Department. 
(d)  A grading permit shall be required from the Township Building Department for any amount of proposed grading if an MDEQ Wetland Permit is required. 
(e)  Most activities that fall under the Green Oak Charter Township Grading Permit will also require an Livingston County Drain Commissioner Soil Erosion Control Permit. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Secs. 17-104—17-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PAVING 
 
Sec. 17-121. - General. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for paving in the Township. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-122. - Non-public streets and parking lots. 
The design of non-public streets and parking lots shall conform to the Green Oak Charter Township Code of Ordinances, article X: private roads and the following standards: 
(1)  The minimum grade on any roadway, except parking areas, shall be 0.5 percent for concrete pavement. Minimum slope on asphalt surfaces is one percent. The maximum grade allowed on any roadway or parking lot is six percent. 
(2)  Radii at intersections: Minimum pavement radii at intersections shall be 40 feet at intersections with County primary roads, 35 feet for industrial developments, 25 feet at intersections with major streets with a right-of-way of 66 feet or more, and 20 feet on local streets. 
(3)  The minimum length of vertical curves shall be 100 feet for grade changes greater than two percent. 
(4)  Approaches to any sites from roads under the jurisdiction of the Livingston County Road Commission (L.C.R.C.) or the Michigan Department of Transportation (M.D.O.T.) shall be designed according to their criteria. Approval of these improvements by the above agencies must be obtained and furnished to the Township Engineer prior to Township approval. Passing lanes and acceleration/deceleration lanes are required by the Township on connections to all paved roads under L.C.R.C. or M.D.O.T. standards. 
(5)  Parking lots shall be of the size and configuration as required by the Green Oak Charter Township Zoning Ordinance. 
(6)  The minimum grade in parking areas for any surface is one percent. The maximum grade in parking areas for any surface, other than accessible parking spaces (per ADA requirements), is four percent. 
(7)  All paved areas shall be designed to meet current Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. 
(8)  All parking lots shall be constructed with concrete curb and gutter unless the Township Planning Commission or Township Board approves otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-123. - Material requirements. 
(a)  All paving material for non-public streets, sidewalks and bike paths shall conform to the requirements of the Livingston County Road Commission, the most current edition of the Michigan Department of Transportation Standards and Specifications and Green Oak Charter Township Code of Ordinances, article X: private roads. 
(b)  Parking lot pavement material shall be as follows: 
Residential and Multi-Family (RE, R1-R3, RM, WR): 
Asphalt pavement: A minimum of 1.5" MDOT 13A, 1.5" MDOT 1100L mixture over 6" MDOT 21AA limestone. 
Concrete pavement: six inches non-reinforced concrete over six inches compacted subgrade. Base material shall be placed over six inches of compacted subgrade to 95 percent modified proctor. 
Commercial and Mixed Use (RMH, LB, GB, HC, RO, VMU): 
Asphalt pavement: A minimum of two inches MDOT 13A, two inches MDOT 1100L mixture over eight inches MDOT 21AA limestone. 
Concrete pavement: eight inches non-reinforced concrete over eight inches compacted subgrade. Base material shall be placed over six inches of compacted subgrade to 95 percent modified proctor. 
Industrial (LI, GI): 
Asphalt pavement: A minimum of nine inches of deep strength asphalt. 
Concrete pavement: 9" non-reinforced concrete over an approved compacted subgrade. Base material shall be placed over 6" of compacted subgrade to 95% modified proctor. 
Loading Zones and/or Dumpster Pads: 
Concrete pavement: eight inches non-reinforced concrete over eight inches compacted subgrade. Base material shall be placed over six inches of compacted subgrade to 95 percent modified proctor. 
Note: These requirements are typical but may be modified based on an engineering review of a geotechnical analysis of subsurface soils. 
(c)  Concrete curb and gutter is required at the edge of the drives or parking areas unless otherwise specified by the Township. 
(d)  Where concrete curb and gutters are required, edge drain will be required per the Livingston County Road Commissioner's requirements. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-124. - Public streets. 
All streets within public right-of-way shall be designed according to the criteria and specifications of the L.C.R.C. or M.D.O.T. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-125. - Sidewalks and bicycle pathways. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for pathways, sidewalks and sidewalk repair in the Township. 
(a)  Design requirements. Where pathways are proposed or required, they shall be indicated on the site plan. Proposed grades shall be indicated at the lot lines. 
(1)  The pathway shall be ten feet wide and located one foot inside the existing or proposed right-of-way line of public street. 
(2)  Pathway material shall be 1½-inch MDOT 13A, 1½-inch MDOT 1100L mixture over four inches of MDOT 21AA limestone. Where the pathway crosses driveways, the material shall be six-inch concrete. 
(3)  The existing subgrade shall be compacted to 95 percent modified proctor and must have a soil sterilant applied prior to placing base material. 
(4)  All pathways should be in compliance with current AASHTO geometric standards. 
(5)  Pathways shall be designed to meet current ADA requirements. 
Where sidewalks are proposed, they shall be indicated on the site plan. Proposed grades shall be indicated at the lot lines. 
(1)  The sidewalk shall be five feet wide and located one foot inside the existing or proposed right-of-way line of public street. 
(2)  Sidewalks shall extend through all driveways without steps. 
(3)  Concrete sidewalks shall be four inches thick, except at driveways where they shall be a minimum of six inches thick. A thicker section may be required if the sidewalk crosses a commercial, mixed use, or industrial driveway. Concrete material for sidewalks shall have a 28-day compressive strength of at least 3,000 pounds per square inch. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall have a transverse slope of two percent. The maximum longitudinal slope shall be five percent. 
(5)  All sidewalks shall be designed to meet current ADA requirements. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-126. - Final acceptance. 
(a)  All public road systems shall be subjected to a final inspection by the Livingston County Road Commission prior to acceptance of the system by the Township or issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  A set of approved record drawings, together with copies of all material certifications, density testing reports, concrete cylinder test reports, any recorded easement(s) and a final inspection shall be submitted to the Township prior to final acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Secs. 17-127—17-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 17-141. - General. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for engineering plans for submittal to the Township. 
(a)  Prior to starting any design, the design engineer is encouraged to make use of maps and information available at the Township and County offices. It shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to verify utility locations provided by the Township, Livingston County or other agencies. 
(b)  A statement indicating that the design engineer has reviewed the Green Oak Charter Township Engineering Design Standards and other applicable ordinances and that the prepared work is in conformance with the standards and ordinances. All exceptions must be indicated. This can be submitted as a separate letter. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-142. - Plans and specifications. 
The plans and specifications shall be prepared under the supervision of a Professional Engineer registered in the State of Michigan and the plans shall have imprinted thereon the seal and original signature of that engineer. 
Plans shall consist of a title sheet, plan and profile, project specific notes and details, and standard detail sheets. Sheet size shall be 24 inches by 36 inches, minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet vertical for plan and profile sheets (an overall development and/or utility layout plan may be at one inch equals 100 feet). Details specific to the project shall be drawn at scale. 
All plan sheets shall have a north arrow and all elevations shall be on U.S.G.S. (NAVD 88 or NGVD 29) datum. 
Existing topography and proposed ground contours at a minimum of two foot intervals extending 100 feet past the boundary of the site. All existing ground elevations shall be shown to tenths of a foot. 
(a)  Title sheet. A title sheet, or the first sheet of a set of plans, shall show the following: 
(1)  Project title. 
(2)  Name, address and phone number of proprietor. 
(3)  Name, address and phone number of designing engineer. 
(4)  The seal and signature of engineer responsible for the project. 
(5)  Location map drawn to an appropriate graphic scale, generally not greater than one inch equals 100 feet nor smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet, with North indicator, showing location of project area with respect to the surrounding area. 
(6)  Reference bench marks, established at intervals not greater than 1,200 feet and on U.S.G.S. Datum, convenient to the proposed construction. Each benchmark shall be noted with number, location, description and established elevation. A minimum two bench marks shall be provided. The Township Engineer can provide a list of available benchmarks. 
(7)  Name of the Township. 
(8)  Legal description of the property. 
(9)  Legend. 
(10)  Plan completion date. 
(11)  Dates of submittals and revisions. 
(12)  Sheet index. 
(13)  Quantity list of public improvements. 
(b)  Existing conditions/topographic survey plan. ALTA plan or certified surveyor's plan of the existing features and easements. 
1.  At a minimum, plan sheets shall include: 
a.  Existing site conditions, including but not limited to: ditches, culverts, utilities, sidewalks, utility poles, easements, building footprint and finish grade, finish grade of adjacent buildings, wetlands and woodlands, and floodplains. 
b.  Topographic elevations at a minimum of 100 feet beyond the property line. 
(c)  General improvement plan. If a development cannot be shown on one 24 inches by 36 inches sheet at one inch equals 50 feet scale, then provide an overall plan that shows the proposed phasing, overall utilities and layout of the entire development. 
The general improvement plan can also include general notes that are applicable to all drawings. 
(d)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(1)  Can be incorporated with drainage area plan sheet or other appropriate construction plan. 
(2)  At a minimum, plan sheets shall include: 
a.  Location, types and details of perimeter and on-site sediment and erosion control methods. 
b.  An erosion control and construction sequence schedule. 
c.  Location and details of mud mats. 
d.  Location, dimensions, surface material and thickness, method of containment, and restoration of construction staging and equipment and material storage areas. 
e.  Construction sediment basins (when indicated on the plans or required due to site conditions): 
1.  Location of basin. 
2.  Calculations for the size of the basin and amount of sediment loading. 
3.  Method and/or location of conveying site runoff to the basin and erosion control measures along drainage route. 
4.  Location, cross-section, and details of access route to basin for periodic dredging and maintenance. 
5.  Maintenance schedule for removing accumulated sediment. Note indicating method and location of disposal of sediment basin soils. 
6.  Location and detail of basin outlet filter. 
7.  Location and elevation of sodded emergency spillway. 
8.  Location and detail of temporary security fencing. 
9.  Cross-section of basin side slopes, top of bank/basin bottom elevations, inlet/outlet elevations, and water surface elevation/depth of storage. 
10.  Plan or description for the removal of the temporary basin and restoration of the affected area once permanent control devices and stabilization are in place. 
(3)  The following "erosion control standard notes" shall be placed on the soil erosion and sediment control plans: 
a.  All erosion and sedimentation control work shall conform to the current standards and specifications of the Livingston County Drain Commissioner and the Green Oak Charter Township. 
b.  Daily inspections shall be made by the contractor for effectiveness of erosion and sedimentation control measures. Any necessary repairs shall be performed without delay. 
c.  Erosion and any sedimentation from work on this site shall be contained within the work area and not allowed to collect on any off-site areas or in waterways. Waterways include both natural and man-made open ditches, streams, storm drains, lakes, ponds and wetlands. 
d.  The contractor shall apply temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures as directed on these plans and where otherwise required by the work. The contractor shall remove temporary measures as soon as permanent stabilization of slopes, ditches, and other changes have been accomplished. 
e.  Soil erosion control practices will be established in early stages of construction by the contractor. Sediment control practices will be applied as a perimeter defense against any transporting of dirt off the work area. 
f.  The contractor shall preserve off-site natural vegetation as much as possible. 
g.  Protect all existing trees, including their branches and roots, from damage due to this work unless specifically identified for removal. 
h.  Stabilization of all disturbed areas shall be established using the appropriate vegetation within five days of completion of final grading. 
i.  The contractor shall sweep the existing streets surrounding the project site as needed. 
j.  The contractor shall be responsible for dust control and shall provide all equipment and material to keep dust in check at all times. The contractor shall respond immediately to any and all complaints. 
k.  The contractor shall be responsible for obtaining the NPDES permit and ensuring compliance with all applicable permit regulations, including but not limited to, inspection, restoration and record keeping requirements. Reports from the certified storm water operator shall be made available to the Township. 
(e)  Grading plans. 
1.  Scale of sheets shall be a maximum of one inch equals 50 feet. 
2.  As a minimum, plan sheets shall include: 
a.  Centerline of street stationing with centerline or top-of-curb elevations at 50-foot intervals. 
b.  Existing and proposed ground elevations shall be provided at all lot corners along the boundaries of the development and 50-foot intervals along all site boundary lines. 
c.  Street names, street widths, subdivision names, lot numbers and dimensions, and permanent parcel numbers and dimensions for all unplatted parcels for the site and adjacent properties. 
d.  Floodplain contour line, where applicable. 
e.  Wetland limits, where applicable and the name of the consultant that flagged the wetland limits. 
f.  All proposed and existing storm drainage facilities, storm sewers, manholes, catch basins and inlets including rim and end section finish grades, and all existing and proposed utility structures (i.e., sanitary manholes, hydrants, etc.) with rim or finished grade elevations and invert elevations to one hundredths of a foot. 
g.  All easements. 
h.  Proposed top of curb or shoulder elevation opposite each front lot corner to hundredths of a foot. 
i.  Finish grades are to be placed in rectangular boxes drawn to dimensions comparable to a typical house to be built in the development. A box shall be placed on each proposed lot according to the front yard setback. Indicate walkouts (w/o) on rectangle box. 
j.  Proposed ground elevation at each lot corner (front and rear), and side lot elevations between houses to tenths of a foot. 
k.  Provide sidewalk elevations at all lot corners to one hundredths of a foot. Minimum slope across walk shall be two percent. 
l.  Provide elevations for pavement, sidewalks, parking islands and other locations as required by the Township Engineer. 
m.  When swales for lot drainage are called for on the plan, swale elevations at the high point adjacent to the house, the back of the house, and the front of the house shall be provided. General flow direction of swales shall be shown with arrows. 
n.  Drainage flow arrows shall be provided to indicate the direction of surface water drainage over the development. 
o.  The 100-year overland flow route shall be shown. 
p.  In residential developments each grading plan sheet shall contain a note indicating the location of footing drain/sump pump discharge. 
q.  Indicate rear yard catch basins where required. The proposed rim shall be shown to the nearest hundredths of a foot. 
r.  Catch basins are required to be placed at a lot corner and the catch basin elevation shall be the only proposed elevation shown at that corner. 
s.  Written description of proposed land use. 
t.  Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels. 
u.  Total acreage and net acreage (minus right-of-way). 
(f)  Paving plans. 
(1)  The plan portion of the sheet shall include, at a minimum: 
a.  Street names, street and easement widths, subdivision names, lot numbers and frontage dimensions, for all unplatted parcels. 
b.  Location of existing and proposed utilities crossing or within proposed right-of-way. 
c.  Existing easements on the site. 
d.  Existing adjacent streets. 
e.  Type of paving. 
f.  Radii of all curves. 
g.  Construction notes. 
h.  A tabulated list of quantities appearing on that sheet. 
i.  Sidewalks and approaches. 
j.  Proposed public street approaches with alignment and dimensions. 
k.  A striping and traffic control plan for the parking lot that indicates proposed loading areas. 
(2)  The profile portion of the sheet, when applicable, shall appear below the companion plan portion, generally projected vertically, and shall show at least the following: 
a.  Existing and proposed centerline. 
b.  Proposed top of curb. 
c.  Proposed storm sewer and or ditch. 
d.  Existing storm sewer facilities. 
e.  Stationing were applicable. 
(3)  Cross-sections shall be provided with the following information: 
a.  Paving type, thickness and specification. 
b.  Base type, thickness and specification. 
c.  Pavement width, crown and cross-slope. 
d.  Curb section (where applicable). 
e.  Subgrade treatment. 
(g)  Plan and profile sheets (sanitary, water main and storm). 
1.  Each plan and profile sheet shall include a tabulated list of quantities appearing on that sheet. 
2.  Structures shall be identified by numbers assigned consecutively and increasing in direction opposite to direction of flow in each sewer. 
3.  The plan portion of sheet shall include, at minimum: 
a.  All existing or planned surface or underground improvements in streets or easements in which sewer construction is proposed, and in adjacent areas if pertinent to design and construction. 
b.  Street names, street and easement widths, subdivision names, lot numbers, lot dimensions, and parcel numbers and frontage dimensions for all unplatted parcels. 
c.  Location, length, size and direction of flow of each section of proposed sewer between manholes. 
d.  Natural or man-made features such as drainage courses, county drains, lakes, wetlands and floodplains. 
e.  Locations of all manholes, ARVs, IFCs, BFCs, TFCs and other sewer appurtenances and special structures with ties to property lines. 
f.  Existing pipe inverts involved in the project. 
g.  House leads, wye branches or tee inlets, to be constructed with the proposed sewer, with locations at easement and/or property lines. 
h.  Limits of special backfill requirements. 
i.  A note stating that the contractor shall adjust existing manhole covers, as required. 
4.  The profile portion of sheet shall appear below companion plan portion, generally projected vertically, and shall show at least the following: 
a.  Size, length, slope, type and class of pipe, and bedding for each section of proposed sewer between structures. 
b.  Limits of special backfill requirements. 
c.  Profile, over centerline of proposed sewer, of existing and proposed finished ground and pavement surfaces. 
d.  Location of existing and proposed utilities crossing the line of the sewer or otherwise affecting sewer construction, with a note of caution. 
e.  Location of all proposed structures, with structure number, invert elevation/direction of all connecting pipes, top of casting elevation, and structure type. 
f.  Location of all house leads and wye branches to be constructed with the proposed sewer. 
g.  Length of risers. 
h.  Invert elevation at property line or easement line for house leads to be included with sewer construction. 
i.  A note stating that the contractor shall verify the location and elevation of all existing utilities prior to construction. 
j.  In the profile view, all crossings of utilities must be shown. When a water main crosses a sanitary sewer, the top of pipe elevation of the water main shall be indicated. Minimum vertical clearance between utilities shall be 18 inches. Compacted sand backfill is required between utilities. 
(h)  Storm water management basins and pretreatment systems. 
(1)  Storm water management basins and/or pretreatment systems can be placed on the storm drainage plan and profile sheets or on a separate plan sheet. 
a.  Design calculations for detention/retention basin volumes required and provided, sediment loading calculations, basin outlet restriction, and a plan of the drainage area tributary to the basin shall accompany construction plans submitted for review. 
b.  For all open detention/retention basins, indicate the top-of-bank, high water and bottom of pond elevations, and side slopes. Provide location, elevation and details of basin outlet restriction and emergency overflow spillway or manhole for detention basins. 
c.  For enclosed detention basins, provide high water and bottom of system elevations, cross-section or profile of system; location, elevation and details of outlet restrictor, and method of providing for emergency overflows. 
d.  For infiltration (recharge) systems, provide soil boring logs and soils analysis, volume requirements, percolation rate, infiltration/exfiltration design calculations, cross-section or profile of system, and method for handling emergency overflows caused by rainfall in excess of the design storm event or failure of the infiltration/exfiltration medium. Soil boring for retention basins shall also show ground water level, and soil types. 
e.  For open basin pretreatment systems, provide storage volume calculations, top of bank, high water and basin bottom elevations, side slopes, location of emergency overflow, and details of outlet control. 
f.  The stormwater maintenance agreement, per the Township Stormwater Ordinance shall be submitted prior to the scheduling of a pre-construction meeting. 
(i)  Detail sheets. 
(1)  The Sanitary Sewer, Water Main, and Storm Sewer Standard Detail sheets as adopted by Green Oak Charter Township and the Soil Erosion Control Detail sheets from the Livingston County Drain Commissioner shall be considered as a part of these design standards and shall be included as part of the construction plans. A copy of these details may be obtained from the Township's website. 
(2)  Additional required details for the project construction can be provided on the appropriate plans sheet or on a separate detail sheet. 
(3)  Scales for special details shall be selected to clearly portray intended construction and component or equipment arrangement. Scales used shall be clearly identified. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Secs. 17-143—17-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RECORD DRAWINGS 
 
Sec. 17-161. - General. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for record drawings in the Township. 
Record drawings of water main, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, detention and retention basins, drainage ditches and swales shall be submitted for review and approval prior to acceptance of the improvements by the Township. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Sec. 17-162. - Plan requirements. 
Record drawing information shall be provided on the original approved construction drawings and shall contain, but not necessarily be limited to, the following items: 
(1)  General items. 
a.  Three sets of record drawings plans shall be submitted directly to the Township Engineer for review. 
b.  All record drawings shall contain a statement by a Professional Engineer or Surveyor, registered in the State of Michigan certifying that "the record drawings conform to the approved construction drawings". The statement shall bear and original signature and seal of the engineer or land surveyor. 
c.  All record drawing elevations shall be based on U.S.G.S. (NAVD 88 or NGVD 29) Datum. 
d.  All record drawing information shall be clearly marked as such by adding an "AB" or "RD" after the updated information. 
e.  Record drawing locations shall be shown on the plans to an accuracy of one foot horizontal and 0.1 foot vertical. 
f.  All location changes of ten feet or more horizontally and one-half foot vertically shall be redrawn on the plan and the original location shall be crossed out (X-ed) on the plan. 
g.  Once the record drawings are approved, five final sets of plans shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for distribution as required. 
h.  An electronic copy (AutoCAD, Microstation, or shapefile) of the final plans shall be submitted to the Township Engineer so that the Township GIS utility database can be updated. 
(2)  Water mains. 
a.  Location of all water mains with respect to property line, back of curb or edge of pavement. 
b.  Rim elevation of gate wells. 
c.  Fire hydrant bury line/arrow elevations. 
d.  Top of pipe elevation at gate wells. 
e.  A minimum of three witnessed dimensions (and a northing and easting coordinate) to each bend, hydrant, valve, gate well, meter pit, pressure reducing valve, water main stub, etc. 
f.  A minimum of three witnessed dimensions (or a northing and easting coordinate) to each connection to an existing water main or restrained joint, and at each connection point for transition from ductile iron pipe (D.I.P.) to high-density polyethylene (HDPE). 
g.  The distance between the hydrant and water main. 
h.  Accurately locate all utilities (storm, sanitary, water main etc.) where the recommended separation horizontally or vertically is less than that required ten feet horizontal and 18 inches vertical. 
i.  The Liber and page number for any easement obtained for water main as well as any existing easement involved in the project shall be noted. 
j.  Length and location (witnessed to three points) of any casing pipe. 
k.  Materials installed: 
1.  Size, length, type, class, joint and manufacturer of pipe. 
2.  Size, brand and manufacturer of valves and hydrants. 
3.  A total record drawing quantity list. 
(3)  Sanitary and storm sewer. 
a.  Location of all sewers with respect to property line, back of curb or edge of pavement. 
b.  Rim elevation of all structures. 
c.  Pipe invert elevations at all structures, end-sections or headwalls. 
d.  Percent grade of all pipe runs. 
e.  A minimum of three witnessed dimensions (and a northing and easting coordinate) to each structure. 
f.  A minimum of three witnessed dimensions to all force main bends. 
g.  Length of pipe from center to center of manholes, and length of stubs out of manholes. 
h.  Length and location (witnessed to three points) of any casing pipe. 
i.  Materials installed: 
1.  Size, type, class, joint and manufacturer of pipe. 
2.  For pressure sewers, a diagram of all appurtenances in each valve structure shall be drawn with flow arrow. 
3.  A total record drawing quantity list. 
j.  The Liber and page number for each easement obtained for the construction of sewer as well as any existing easement involved in the project shall be noted. 
k.  House lead locations: 
1.  Information shall be obtained from inspection records and transferred to the plans. 
2.  Location of wye measured from downstream manhole. 
3.  Length of lead. 
4.  Length of any risers, if placed. 
5.  Location of end of lead measured from downstream manhole. 
(4)  Detention/retention/infiltration basins. 
a.  Width and length of top and bottom of basin. 
b.  Elevations at sufficient intervals to verify basin side slopes and capacity. 
c.  Location, width and elevations of basin overflow facility. 
d.  Invert elevation of inlet and outlet pipes. 
e.  Basin outlet restriction size. 
f.  Calculations of the basin volume between the high water elevation and the invert of the outlet pipe for a detention basin, and the bottom of the basin for a retention basin (based on as-built elevations). 
(5)  Drainage ditches and swales. 
a.  Location of centerline of all ditches and swales with respect to property lines. 
b.  Elevations of top and bottom at lot corners. 
c.  Elevations at top and bottom along all road frontages. 
d.  As-built cross section of any ditch or swale. 
e.  Elevations at all high and low points and 50 feet along the centerline of any ditch or swale. 
(Ord. No. 02-2013, § 1, eff. 5-15-2013)  
Chapter 18 - LAND DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(13); buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 10; floods, ch. 14; utilities, ch. 34; waterways, ch. 36; zoning, ch. 38; nonconforming lots, uses of land, structures and uses of structures and premises, § 38-491 et seq. 
State Law reference— Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq.; further partition or division of property, MCL 560.263; township planning, MCL 125.321 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et sq.; condominium act, MCL 559.101 et seq.; township zoning act, MCL 125.271 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LAND DIVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessible, in reference to a parcel, means that the parcel meets one or both of the following requirements: 
(1)  Has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access to an existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards of the state department of transportation or County Road Commission pursuant to Public Act No. 200 of 1969 (MCL 247.321 et seq.), or has an area where a driveway can provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and meets all such applicable location standards. 
(2)  Is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access to an existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards of the state department of transportation or County Road Commission pursuant to Public Act No. 200 of 1969 (MCL 247.321 et seq.), or can be served by a proposed easement that will provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and that will meet all applicable location standards. 
Act and the act mean the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
Applicant means a natural person, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or any combination thereof, that holds an ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
Development site means any parcel or lot on which exists, or which is intended for, building development, other than the following: 
(1)  Agricultural use involving the production of plants and animals useful to humans, including forages and sod crops; grains, feed crops and field crops; dairy and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including breeding and grazing of cattle, swine and similar animals; berries; herbs; flowers; seeds; grasses; nursery stock; fruits; vegetables; Christmas trees and other similar uses and activities. 
(2)  Forestry use involving the planting, management or harvesting of timber. 
Division. 
(1)  The term "division" means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the land division act (MCL 560.108, 560.109). 
(2)  The term "division" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the land division act or an applicable local ordinance. 
Exempt split means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent. For a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the land division act or an applicable local ordinance. 
Floodplain means the area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other similar body of water, which will be inundated by a flood which can reasonably be expected for that region. 
Forty acres or the equivalent means either: 
(1)  40 acres; 
(2)  A quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres; or 
(3)  A government lot containing not less than 30 acres. 
Improvement means any addition to the natural state of the land which increases its value, utility or habitability. The term "improvement" includes street pavements, with or without curbs or gutters, sidewalks, water mains, storm and sanitary sewers, street trees and similar items. 
Land division officer means the Township official designated by resolution of the Township Board. 
Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
Outlot, when included within the boundary of a recorded plat, means a lot set aside for purposes other than a development site, park or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. 
Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
Parent parcel and parent tract mean a parcel or tract, respectively, lawfully in existence on March 31, 1997. 
Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
Preliminary plat means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision, submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
Proprietor means a natural person, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or any combination thereof, that holds an ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
Public utility means all persons, firms, corporations, copartnerships, or municipal or other public authority providing gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, sewer or other services of a similar nature. 
Resulting parcel means one or more parcels which result from a land division. 
Subdivide and subdivision mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor, or his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempt from the platting requirements by sections 108 and 109 of the land division act (MCL 560.108, 560.109). Such terms do not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the land division act or an applicable local ordinance. 
Surveyor means a professional surveyor licensed under article 20 of the occupational code, Public Act No. 299 of 1980 (MCL 339.2001 et seq.). 
Topographical map means a map showing existing physical characteristics, with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of proposed grades and drainage. 
Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 3, 5-20-1998) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to carry out the provisions of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and Public Act No. 246 of 1945 (MCL 41.181 et seq.), authorizing Township Boards to adopt ordinances and regulations to secure the public health, safety and general welfare in order to prevent the creation of parcels of land which do not comply with the act or with applicable Township ordinances, to provide for the orderly development of land and otherwise to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the Township by establishing minimum requirements for the review and approval of certain land divisions within the Township. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 1, 5-20-1998)  
Sec. 18-33. - Authority. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority granted by the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and Public Act No. 246 of 1945 (MCL 41.181 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 93, § 2, 5-20-1998)  
Sec. 18-34. - Application requirements. 
(a)  A complete application for a proposed land division shall be filed with the Township Clerk and shall include the following: 
(1)  A completed application, on such written form as the Township may provide, including any exhibits described therein; 
(2)  Proof of an ownership interest in the land which is the subject of the proposed division, or written consent to the application, signed by the owner of such land; 
(3)  A copy of each deed or other instrument of conveyance which contains the statement required by section 109(3) of the land division act (MCL 560.109(3)) concerning the right to make further divisions; 
(4)  Except for large acreage parcels, equal or greater than 40 acres, that can be adequately described in reference to section or quarter section lines, three copies of a tentative parcel map showing the parent parcel or parent tract which is the subject of the application, and the area, parcel lines, public utility easements and the manner of proposed access for each resulting parcel. The tentative parcel map, including the resulting parcels, shall be accurately and clearly drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 20 feet for parent parcels or parent tracts of less than three acres in area, and to a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet for parent parcels or tracts of three acres or more in area. A tentative parcel map shall include the following: 
a.  Date, north arrow, scale and the name of the person responsible for the preparation of the tentative parcel map; 
b.  Proposed boundary lines and the dimensions of each parcel; 
c.  A drawing or written description of all previous land divisions from the same parent parcel or parent tract, identifying the number, area and date of such divisions; 
d.  Location, dimensions and nature of proposed ingress to, and egress from, any existing public or private streets; and 
e.  Location of any public or private street, driveway or utility easement to be located within any resulting parcel. Copies of the instruments describing and granting such easements shall be submitted with the application. 
A tentative decision may be made, based on the tentative parcel map, with final approval withheld until receipt of a formal drawing prepared by a professional land surveyor registered in the state. The final drawing shall be prepared according to the guidelines specified in section 3 of Public Act No. 132 of 1970 (MCL 54.211), showing that the parcels are drawn as large as possible within the 8½-inch by 14-inch format and providing all of the information required in this subsection (a)(4). 
(5)  An adequate and accurate legal description of each resulting parcel. Tentative approval may be granted without formal legal descriptions of all parcels that would result from the requested division of land, but legal descriptions must be received before final approval is granted. The legal descriptions shall be in a form sufficient for recording with the county register of deeds and shall indicate the acreage of all parcels. 
(6)  Payment of the application fee and other applicable fees and charges established by resolution of the Township Board. 
(b)  Complete applications shall be forwarded by the Township Clerk to the land division officer for review and a determination of approval or disapproval. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 4, 5-20-1998)  
Sec. 18-35. - Review and approval. 
(a)  A proposed land division shall be approved by the Township Land Division Officer within 45 days of receipt of a complete application, if all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Each resulting parcel shall be accessible. Such access shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  If a driveway is proposed as a means of access, each resulting parcel shall have an area where a driveway will lawfully provide vehicular access in compliance with applicable Township ordinances. 
b.  If an easement is proposed as a means of access, the proposed easement shall be in writing and signed by the owner of the parcels within which the easement is to be located. Such easement shall provide a lawful means of access over and across such parcels, in compliance with applicable Township ordinances. 
c.  If a new private or public road is proposed for access, the applicant shall comply with the requirements of applicable Township ordinances and regulations of other authorities having jurisdiction over the proposed layout, construction design, utility easements and drainage facilities associated therewith. If approval is required by other authorities, proof of such approval is required. 
(2)  The proposed division, together with any previous divisions of the same parent parcel or parent tract, shall not result in a number of resulting parcels that is greater than that permitted under section 108 of the land division act (MCL 560.108). 
(3)  Each resulting parcel that is a development site shall have adequate easements for public utilities from the resulting parcel to existing public utility facilities. 
(4)  The depth to width ratio of any parcel created by the proposed division, exclusive of access roads, easements or nondevelopment sites, shall not exceed four to one. The depth of a parcel created by a land division shall be measured within the boundaries of each parcel at a point from the abutting road right-of-way, access road or access easement to the most remote boundary line point of the parcel from the point of commencement of the measurement. 
(5)  All resulting parcels shall comply with all applicable zoning requirements of chapter 38, zoning, for the zoning district in which the resulting parcels are located, including minimum lot size, lot width, lot area, public road frontage and parking requirements. 
(b)  The time period for approval shall not commence until all of the requirements for an application for land division approval have been complied with. 
(c)  The time period for approval may be waived at the applicant's option, provided that the applicant has provided for such waiver in writing to the Township Land Division Officer. 
(d)  The land division officer shall request a recommendation from the assessor and/or building official prior to issuing the approval or disapproval of a proposed land division. 
(e)  Any approval or disapproval of a proposed land division shall be in writing to the applicant. If disapproved, the Township Land Division Officer shall provide the applicant with a description of the reasons for disapproval. Any notice of approval for a resulting parcel of less than one acre in size shall contain a statement that the Township is not liable if a building permit is not issued for the parcel for the reason that the parcel fails to satisfy the requirements of section 109a of the land division act (MCL 560.109a), including approval of on-site water supply and on-site sewage disposal under the standards set forth in section 105(g) of the land division act (MCL 560.105(g)). 
(f)  A decision approving a land division shall be effective for not more than 180 days after such approval by the Township Land Division Officer or, if appealed, by the Township Board, unless either of the following requirements is satisfied within the 180-day period: 
(1)  A deed or other recordable instrument of conveyance, accurately describing the resulting parcels, other than the remainder of the parent parcel or parent tract retained by the applicant, shall be recorded with the county register of deeds and a true copy thereof, showing proof of such recording, shall be filed with the Township Land Division Officer; or 
(2)  A survey, accurately showing the resulting parcels, shall be recorded with the county register of deeds and a true copy thereof, showing proof of such recording, shall be filed with the Township Land Division Officer. Such survey shall comply with the minimum requirements of Public Act No. 132 of 1970 (MCL 54.211 et seq.). 
If the requirement of neither subsection (f)(1) or (2) of this section is satisfied, such land division approval shall, without further action on the part of the Township, be deemed revoked and of no further effect after the 180th day following such approval by the Township Land Division Officer or, if appealed, by the Township Board. 
(g)  All deeds and other recordable instruments of conveyance and all surveys submitted in compliance with this article shall be reviewed by the Township Land Division Officer in order to determine the conformity thereof with the approved tentative parcel map. The Township Land Division Officer shall mark the date of approval of the proposed land division on all deeds, other recordable instruments of conveyance and surveys which are in conformity with the approved tentative parcel map and which otherwise comply with the requirements of this article. Such documents shall be maintained by the Township Assessor in the Township's record of the approved land division. 
(h)  The approval of a land division shall not, of itself, constitute an approval or permit required under other applicable Township ordinances. Approval of a land division is not a determination that the resulting parcels comply with other Township ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 5, 5-20-1998)  
Sec. 18-36. - Taxes and special assessments. 
Any due or unpaid taxes or special assessments upon the property shall be paid before the division of land is given final approval. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 6, 5-20-1998)  
Sec. 18-37. - Variances and appeals. 
(a)  Provided that the minimum requirements of the land division act are met, and with the exception of the requirements of chapter 38, zoning, where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this article, such as topographical and other physical characteristics of a parcel or other difficulties which are not self-created or financial in nature, the Township Board shall have the power to vary or modify the application of the provisions of this article so that the intent and purpose of this article shall be observed. An aggrieved applicant may, within 30 days of the decision, file a written appeal with the Township Board, which shall consider and decide the appeal by a majority vote of the members present and voting at a public meeting. At least ten days' written notice of the date, time and place of the meeting at which the appeal is to be considered shall be given to the applicant by regular, first class mail, directed to the applicant's address as shown on the application or the written appeal. The Township Board may affirm or reverse the decision of the Township Land Division Officer, in whole or in part, and the decision of the Township Board shall be final. 
(b)  The Township Board may attach reasonable conditions in granting any variance from any provision of this article, and the breach of any condition, or the failure of any applicant to comply with the conditions, shall void the variance. 
(Ord. No. 93, § 7, 5-20-1998) 
State Law reference— Township Board of Appeals, MCL 125.290.  
Sec. 18-38. - Violations; injunctive relief. 
(a)  Any parcel created inconsistent with, or in violation of, this article, where approval under this article is required, shall not be eligible for issuance of building permits, zoning ordinance approvals or other land use or building approvals under other Township ordinances, nor shall any such parcel be established as a separate parcel on the tax assessment roll. 
(b)  The Township shall have the authority to initiate injunctive or other relief to prevent any violation or continuance of any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 93, §§ 8.1, 8.2, 5-20-1998)  
Secs. 18-39—18-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Land division act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, highways or other rights-of-way, except alleys, or the exterior boundary of the subdivision. 
Building line means a line established in a plat for the purpose of prohibiting construction of any portion of a building or structure between such line and any easement, right-of-way or other public area. 
Comprehensive development plan means the comprehensive development plan for the Township, as adopted by the Township Planning Commission in accordance with Public Act No. 168 of 1959 (MCL 125.321 et seq.). 
Dedication means the intentional appropriation of land by the owner to public use. 
Easement means a grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, a corporation or private person for specific uses and purposes, to be designated as a public or private easement, depending on the nature of the use. 
Final plat means the map of all or part of a subdivision, which is prepared and certified by a state registered professional civil engineer or land surveyor. Such map must satisfy the requirements of the land division act and section 18-104, and be suitable for recording by the county register of deeds. 
Floodplain means the area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other similar body of water, which will be inundated by a flood which can reasonably be expected for the region. 
Greenbelt and buffer park mean a strip or parcel of land, privately restricted or publicly dedicated as open space located between incompatible uses for the purpose of protecting and enhancing the residential environment. 
Improvement means any addition to the natural state of the land, which increases its value, utility or habitability. The term "improvement" includes street pavement, with or without curbs or gutters, sidewalks, water mains, storm and sanitary sewers, street trees and other similar items. 
Land division act means the Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 125.321 et seq.). 
Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described or fixed in a recorded plat. 
(1)  Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
(2)  Lot split means the division of a parcel of land, whose boundaries are fixed in a recorded plat, into more than one, but less than five lots or tracts. 
(3)  Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the minimum building setback line as established by chapter 38, zoning. 
Major thoroughfare plan means the part of the comprehensive development plan, which sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed thoroughfares. 
Outlot, when included within the boundary of a recorded plat, means a lot set aside for purposes other than a building site, such as a park or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. 
Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land, which can be described as provided for in the act. 
Planning Commission means the Township Planning Commission. 
Preliminary plat means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to the Township Board for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
Proprietor, subdivider and developer mean a natural person, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or combination thereof, that holds a recorded ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. The term "proprietor" is also commonly referred to as the owner. 
Public open space means land dedicated or reserved for use by the general public. The term "public open space" includes parks, parkways, recreation areas, school sites, community or public building sites, streets and highways and public parking spaces. 
Public utility means all persons, firms, corporations, copartnerships, or municipal or other public authority providing gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, sewer or other services of a similar nature. 
Right-of-way means land reserved, used or intended to be used for a street, alley, walkway or other public purpose. 
Street means a right-of-way, which provides for vehicular and pedestrian access to abutting properties. 
(1)  Alley means a strip of land dedicated to public use, generally for the purpose of providing vehicular access to the rear or side of properties to which the principal access is provided by an abutting street. 
(2)  Collector street means a street used to carry traffic from local streets to major thoroughfares, including a principal entrance street to a large residential development. 
(3)  Cul-de-sac means a minor street of short length, having one end permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
(4)  Freeway means a street designed for high speed, high volume through traffic, with completely controlled access, no grade crossings and no private driveway connections. 
(5)  Local street means a street which is used primarily for access to abutting properties and which has limited continuity. 
(6)  Major thoroughfare means streets and highways which are used as through routes for larger volumes of traffic and which have considerable continuity within the municipality and the region beyond. 
(7)  Marginal access street means a local street, which is parallel and adjacent to major streets and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(8)  Parkway means a street designed for noncommercial, pleasure-oriented traffic, moving at moderate speeds, between and through scenic areas and parks. 
(9)  Street width means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the boundaries of the right-of-way of streets. 
Subdivide and subdivision mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempt from the platting requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the land division act (MCL 560.108, 560.109), or does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the act or an applicable local ordinance. 
Surveyor, land, means either a state registered land surveyor or a state registered professional civil engineer. 
Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 200, 8-9-1972) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, MCL 560.102.  
Sec. 18-72. - Purposes. 
This article has been enacted for the purpose of protecting the safety, convenience and welfare of the residents of the Township and ensuring the orderly growth and harmonious development of the Township by requiring: 
(1)  Proper arrangement of streets in relation to existing or planned streets, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities, and the comprehensive development plan. 
(2)  Adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, access to firefighting equipment, recreation, light, air, privacy and safety from fire hazards. 
(3)  Individual property lots which provide maximum utility and livability. 
(4)  Standards for the construction of any and all improvements as required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 101, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-73. - Authority. 
The regulations of this article are made, interpreted and enforced by the Township Board and the Township Planning Commission under authority of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 102, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-74. - Interpretation. 
The provisions of this article shall be construed to be the minimum requirements necessary for the preservation of public health and welfare within the Township. Such regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate or supersede any existing regulations of the state or county, except that the regulations of this article shall prevail in cases where such regulations impose a lawful restriction or requirement more severe than existing statutes, laws or regulations. If any section or provision of this article shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of other sections or provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 103, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-75. - Existing lots. 
This article shall not apply to any lot forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except for the further dividing of lots or parcels. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 104, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-76. - Scope. 
Subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, no plat within the Township shall be approved by the Township Board unless it conforms to the regulations of this article, nor shall any lot or parcel be split or otherwise divided unless it conforms to the regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 105, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-77. - Fees. 
The Township Board shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for applications and subdivision plats. Such fees shall be sufficient to defray the costs of enforcing this article. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 1, 8-9-1972; Ord. No. 8B, art. VII, 8-14-1973)  
Secs. 18-78—18-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 18-101. - Established. 
The review and approval of a proposed subdivision shall be carried out sequentially through preliminary plat phases. The proprietor may submit a pre-preliminary plat for information discussion purposes, if he so desires, before submission of a preliminary plat. Such pre-preliminary plat shall be a legibly drawn sketch, in three copies, at a suitable scale, and containing information regarding street layout, sewer and water facilities, types of buildings and legal description of the subdivision boundary. The proprietor shall secure a copy of this article, chapter 38, zoning, the County Road Commission's plat development and street construction standards, and any other similar Township regulations relating to plat development. Adequacy of schools, sewage disposal and other public facilities should also be thoroughly investigated by the proprietor for purposes of discussion with the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 8A, art. III, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-102. - Preliminary plat—Tentative approval. 
(a)  Rights. Tentative approval under this section shall confer upon the proprietor the rights granted under section 112 of the land division act (MCL 560.112). 
(b)  Filing. The proprietor shall submit 11 copies of the properly and completely prepared preliminary plat and other data to the Township Clerk at least 15 days before a regular meeting of the Planning Commission (at which meeting the proprietor will be scheduled to appear and which meeting date shall be considered as the date of filing), and copies shall be distributed as follows: 
(1)  Five copies shall be retained by the Township Clerk. 
(2)  Two copies shall be sent to the Planning Commission. 
(3)  Two copies shall be sent to the Township Planner. 
(4)  Two copies shall be sent to the Township Engineer. 
(c)  Required information. The following information shall be shown on the preliminary plat or submitted with such plat. Should any of the data required in this section be omitted, the Township Clerk shall notify the proprietor of the additional data required and acceptance of the preliminary plat for processing shall be delayed until the required data is received. 
(1)  Proposed name of the subdivision and the area in acres. 
(2)  Location of the subdivision by section, township and range, and the name of the Township and the County. All relevant corporation, township, range and section lines shall also be shown. 
(3)  Names and addresses of the proprietor and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout. 
(4)  Names of abutting subdivisions, layout of streets and indicating street names, right-of-way widths and connections with adjoining platted streets, the widths and the location of alleys, easements and public walkways; the adjacent property owner's name and property lines; and the zoning classification of the tract and the adjacent properties. 
(5)  The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to one inch. 
(6)  Date, cardinal points and bar scale. 
(7)  A map of the entire area scheduled for development, if the proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent development. A location or vicinity sketch shall be shown on the plat at a scale of not less than 2,000 feet to the inch. 
(8)  Ten copies of the proposed protective covenants and deed restrictions or state in writing that none are proposed. 
(9)  Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of the lots, including building setback lines. 
(10)  Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the common use of property owners in the subdivision. The plat shall show the exact location of all floodplain areas. 
(11)  Location of any existing and proposed sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivision, including the location and dimensions of easements therefor. 
(12)  A site report, if the proposed subdivision is not to be served by public sewer and water systems, as described in the rules of the State Department Of Public Health. If available, such report shall also include soil boring and percolation test data for a representative portion of the subdivision. 
(13)  Contours shall be shown on the preliminary plat at five-foot intervals where the slope is greater than ten percent and two-foot intervals where the slope is ten percent or less. Topography elevations are to be based on USGS datum. 
(14)  The proprietor shall submit preliminary engineering plans for streets, lighting, yard grading, surface drainage, water, sewage treatment, sewers, sidewalks and other required public improvements. The engineering plans shall contain enough detail to enable the Township Engineer to make a preliminary determination as to conformance of the proposed improvements with applicable municipal regulations and standards. If a central sewage disposal facility is to be used, additional information is required regarding the method and cost which would be involved with connecting such facility into the community's public sewer system. 
(15)  An indication of the ownership, and existing and proposed use of any parcel identified as being "excepted" on the proposed plat. 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  If the Township Clerk finds that the application, preliminary plat and supporting documentation are complete as required in this section, the clerk shall cause the preliminary plat to be forwarded to the planning commission. 
(2)  After the complete application, preliminary plat and supporting documentation have been forwarded to the planning commission, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing thereon. 
(3)  The planning commission shall review the preliminary plat and the comments of the township planners and engineer, and shall recommend approval, denial or grant conditional approval subject to specified modifications and changes to be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
a.  Should the approval be a conditional approval, such conditions shall be met to the satisfaction of the planning commission within the time set by the planning commission or the plat shall be recommended for denial. 
b.  Should the planning commission recommend denial of the preliminary plat, it shall record the reasons for denial and requirements for tentative approval in its minutes. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor and filed in the office of the clerk. 
The planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the preliminary plat within 63 days after the plat is submitted to the planning commission, unless the proprietor waives this requirement or consents to an extension. 
c.  Should the planning commission find that all conditions have been satisfactorily met and the preliminary plat conforms to the land division act and this article, it shall recommend tentative approval of the preliminary plat to the Township Board. The chairman shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the preliminary plat and make provisions and distribute copies thereof as follows: 
1.  One copy shall be returned to the proprietor. 
2.  One copy shall be retained as a matter of permanent record in the planning commission's files. 
3.  One copy shall be sent to the board of the school district having jurisdiction in the area concerned. 
4.  Two copies shall be forwarded to the Township Board. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the recommendations from the planning commission, the Township Board will review the preliminary plat and tentatively approve such plat and notes its approval on the copy of the preliminary plat to be returned to the proprietor, or set forth in writing its reasons for denial and requirements for tentative approval. The Township Board may require the submission of other pertinent related data, as it deems necessary. After such tentative approval, the Township Clerk shall distribute approved copies as follows: 
a.  One copy shall be returned to the proprietor. 
b.  One copy shall be retained as a matter of public record in the Township Board's files. 
(5)  The proprietor, upon receiving approval from the Township Board, shall submit the preliminary plat to all authorities as required by Sections 113 through 119 of the Land Division Act, MCL 560.113, et seq. as amended. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 300, 8-9-1972; Ord. No. 10-2014, § 1, eff. 11-24-2014)  
Sec. 18-103. - Same—Final approval. 
(a)  Rights. Final approval of the preliminary plat under this section shall confer upon the proprietor, for a period of two years from the date of approval, the rights granted under section 120 of the land division act (MCL 560.120). 
(b)  Submittal. Five copies of the tentatively approved preliminary plat shall be submitted to the Township Clerk for final approval of the Township Board prior to the expiration of the tentative approval. The Township Clerk shall distribute copies of the tentatively approved preliminary plat as follows: 
(1)  Two copies shall be retained by the Township Clerk. 
(2)  One copy shall be sent to the Planning Commission. 
(3)  One copy shall be sent to the Township Planner. 
(4)  One copy shall be sent to the Township Engineer. 
(c)  Required information. The following information shall be shown on the preliminary plat or submitted with such plat: 
(1)  A list of all authorities as required by sections 113—119 of the land division act (MCL 560.113—560.119) shall be submitted to the Township Clerk, and certifying that the list shows all authorities as required. 
(2)  Complete metes and bounds description of the subdivision boundary. 
(3)  All approved copies of plats from each of the required authorities shall be submitted to the Township Clerk after all necessary approvals have been secured. 
(4)  A copy of the receipt from the Township Clerk that all fees, as provided in section 18-77, have been paid. 
(5)  Engineering inspection fees, and other charges and deposits provided for in section 18-77. 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  The Township Board, after receipt of the necessary approved copies of the preliminary plat, shall: 
a.  Consider and review the preliminary plat and the comments of the other approving authorities, and approve the plat if the proprietor has met all conditions set forth for approval of the preliminary plat. 
b.  Instruct the Township Clerk to promptly record on the copy of the preliminary plat to be returned to the proprietor the approval or rejection, with reasons for such rejection. 
c.  Instruct the Township Clerk to note all proceedings in the minutes of the meeting, which minutes shall be open for inspection. 
(2)  No construction of improvements shall be commenced by the subdivider until he has: 
a.  Received notice of final approval of the preliminary plat by the Township Board; 
b.  Entered into a subdivision agreement with the Township for construction of all required subdivision improvements; and 
c.  Deposited with the Township a performance guarantee and cash escrow as required under section 18-138. 
(3)  Construction of up to four model homes in a new subdivision may be commenced by the proprietor, provided, he has fully and satisfactorily complied with the provisions of subsection (d)(2) of this section. Such models shall be constructed on proposed residential lots and in complete conformance with all conditions and regulations expected to be in effect until such time as the final plat is recorded and all utilities and other improvements are installed, inspected and accepted. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 301, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-104. - Final plat. 
(a)  Survey. Following final approval of the preliminary plat by the Township Board, the proprietor shall cause a survey and five true plats thereof to be made by a surveyor. 
(b)  Filing. 
(1)  Five Mylar copies and three paper prints of the final plat, along with the application, shall be submitted to the Township Clerk. 
(2)  A final plat shall not be accepted after the date of expiration of the preliminary plat approval. 
(3)  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat. 
(4)  A policy or commitment for a policy of title insurance currently in force, covering all of the land included within the boundaries of the proposed subdivision, shall be furnished. 
(c)  Required information. All final plats of subdivided land shall comply with the provisions of survey and mapping requirements cited in the land division act, especially the requirements cited in sections 126—140 of the land division act (MCL 560.126—560.140). 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  The final plat shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for utilities and other improvements. 
(2)  The Township Board shall review all recommendations and take action on the final plat as soon as practicable after the filing of such plat is in proper form. 
(3)  The Township Board shall require all improvements and facilities to be constructed or require a cash deposit or its equivalent in lieu of construction of such improvements and facilities before it approves the final plat. 
(4)  Upon the approval of the final plat by the Township Board, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the land division act. If disapproved, the Township Board shall give the proprietor its reasons in writing, as set forth in the minutes of the meeting, and return the plat to the proprietor. 
(5)  The Township Board shall instruct the clerk to record all proceedings in the minutes of the meeting, which shall be open for inspection, and to sign the Township certificate of the approved final plat on behalf of the Township Board. 
(6)  The Township Clerk shall transcribe a certificate of approval of the Township Board on the final plat and deliver all Mylar copies to the Clerk of the County Plat Board, together with the filing and recording fee required by the land division act. 
(7)  A final plat received by the state treasurer more than one year following the date of approval of the Township or County Treasurer shall be returned to the treasurer, who shall make a new certificate, currently dated, relative to paid or unpaid taxes, special assessments and tax liens or titles. 
(8)  The clerk shall transmit one paper print copy: 
a.  To the Planning Commission; 
b.  To the Township Planner; and 
c.  Temporarily in the files of the Township Board. 
(9)  After all approvals as described in subsection (d)(4) of this section are effectuated, and the state treasurer receives notification of the recording of such plat, he shall return one completely transcribed copy to the Township Clerk for filing as a matter of permanent record. 
(10)  An Administrative Review Committee, consisting of the Township Engineer, Planner, Planning Commission Chairperson, and Building Official designated by the Township Supervisor, is hereby authorized to grant minor changes to site plans approved by the Planning Commission under certain circumstances. For purposes of this section, "minor changes" to an approved site plan shall be those minor changes that do not materially affect the approved design character; do not change the use of the property; do not increase building units; do not violate setback, height or other ordinance requirements; do not substantially affect the required landscaping; do not increase the permitted square footage of any buildings; do not affect easement descriptions; do not substantially impact the required engineering approval; and do not substantially impact any required environmental response activities. Examples of minor changes include, but are not limited to: 
a.  For residential buildings, the size of structures may be reduced or increased by five percent, provided that the overall density of units does not increase. 
b.  Square footage in non-residential buildings may be decreased or increased by up to five percent or 10,000 square feet, whichever is smaller. 
c.  Horizontal and/or vertical elevations may be altered by up to five percent. 
d.  A building may be moved by no more than ten feet. 
e.  Designated areas not to be disturbed may be increased. 
f.  Plantings approved in the final landscape plan may be replaced by similar types of landscaping on a one-to-one or greater basis. 
g.  Improvements may be made to access or circulation, such as inclusion of deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing, pedestrian/bicycle paths, etc. 
h.  Changes of building materials to another of higher quality may be made. 
i.  Changes may be made of floor plans which do not alter the character of the use. 
j.  Slight modifications of sign placement or reduction of size may be made. 
k.  Relocation of sidewalks and/or refuse storage stations may be made. 
l.  Internal rearrangement of a parking lot may be made which does not affect the number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design. 
m.  Changes required or requested by the Township for safety reasons may be made. 
n.  Minor adjustments in the location of lot lines. 
o.  Approval of the location of mechanical equipment originally omitted from the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 302, 8-9-1972; Ord. No. 09-2014, § 1, eff. 11-24-2014) 
State Law reference— General requirements, MCL 560.131; general approval requirements, MCL 560.161.  
Secs. 18-105—18-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PLANNING 
 
Sec. 18-131. - Established. 
The design standards set forth in this division are intended as a guide to sound land planning and are for application to typical development conditions. Should there be unusual topographic or property problems, the standards of this division may have to be modified to either greater or lesser conformance in accordance with the judgment of the Township Planning Commission and the requirements of this division. Copies of preferred subdivision development procedures are on file with the Township Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 8A, art. IV(intro. ¶), 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-132. - Streets and alleys. 
The specifications set forth in this section are hereby declared to be the standards and general plan adopted by the Township Board for the width and location of all highways, streets and alleys which may be platted or accepted within the Township. All such regulations are intended to be in harmony with all road and right-of-way standards and policies of the County Road Commission. 
(1)  Layout. The layout of proposed streets shall provide for the continuation of existing streets in surrounding areas and/or shall conform to a plat for the neighborhood approved by the Planning Commission in cases where topographical or other conditions preclude the continuation of existing streets. In general, such streets shall be of a width as great as that of the street so extended. In general, such streets shall be laid out so as to discourage their use by through traffic. The plat shall provide within its boundaries the necessary right-of-way for widening or alignment changes proposed by the road commission or the comprehensive development plan. 
(2)  Major thoroughfares. Where the subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the Township Planning Commission may, at its discretion, require the construction of marginal access streets, double frontage of lots with provision of a screen planting contained in a no-access reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service alleys or other treatment which the Planning Commission considers essential to adequate protection of residential lots and to separation of through and local traffic. 
(3)  Private streets and alleys. Private streets and alleys will not be encouraged; however, all streets and alleys should be dedicated to the public. The proprietor shall provide an agreement and plan which assures the Planning Commission that nondedicated streets and alleys will receive proper care and maintenance in perpetuity. 
(4)  Access to property. Each residential lot within a subdivision shall have a satisfactory means of access to a public street. No plat shall be approved which isolates other lands from existing streets, unless suitable access is provided. Alternative forms of access may be approved in the case of cluster and planned residential developments, provided, the proprietor can assure that such access is of a permanent nature. 
(5)  Intersections. Intersecting streets shall be laid out so that the angle of intersection is approximately 90 degrees, but in no case shall the angle of intersection be less than 80 degrees, without the consent of the Planning Commission. No more than two streets shall cross at one intersection. 
(6)  Visibility. On any corner lot in any district having front and side yards, no fence, wall, screen, hedge, sign or other structure or planting shall obstruct the visibility of street vehicular traffic between the heights of three feet and ten feet in an area measuring 30 feet from the point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines and the tangent connecting the 30-foot extremities of the intersecting right-of-way lines. 
(7)  Half streets. Generally, half streets shall not be permitted where a subdivision adjoins undeveloped property, except for such major streets of over 66 feet in right-of-way width as may be recommended in the Township's comprehensive development plan or by the County Road Commission. Half streets shall be permitted only when the Township Planning Commission considers the use of a half street essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in accordance with the intent of the regulations of this section and where the Planning Commission finds it practicable to require the dedication of the other half of the right-of-way at such time as the adjoining property is subdivided. Where there already exists a dedicated and recorded half street or half alley on an adjoining plat, the other half shall be dedicated on the proposed plat to make the street or alley complete. 
(8)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of more than 150 feet should be avoided. Where local streets intersect major thoroughfares, the alignment shall be continuous. 
(9)  Cul-de-sacs. Where required for the full and best utilization of the property, cul-de-sacs may be utilized. The maximum permissible length of cul-de-sacs shall be 600 feet, measured from the right-of-way line of the nearest intersecting street to the farthest point on the right-of-way of the cul-de-sac. Each cul-de-sac shall be provided at its closed end with a turnaround having a diameter at the outside of the roadway pavement of at least 90 feet and a property line diameter of at least 125 feet. The remaining portion of the cul-de-sac shall have a right-of-way width of at least 60 feet. The straight portion of the right-of-way shall be joined to the circular portion of the right-of-way by circular curves with a radii of not less than 50 feet. Where curb and gutter construction is not provided, the entire cul-de-sac design shall conform to the minimum requirements of the County Road Commission. 
(10)  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be permitted only in cases where the Township Planning Commission is of the opinion that there is a reasonable expectation that such streets will be extended to a suitable outlet when the adjoining property is platted. If the Planning Commission permits the platting of dead-end streets with the expectation of such future extension, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the subdivider shall provide a temporary turnaround at the closed end of the street. 
(11)  Alleys. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential areas, but may be permitted or required in commercial or industrial areas for the purpose of service access, such as off-street parking and loading, and shall have a minimum width of 24 feet. 
(12)  Street names. Street names shall not be permitted which might cause confusion with names of existing streets in or near the Township. Streets that will be continuations of existing streets shall be called by the same names as such existing streets. All names shall be as approved by the Township Planning Commission and the County Road Commission. 
(13)  Subdivision names. Subdivision names shall not be permitted which may cause confusion with names of other existing or proposed subdivisions in or near the Township. All names shall be as approved by the Township Planning Commission. 
(14)  Rights-of-way widths. Minimum right-of-way width shall be 66 feet, except as otherwise provided in this article. Greater right-of-way widths for major streets as may be required by the County Road Commission or as may be designed on the Township's comprehensive development plan may be required when and as the Township Planning Commission deems necessary. 
(15)  Horizontal alignment. The centerline of pavement shall coincide with the centerline of the right-of-way, except for irregular rights-of-way widths. 
(16)  Street grades. Profiles may be required on all streets, at the discretion of the Township Planning Commission. The minimum gradient allowed shall not be less than one-half percent. The maximum gradient allowed shall not be greater than five percent. 
(17)  Street curvature. The minimum horizontal centerline radii of curved local streets shall not be less than 230 feet. Greater radii may be required for principal streets having through traffic. A minimum 50-foot tangent shall be introduced between reverse curves on streets with a 66-foot right-of-way. Greater tangents shall be required on streets with a greater right-of-way. 
(18)  Radii at intersections. Minimum pavement radii at intersections shall be 40 feet at intersections with county primary roads, 25 feet at intersections with major streets with over a 66-foot right-of-way, and 20 feet on local streets. 
(19)  Access to streets across ditches. Subdivisions shall provide access to all proposed streets across watercourses or ditches in a standard manner approved by the County Road Commission and the County Drain Commission. 
(20)  Acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes. Acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes shall be provided at the intersection of a local street with a major street as required by the highway authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 400, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-133. - Pedestrian ways. 
(a)  Crosswalks. A right-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks in the middle of long blocks shall be required, where necessary, to obtain convenient pedestrian circulation to schools, parks or shopping areas. The right-of-way shall be at least ten feet wide and extend entirely through the block. 
(b)  Sidewalks. Sufficient rights-of-way shall be provided so that sidewalks may be installed on both sides of all streets. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 401, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-134. - Drainage and utility easements. 
(a)  Provision. Drainage easements shall be provided, which conform substantially with the lines of any natural watercourse, drainage ditch, channel or stream. Such easements shall be of adequate width for the particular conditions of the site. The Township Engineer may, if he considers such requirement necessary to the proper development of the subdivision and the circulation of local traffic, require that the drain, if within a public right-of-way, be tiled and enclosed. 
(b)  Size. A private utility easement, not less than 20 feet in width, with ten feet located on each side of the property line, shall be provided along rear or side lot lines, except where alleys are provided for such purpose. Utility easements, ten feet in width, are permissible along rear property lines, in cases where such rear property lines abut unplatted land. 
(c)  Exclusions. Land within a public drainage easement intended for surface use, or land within a private utility easement used for major electrical power transmission lines, shall not be considered as satisfying a part of the minimum required lot area. 
(d)  Surface drainage. 
(1)  The preferred plan for yard drainage shall provide for drainage from the rear of the lot to the front of the lot, with a minimum grade of one percent and a maximum grade of three percent (FHA type A). 
(2)  If it is found to be essential to the economical development of substantial portions of a project, the easement at the rear of the lot may be below the building grade. In such event, the grade shall not be less than one percent, nor more than three percent, and the grade from the house to the street shall not be less than one percent, with the building grade being not less than 12 inches above the street grade. 
(3)  Where low easements are essential to the economical development of major portions of the project, the longitudinal grade of such easement shall not be less than four-tenths of one percent, and the length of run of such longitudinal easement shall not exceed 500 feet of continual drainage, with no more than 100 feet of such distance being upstream from an angle point in the easement. 
(4)  Where required by the Township Engineer, a four-inch drainage tile shall be provided for easement drainage, with such drain tile being laid in a trench that is backfilled with pea gravel or approved bank run gravel. The depth of grade and outlet for such tile shall be subject to Township approval. 
(e)  Placement. All utility services within a subdivision shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 402, 8-9-1972) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 34.  
Sec. 18-135. - Lots. 
(a)  Generally. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and the type of development and use contemplated. Lots shall be of such size as to permit a variety of house types, provide side yards for desirable access, light, air, privacy and safety from fire hazards, provide for setbacks from the street line, and allow sufficient space for household purposes. 
(b)  Access. All lots, except corner lots, shall abut by their full frontage on one properly dedicated street, except as otherwise provided in sections 18-132(4) and 18-193. 
(c)  Width. The minimum width of any lot shall be 70 feet, except as otherwise provided for, or required, in chapter 38, zoning. Where desirable to plat wedge-shaped lots so as to best utilize a parcel of land, the required lot width shall be measured at the front building line and parallel to the front property line, and when the front building line is narrower than the front lot line, the lot width shall be measured at the rear building line and be parallel to the rear property line. 
(d)  Depth. The depth of a lot should not exceed a depth to width ratio of 2½ to one. 
(e)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be provided extra width sufficient to permit the maintenance of building setback lines on both the front and side street lines in order to protect similar setbacks on both the front and side streets which exist or are planned. Where lots have side yards abutting upon a street, on the same side of which other residential lots front, the lots shall be of such width as to permit a side yard setback on the street equivalent to the required front yard setback of the lots fronting on such street. 
(f)  Side lot lines. Side property lines of lots shall generally be perpendicular to straight street lines on radial to curved street lines unless the Planning Commission determines that a variation from such requirement will afford a better lot layout. Property lines on sides and rear of lots should be straight. 
(g)  Depth and area. The depth and area of lots will be in conformance with the minimum lot areas specified in chapter 38, zoning. 
(h)  Business or commercial lots. No lot or parcel classified as business or commercial shall be platted that is less than 50 feet in width. The area of such lot or parcel shall be sufficient in overall size so as to provide sufficient area for the off-street parking and loading requirements of chapter 38, zoning. 
(i)  Building lines and setback lines. Building and setback lines shall conform to the requirements of chapter 38, zoning. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 403, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-136. - Blocks. 
(a)  Generally. The size and shape of blocks shall be appropriate for the type of lots and land use proposed. Blocks shall be designed so as to permit good lot orientation, safe street design and economical use of the land. 
(b)  Length. The length of blocks between intersecting streets shall normally be within the range of 800 to 1,000 feet. Such form shall be altered only where, in the opinion of the Township Planning Commission, the topography of the land makes it advisable to do so in order to protect the public safety and convenience, and in no event shall blocks be less than 500 feet or more than 1,320 feet in length. 
(c)  Arrangement. A block should be designed so as to provide two tiers of lots, except where lots back onto a major street, natural feature or subdivision boundary. 
(d)  Nonresidential blocks. Blocks intended for purposes other than residential shall be especially designed for such purposes and shall have adequate provision for off-street parking, access and loading in accordance with the applicable requirements of chapter 38, zoning. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 404, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-137. - Uses, restrictions and modifications. 
(a)  Control. The subdivision of property for residential or similar uses shall not be permitted where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the area involved is unsuitable for building purposes, such as, in the case of prohibitive topography, very poor soil characteristics or conservative objectives. In any event, all uses and property configurations are subject to the applicable provisions of chapter 38, zoning. 
(b)  Commercial or industrial modifications. The subdivision design standards of this division may be modified in accordance with division 5 of this article in the case of a subdivision specifically for commercial or individual development, including shopping districts, wholesaling areas and planned industrial districts. In all cases, however, adequate provision shall be made for off-street parking, access and loading areas, as well as traffic circulation provisions. 
(c)  Flooding. Any areas within the proposed plat which are subject to flooding, inundation by stormwater or within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or have inadequate drainage, shall not be platted for any use so as to increase danger to life, health or property. If the Township Board determines that a flood problem does exist, then the Township Board shall reject all or part of the proposed plat laying within the floodplain, and shall require compliance with the land division act and review by the state department of environmental quality. The proprietor may show, by engineering site plans, that a change in the topography will eliminate flooding and shall demonstrate that any planned topographical change will not aggravate the flood hazard beyond the limits of the plat. 
(d)  Open spaces. In the design of the plat, thorough and equitable consideration shall be given by the subdivider and the Planning Commission to the provision of suitable sites for recreational, school and other public purposes. When a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown on the comprehensive development plan is located, in whole or in part, within a subdivision, a suitable area for such purpose may be dedicated to the public purchase. If, within two years of plat recording, the purchase is not agreed on, the reservation may be cancelled or shall automatically cease to exist. 
(e)  Protection of natural features. Due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as large trees, exceptionally fine groves of trees, watercourses, scenic points, historic spots and similar community assets, which, when preserved, will add a certain attractiveness and value to the subdivision. 
(f)  Woodlands protection and preservation. 
(1)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this subsection to protect woodlands within the Township and preserve the economic, health, aesthetic and environmental values associated with woodlands. Regulation of the removal of tree resources will help protect and preserve an important natural feature of the Township for the benefit of present and future generations, and for the future well-being of the public health, the Township's character and the natural environment. The provisions of this subsection are also intended to prohibit clearcutting of woodland areas within the Township. 
(2)  Regulated activities. This subsection shall apply to land for which a site plan, plat or site condominium plan has been submitted for approval to the Planning Commission on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived. The provisions of this subsection shall also apply to simple land divisions under the land division provisions in article II of this chapter and the state land division act. 
(3)  Exemptions. The following activities or conditions are permitted under this subsection unless otherwise prohibited by statute or other ordinances: 
a.  Residential parcels of five acres or less. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, removal or transplantation of trees is permitted on residential parcels of five acres or less, provided, the parcel supports only one dwelling and permitted residential accessory uses, and, provided that the parcel is not part of a site plan, plat or site condominium being reviewed or anticipated for review under subsection (f)(2) of this section. Such exemption shall not apply to landmark trees located on such parcels. 
b.  Emergencies. This subsection shall not bar tree removal, transplantation or other prohibited activities where such actions were made necessary by a genuine emergency, such as a tornado, windstorm, flood, freeze, dangerous and infectious insect infestation or disease, or other natural or manmade disasters, in order to prevent injury or damage to persons or property, or to restore order. 
c.  Dead or damaged trees. This subsection shall not bar removal, transplantation or trimming of dead, diseased, infested or damaged trees, where the damage resulted from an accident or natural cause, and, provided that the removal or trimming is accomplished through the use of accepted standard forestry practices and techniques. 
d.  Public utilities. This subsection shall not bar the repair or maintenance work performed by public utilities which would necessarily require the trimming or cutting of trees. However, it is intended to encourage the preservation of trees by public utilities, wherever possible. 
e.  Agricultural uses. This subsection shall not bar removal or transplantation of trees occurring during the use of the land for agriculture, or the operation of a commercial nursery or certified tree farm, provided, the commercial nursery or certified tree farm has been licensed with the state and has received all other necessary licenses and permits. 
f.  Woodlands management. Thinning, selective clearing and trimming of trees shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this subsection, if such work is conducted in accordance with professional forest management and registered in the state. Woodlands management activities shall not, however, include clearcutting or the wholesale removal of significant vegetation from the site. 
(4)  Tree inventory. 
a.  For all lands, parcels and projects to which this subsection applies, a tree inventory shall be required. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to waive the tree inventory requirements of this subsection (4), if it is determined to be unreasonable, unnecessary or not applicable, provided, the Planning Commission shall not have the authority to waive the tree inventory requirements for woodlands within building envelopes and when pertaining to landmark trees. If the tree inventory is waived, the Planning Commission may still require compliance with some of the noted required information, and may also include an indication of tree massing and a statement indicating predominate species and the estimated number and size of trees on the site within each massing. 
b.  The tree inventory shall include the following information: 
1.  An inventory indicating the location of all existing trees that are six inches or more in diameter at breast height (dbh), including off-site trees within 25 feet of the property lines, and all trees to be affected by the development, such as trees located within areas of right-of-way improvements or off-site utility work. All such trees proposed to remain, be relocated or be removed shall be so designated. Clearing limits shall be clearly shown on the inventory. The inventory shall be accompanied by a separate key, identifying the numbered trees by size, common name and condition. 
2.  Tree location inventories are to be performed by an actual field survey by a registered land surveyor, registered landscape architect, or certified arborist or forester. Professionals must verify the contents by seal or signature, whichever is applicable. 
3.  If existing trees are to be relocated, the proposed location for such trees shall be shown, together with a statement as to how such trees are to be protected and/or stored during land clearance and construction, and how they are to be maintained after construction. 
4.  A statement showing how trees to remain are to be protected during land clearance, construction and on a permanent basis, including the proposed use of tree wells, protective barriers, tunneling or retaining walls. 
5.  A description of the soil types and characteristics. 
(5)  Historic or landmark trees. 
a.  A nomination for historic or landmark tree designation shall be reviewed and determined by the Planning Commission. 
b.  Any Township property owner may nominate a tree within their own property boundaries for designation as a landmark tree or historic tree. If nominated, the Planning Commission shall review the nomination request and, if the tree is determined to meet the criteria listed in subsection (5)c of this section, such tree shall be placed on the Township's landmark tree inventory. 
c.  The Planning Commission may designate a tree, upon nomination, as an historic tree upon a finding that one or more of the following unique characteristics exist: 
1.  The tree is the predominant tree within a distinct scenic or aesthetically valued setting. 
2.  The tree is of unusual age or size for that species in this climatic and geographic location. (Examples include trees listed on the register of big trees or the state botanical club as large trees). 
3.  The tree has gained prominence due to unusual form or botanical characteristics. 
4.  The tree has some historical significance to the Township. 
d.  The building department shall maintain an inventory of all nominated and designated historic landmark trees. 
e.  A permit shall be required to remove any landmark or historic tree. Any historic tree shall be replaced on a one to one caliper inch basis. For example, a 48-inch landmark tree shall be replaced by 24 two-inch trees. Such replacement requirement may be waived if, in the opinion of the Planning Commission and after review by the Township's consultants, the health or condition of the tree is such that it should not be counted. 
(6)  Landmark trees. All landmark trees as identified in section 38-363(f) shall be designated. 
(7)  Tree removal and protection. Developments that are subject to the woodland preservation regulations set forth in this subsection shall indicate all trees proposed to be removed and those to be preserved on the provided tree inventory. The trees designated for protection shall be properly protected from damage due to construction operations and development. Prior to commencement of development or construction operations, land clearing, filling or any land alteration, a developer must erect and maintain suitable protective barriers to protect trees designated to remain under the submitted plan. The protective barriers shall be required for all trees designated to remain in place by the submitted plan. 
(8)  Development of land parcels. Subject to the exemptions listed in subsection (3) of this section, no person shall remove, cause to be removed, transplant or destroy, on any land in the Township slated for land development to which this article applies, any tree having a six-inch or greater dbh, without first obtaining approval subject to the provisions of this subsection. 
(9)  Tree mitigation and replacement. 
a.  Requirements established. For each protected tree required to be preserved under the terms and standards set forth in this subsection, and which is permitted to be removed under this subsection, the applicant shall replace or relocate trees according to the replacement tree requirements set forth in subsection (9)b of this section. 
b.  Replacement tree requirements. 
1.  Replacement trees shall have shade potential and/or other characteristics comparable to the removed trees, shall be state department of agriculture nursery grade No. 1 or better, and must be approved by the Township prior to planting. Replacement trees must be staked, fertilized, mulched and watered, and shall be guaranteed by the applicant for two years. 
2.  Trees usable for replacement trees may be transplanted on-site, using appropriate and accepted procedures and precautions. 
3.  For all regulated trees removed, replacement shall be on a one for one basis. For example, for each tree removed, a replacement tree shall be planted. All replacement trees shall have a dbh of at least two inches. All evergreen replacement trees shall be at least six feet tall. 
4.  Landmark trees shall be replaced at a rate of one inch of replacement tree for each dbh inch of landmark tree removed. 
5.  If more than 50 percent of the parcel of land is designated on the Township's woodland map, an applicant shall not be required to replace more than 30 percent of all protected trees, excluding landmark trees. 
6.  The Planning Commission shall be authorized to waive portions of the tree replacement requirements of this subsection (9)b when site factors, tree conditions or development requirements warrant special consideration, or if the applicant has adjusted the site design to save landmark trees. 
c.  Replacement tree relocation. 
1.  The Township shall approve tree relocation or replacement at off-site locations in order to provide optimum enhancement, preservation and protection of wooded areas. To the extent feasible and desirable, trees shall be relocated or replaced on-site and within the same general area as trees removed, provided that survival shall not be jeopardized by improvements or activities. 
2.  Where it is not feasible and desirable to relocate or replace trees on site, relocation or replacement may be made at another location in the Township that is approved as part of the approval. 
d.  Environmental trust fund. If lot coverage or site characteristics prohibit on-site or off-site mitigation, contribution to the Township's environmental trust fund may be permitted. In lieu of replacing regulated trees, the Planning Commission may direct the applicant to exercise the option to contribute money to the Township's Environmental Trust Fund. Payment to such fund per tree removed shall be in accordance with replacement fee schedules as established by the Township Board, and shall be used to fund tree planting activities on public land or public right-of-way areas. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 405, 8-9-1972; Ord. No. 104, § 1, 1-3-2001)  
Sec. 18-138. - Required improvements. 
In order to provide healthful, clean and desirable living conditions, the subdivider shall be entirely responsible for installing the following site improvements, or shall furnish a cash deposit or its equivalent acceptable to the Township Board, sufficient to permit the completion of all contemplated improvements, before a plat shall be accepted by the Township: 
(1)  Street pavement. Street improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with the standards and specifications of the County Road Commission, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(2)  Storm drainage. All streets shall provide for storm drainage in accordance with standards and specifications prescribed by the Township Engineer. Where county drains are included in the proposed plat, a letter or document of approval from the County Drain Commissioner shall be submitted by the proprietor. 
(3)  Septic tanks and private sewage systems. Septic tanks or private sewage systems with a central plant must meet standards and specifications prescribed by the Township Engineer, the County Health Department and/or the State Department Of Environmental Quality (DEQ), and a letter or document of approval from the County Health Department and the DEQ must be submitted by the proprietor. 
(4)  Water supply. Each lot shall be serviced with an adequate source of water supply, subject to the standards and specifications of the Township Engineer and the County Health Department. 
(5)  Street signs. For the proper identification of streets, the subdivider shall provide and erect street signs at all intersections, which signs shall meet the standards of the County Road Commission and the Township Board. 
(6)  Other improvements. The requirements for curb and gutter, sidewalks, lighting, crosswalks, street trees, driveways, etc., shall be as determined by the Township Planning Commission and/or the Township Board, upon due deliberation of the merits and needs of each individual subdivision. Public utilities must be placed underground and stubbed at the property line, and otherwise placed in accordance with the requirements of the County Road Commission. The consideration of sidewalk requirements should include a need for providing maximum safety for children playing, protection of children walking to and from schools and parks, and provision for adults and children walking to and from neighborhood shopping and bus stops. Street trees, if required, shall be at least three inches in diameter as measured six inches above the crown, and located on residential lots between the right-of-way line and the curbline at a spacing of one tree per each full 50-foot increment of lot frontage. The trees shall be species which are resistant to damage and disease, and do not cause interference with underground utilities or visibility at street intersections. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 406, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-139. - Guarantee of completing of improvements required. 
In lieu of the actual installation of required public improvements, the Township Board, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, may permit the subdivider to provide a financial guarantee of performance of the requirements of this division, of the County Road Commission, County Drain Commissioner or any other agency responsible for the administration, operation and maintenance of the applicable public improvement, provided, a cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit is deposited as follows: 
(1)  Treasurer, escrow agent or trust company. A cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, acceptable to the Township Board, shall accrue to the Township. Such deposits shall be made with the Township treasurer, or deposited with a responsible escrow agent or trust company, subject to the approval of the Township Board. 
(2)  Dollar value. The dollar value of the cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be equal to the total estimated cost of construction of the specific public improvement, including contingencies, as estimated by the Township Board. 
(3)  Escrow time. The escrow time for the cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, to the extent of the cost of the completed portion of the public improvement, shall be in accordance with a previously entered into agreement. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 407, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-140. - Condition of Township approval of final plat; financial guarantees. 
(a)  Approval condition. With respect to financial guarantees, the approval of all final subdivision plats shall be considered upon the accomplishment of one of the following: 
(1)  The construction of improvements required by this division shall have been completed by the subdivider and approved by the Township Board. 
(2)  Surety acceptable to the Township shall have been filed in the form of a cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit. 
(b)  Special agreements. A special agreement shall be entered into between the subdivider and the Township Board where street trees and streetlights have been required by the Township Board. 
(c)  Inspection of public improvements under construction. Before approving a final plat and constructions plans and specifications for public improvements, an agreement between the subdivider and the Township Board shall be made to provide for checking or inspecting the construction and its conformity to the submitted plans. 
(d)  Failure to complete the construction of a public improvement. If the subdivider shall, in any case, fail to complete such work within such period of time as required by the conditions of the guarantee for the completion of public improvements, it shall be the responsibility of the Township Board to proceed to have such work completed. In order to accomplish the completion of such work, the Township Board shall reimburse itself for the cost and expense thereof by appropriating the cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit which the subdivider may have deposited, or may take such steps as may be necessary to require performance under this division, and as included in a written agreement between the Township Board and the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 408, 8-9-1972)  
Secs. 18-141—18-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - DIVISION OF LAND IN RECORDED PLAT AND UNPLATTED PARCEL 
 
Sec. 18-161. - In general. 
The provisions of this division shall govern the partitioning or dividing of lots, outlots or other parcels of land in a recorded plat, subject to the provisions of section 263 of the land division act (MCL 560.263). 
(Ord. No. 8A, art. V(intro. ¶), 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-162. - Recorded plats, unplatted parcels and utility easements. 
(a)  The Township may permit the partitioning or dividing of lots, outlots or other parcels of land in recorded plats into not more than four parts. Such lots, outlots or parcels shall conform to the minimum lot width and area requirements of the zoning district in which the recorded plat is located. In areas not served by a public sewer or public water system, such partitioning or dividing shall not create lots, outlots or parcels which do not meet the minimum lot width and area requirements of the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101). In all cases, the most restrictive provisions of either chapter 38, zoning, or the land division act shall apply. 
(b)  The Township may permit the partitioning or dividing of unplatted parcels of land, provided, such partitioning or dividing complies with the land division act. Such partitioning or dividing shall result in the creation of parcels which conform to the minimum lot width and area requirements of the zoning district in which the parcel is located. 
(c)  No lot, outlot or parcel in a recorded plat or unplatted parcel shall be approved for partitioning or dividing without adequate provisions being made for utility easements. Where such utility easements are needed, written evidence of the availability of utility easements shall be submitted to the Township Board prior to approval. The location of utility easements shall be shown on the illustrative sketch which accompanies the application. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 500, 8-9-1972; Ord. No. 8A-1, § 500, 7-6-1983) 
State Law reference— Easements, MCL 560.190; lots, MCL 560.263.  
Sec. 18-163. - Lots divided into two. 
A lot, outlot or parcel may be divided into not more than two new lots, outlots or parcels, upon application to, and approval by, the Township Supervisor. The fact of such a division shall be noted upon the Township assessment roll and thereafter each separate parcel shall be considered to be a single lot, outlot or parcel for tax assessment and all other purposes. No such division shall be permitted unless each separate parcel meets the minimum requirements of chapter 38, zoning, including requirements as to width, area and open spaces. In cases where water, sewer or other services have been installed within the plat by special assessment and the lot, outlot or parcel proposed to be divided has been assessed therefor, no division shall be permitted unless the applicant agrees in writing to pay into the special assessment district an additional amount to be determined by the supervisor or the assessor representing the increased share of the special assessment district which should be borne by the lot, outlot or parcel as the result of increased benefit received by such lot, outlot or parcel when divided into two separate lots, outlots or parcels. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 501, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-164. - Land detached in a recorded plat. 
Land may be detached from one lot, outlot or parcel and added to another lot, outlot or parcel upon application to, and approval by, the Township Supervisor. The fact of such a division shall be noted upon the Township assessment roll and thereafter the enlarged lot, outlot or parcel shall be considered to be a single lot, outlot or parcel for tax assessment and all other purposes. No such division shall be permitted unless the remainder of the lot, outlot or parcel from which the part was taken meets the minimum requirements of chapter 38, zoning, including requirements as to width, area and open spaces. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 502, 8-9-1972; Ord. No. 8A-1, § 502, 7-6-1983)  
Sec. 18-165. - Division into two, three or four lots in a recorded plat. 
(a)  A lot, outlot or parcel may be divided into two, three or four separate lots, outlots or parcels upon application to, and approval by, the Planning Commission. A survey showing such proposed divisions, prepared by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor, and including a proper legal description of each separate lot, outlot or parcel proposed, shall be submitted with the application. The application shall be filed with the clerk at least 12 days prior to the regular Planning Commission meeting at which the applicant is scheduled to appear. A copy of the application and the survey may be forwarded to the Township Planner for recommendation. As soon as practical, the matter shall be placed upon the agenda of the next meeting of the Planning Commission. Should the Planning Commission approve the requested division, it shall notify the Township Supervisor or assessor and the fact of such division shall be noted upon the Township assessment roll and thereafter the divided portions of the lot, outlot or parcel shall be considered to be separate lots, outlots or parcels for tax assessment and all other purposes. 
(b)  No such division shall be permitted unless each of the parts into which such lot, outlot or parcel is to be divided meets the minimum requirements of chapter 38, zoning, including requirements as to width, area and open spaces. In such cases where water, sewer or other services have been installed within the plat by special assessment and the lot proposed to be divided has been assessed therefor, no division shall be permitted unless the applicant agrees in writing to pay into the special assessment district an additional amount to be determined by the supervisor or assessor representing the increased share of the divided lot, outlot or parcel due to increased benefits received by such lot, outlot or parcel when dividing the lot, outlot or parcel into two, three or four lots, outlots or parcels. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 503, 8-9-1972; Ord. No. 8A-1, § 503, 7-6-1983)  
Sec. 18-166. - Division of unplatted parcels. 
(a)  Application. The partitioning or dividing of unplatted parcels into two or three parts shall require the joint approval of the supervisor, assessor and building official. The partitioning or dividing of unplatted parcels into four or more parts shall require the approval of the Planning Commission. The application shall be filed with the clerk at least 12 days prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting at which the applicant is scheduled to appear. A copy of the application may be forwarded to the Township Planner for recommendation. 
(b)  Zoning compliance. No application for the partitioning or dividing of unplatted parcels shall be approved unless the minimum requirements of chapter 38, zoning, are met. 
(c)  Access. No parcel shall be created unless accessibility is provided by either a public road or private road construction on a permanent, unobstructed easement. All private roads shall be constructed in accordance with chapter 38, article X, private roads. 
(d)  Utility easements. No application for the partitioning or dividing of unplatted parcels shall be approved without adequate provisions being made for utility easements. Where such utility easements are needed, written evidence of their availability shall be submitted prior to approval. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 504, 8-9-1972; Ord. No. 8A-1, § 504, 7-6-1983)  
Sec. 18-167. - Review fees. 
The applicant shall be required to pay any actual costs incurred by the Township in the review of an application for division of land. Such costs may include the review fees of the Township Planner, Township Engineer or Township Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 505, 8-9-1972; Ord. No. 8A-1, § 505, 7-6-1983)  
Sec. 18-168. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township Supervisor, assessor or Planning Commission under this division shall be entitled to a hearing before the Township Board. Such hearing shall be requested in writing and shall be held at the next meeting of the Township Board occurring not less than ten days after filing of the request. The Township Board may, after hearing, modify or reverse any decision of the Township Supervisor, Township Assessor or Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 506, 8-9-1972; Ord. No. 8A-1, § 506, 7-6-1983)  
Secs. 18-169—18-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCES 
 
Sec. 18-191. - Generally. 
(a)  The Township Planning Commission may recommend to the Township Board a variance from the provisions of this article upon a finding that undue hardship may result from strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements of this article or that application of such provision or requirement is impracticable. The Planning Commission shall only recommend variances that it deems necessary to, or desirable for, the public interest. In making its findings, as required in this section, the Planning Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be recommended unless the Planning Commission finds, after a meeting, that: 
(1)  There are such special circumstances or conditions affecting the property that the strict application of the provisions of this article would clearly be impracticable or unreasonable. In such cases, the subdivider shall first state his reasons in writing as to the specific provision or requirement involved and submit such reasons to the Planning Commission. 
(2)  The granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which such property is situated. 
(3)  Such variance will not violate the provisions of the state land division act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(4)  Such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of this article and the comprehensive development plan of the Township. 
(b)  The Planning Commission shall include its findings and the specific reasons for such findings in its report of recommendations to the Township Board and shall also record its reasons and actions in its minutes. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 600, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-192. - Topographical and physical limitation variance. 
Where, in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this article would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography, other physical conditions or other such conditions which are not self-inflicted, or that such conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this article, the Planning Commission may recommend to the Township Board that variance modification or a waiver of the requirements of this article be granted. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 601, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-193. - Planned residential developments. 
The following requirements apply in addition to all other requirements of this article where a preliminary plat is filed for approval as a planned residential development under chapter 38, zoning: 
(1)  Statement of principles. Consideration by the Planning Commission and the Township Board of proposed optional use of planned residential developments shall reflect the following basic principles: 
a.  The planned residential development provisions of chapter 38, zoning, provide an optional method of subdividing property, and approval of any planned residential development is subject to the discretion of the Township. 
b.  Particular attention shall be given to the effect of a planned residential development upon the immediate area, where the character of the area has been established by previous development. Major attention shall be given by the Planning Commission and the Township Board to the benefits to be derived by the residents of the proposed subdivision and the Township because of the planned residential development, with minor consideration to be given to the proprietor. 
c.  The following objectives, set forth in chapter 38, zoning, shall govern the approval or disapproval of the proposed planned residential development: 
1.  Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and similar natural assets. 
2.  Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of a residential area. 
3.  Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of the land, while recognizing a reduction in development costs and allowing the developer to bypass natural obstacles on the site. 
4.  Encourage the provision of open space within a reasonable distance of all lot development so benefits may accrue to the subdivision and further encourage the development of recreational facilities and areas. 
(2)  The application for approval of a planned residential development shall contain the following information, in addition to the information required by other sections of this article: 
a.  The Township Planner shall review and render an opinion upon the proposed planned residential development from the materials furnished and from visits to the site, or such other information as he may deem necessary, and render his opinion with respect to the following: 
1.  The suitability of the proposed open land for the purposes proposed. 
2.  The need for the proposed uses in the general area. 
3.  The location and layout of the open spaces with relation to the lots within the subdivision. 
4.  The effect upon neighboring areas which would result by the planned residential development and the appropriateness of the development of the lot sizes proposed under the planned residential development in the particular area involved. 
5.  Any other factors related to the development and proper design of the proposed subdivision. 
b.  The Township Attorney shall review the proposed planned residential development and render his opinion with respect to the following: 
1.  The proposed manner of holding title to the open land. 
2.  The proposed manner of payment of taxes. 
3.  The proposed method of regulating the use of the open land. 
4.  The proposed method of maintenance of property and financing thereof. 
5.  Any other factors related to the legal or practical problems of ownership, use and maintenance of the open land. 
(3)  If the Planning Commission is satisfied that the proposed planned residential development meets the letter and spirit of chapter 38, zoning, and should be approved, it shall recommend tentative approval of the plat, with the conditions upon which such approval should be based. Thereafter, the Township Board shall take action upon such application in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  If the commission is not satisfied that the proposed planned residential development meets the letter and spirit of chapter 38, zoning, or finds that the approval of such planned residential development will be detrimental to existing development in the general area and should not be approved, it shall communicate such disapproval to the Township Board, with the reasons for such disapproval. The proprietor shall be entitled to a hearing upon such proposal before the Township Board upon written request for such hearing filed with the Township Clerk. 
(5)  If the Township Board gives preliminary approval to the proposed planned residential development, it shall instruct the Township Attorney to prepare a contract, setting forth the conditions upon which such approval is based, which contract, after approval by the Township Board, shall be entered into between the Township and the proprietor prior to the approval of any final plat, based upon the approved preliminary plat. 
(6)  At the time of application for final approval, the proprietor shall deposit cash or its equivalent in the amount of the estimated cost of the proposed improvements to the open land guaranteeing the completion of such improvements within a time to be set by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 602, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-194. - Natural features. 
The natural features and character of lands must be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features, such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 602.1, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-195. - Floodplains. 
Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or in part within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by stormwater, shall require specific compliance with the land division act and its review by the state department of environmental quality. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 602.2, 8-9-1972)  
Sec. 18-196. - Applications. 
Applications for variances are available from the Office of the Township Clerk. Such applications shall be submitted in writing by the proprietor at the time the preliminary plat is submitted for tentative approval, and such applications shall be supplemented by such maps, plans or other data which may aid in the analysis of the conditions which prompt the request. 
(Ord. No. 8A, § 603, 8-9-1972)  
Secs. 18-197—18-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONDOMINIUMS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Condominium act, MCL 559.101 et seq.; Township zoning act, MCL 125.271 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building envelope means the principal structure intended for a building site, together with any attached accessory structures (e.g., in a residential development, the term "building envelope" would refer to the house and any attached garage). 
Building site means the condominium unit, including the building envelope and the contiguous limited common area or element under and surrounding the building envelope, and shall be the counter part of "lot," as used in connection with a project developed under the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
Condominium act means Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
Condominium plan means the site, survey and utility plans, floor plans and sections, as appropriate, showing the existing and proposed structures and improvements, including the location thereof on the land, for any condominium development. The condominium subdivision plan shall show the size, location, area, vertical boundaries and volume for each unit comprised of enclosed air space. A number shall be assigned to each condominium unit. The condominium subdivision plan shall include the nature, location and approximate size of limited and general common elements. 
Condominium project and project mean a plan or project, consisting of not less than two condominium units, established in conformance with the condominium act. 
Condominium unit means that portion of the condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed, regardless of whether it is intended for residential, office, industrial, business, recreational, time share unit or any other type of use. 
Consolidating master deed means the final amended master deed for a contractible condominium project, an expandable condominium project or a condominium project containing convertible land or space, which final amended master deed fully describes the condominium project as completed. 
Contractible condominium means a condominium project from which any portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn pursuant to express provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with this article and the condominium act. 
Conversion condominium means a condominium project containing condominium units, some or all of which were occupied before the establishment of the condominium project. 
Convertible area means a unit or a portion of the common elements of the condominium project referred to in the condominium units or general or limited common elements which may be created pursuant to express provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with this article and the condominium act. 
Design standards means the area, height and placement regulations as set forth in article III of chapter 38, zoning, and incorporated by reference as part of this definition. 
Expandable condominium means a condominium project to which additional land may be added pursuant to express provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with this article and the condominium act. 
Front yard setback shall be equal to the distance between the front line of the building site and the building envelope. 
General commons area means the common elements of a condominium development, other than the limited common elements. 
Limited common elements means a portion of a condominium common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners. 
Master deed means the condominium document recording the condominium project as approved by the Township Board, to which is attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the approved bylaws and condominium plan for the project. 
Mobile home condominium project means a condominium project upon which mobile homes are intended to be located upon separate sites, which constitute individual condominium units. 
Rear yard setback shall be equal to the distance between the rear line of the building site and the building envelope. 
Side yard setback shall be equal to the distance between the side line of the building site and the building envelope. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 1.7, 2-21-1990) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-232. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the creation and use of condominium ownership and condominium development so that, to the extent possible and as stated in this article, any proposed or existing condominium project shall be treated no differently by any law, regulation or ordinance of the Township which would apply to the project or development under a different form of ownership, and to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 1.2, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-233. - Legal authorization. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority conferred by the condominium act, Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), the township zoning act, Public Act No. 184 of 1943 (MCL 125.271 et seq.), and the township ordinances act, Public Act No. 246 of 1945 (MCL 41.181 et seq.), so that all developments utilizing any form of condominium subdivision of lands may be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 1.3, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-234. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the creation, use and approval of condominium development after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 1.4, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-235. - Fees. 
The Township Board shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be charged to the petitioner with respect to application administration, planning and engineering review, and final inspection of condominium developments. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 1.5, 2-21-1990)  
Secs. 18-236—18-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONDOMINIUM PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 18-261. - Required information. 
Concurrently with notice required to be given to the Township pursuant to section 71 of the condominium act (MCL 559.171), a person intending to develop a condominium project shall provide the following information with respect to the project, when a tentative preliminary plan is submitted: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of: 
a.  All persons with an ownership interest in the land on which the condominium project will be located, together with a description of the nature of each person's interest (for example, fee owner, optionee or land contract vendee). 
b.  All engineers, attorneys, architects or registered land surveyors associated with the project. 
c.  The developer or proprietor of the condominium project. 
(2)  The legal description of the land on which the condominium project will be developed, together with appropriate tax identification numbers. 
(3)  The acreage content of the land on which the condominium project will be developed, and a notation of the acreage to be dedicated as public right-of-way. 
(4)  The purpose of the project (e.g., residential, commercial, industrial, etc.). 
(5)  The approximate number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel. 
(6)  Whether or not a community water system is contemplated. 
(7)  Whether or not a community septic system is contemplated. 
(8)  A floodplain plan, where appropriate. 
(9)  A site plan showing the location, area and dimensions of all building envelopes, building sites (limited commons areas and general commons areas). 
(10)  A utility plan showing all sanitary sewer, water and storm sewer lines and easements granted to the Township for installation, repair and maintenance of all utilities. 
(11)  Stormwater management plan, including all lines, swales, drains, basins and other facilities, including appropriate documentation. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.1, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-262. - Streets. 
All building sites shall have direct access to a public road right-of-way or private road built to the County Road Commission's standards. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.2, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-263. - Encroachments. 
Encroachment of one condominium unit upon another, including the building envelope and limited common area, as described in section 40 of the condominium act (MCL 559.140), shall be prohibited by the condominium bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.3, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-264. - Relocation of boundaries. 
The relocation of boundaries, as described in section 48 of the condominium act (MCL 559.148), shall conform to all design standards for the district in which the project is located and shall be approved by the zoning administrator, and such requirement shall be made part of the bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.4, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-265. - Subdivision of condominium units. 
All individual condominium units shall conform to the design standards for minimum lot width, lot area and the building setback requirements provided by ordinance, and shall be approved by the Township Board. Such requirements shall be made part of the bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed. All condominium projects shall be located in the appropriate zoning district for their intended use and shall comply with all zoning standards. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.5, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-266. - Mobile home condominium projects. 
Mobile home condominium projects shall conform to all requirements of this article and shall be located only in RMA residential mobile home districts. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.6, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-267. - Updating information. 
The information required in this division shall be furnished to the building inspector and shall be kept updated until such time as a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.7, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-268. - Master deed. 
The condominium project developer or proprietor shall furnish the building inspector with one copy of the proposed recorded master deed and two copies of a legal survey. The legal survey shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer for compliance with Township ordinances. The Township Attorney shall review the master deed for its compliance with the approved plan. Fees for such review shall be established by resolution of the Township Board and shall be separate from all other fees. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.8, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-269. - Building site, mobile home site and recreational site monuments and markers. 
All condominium projects which consist in whole or in part of condominium units which are building sites, mobile home sites or recreational sites shall be marked with monuments as provided under the condominium act (MCL 559.407). The Township Board may waive the placing of any of the required monuments and markers for a reasonable time, not to exceed one year, on the condition that the proprietor deposits with the Township Clerk cash, a certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit, running to the Township, whichever the proprietor selects, in an amount not less than $25.00 per monument and not less than $100.00 in total. Such cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and markers have been placed as required within the time specified. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.9, 2-21-1990) 
State Law reference— Survey requirements, MCL 560.125.  
Sec. 18-270. - Boundary monuments. 
All condominium projects shall be marked at their boundaries with monuments meeting the requirements of section 18-269. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.10, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-271. - Compliance with federal, state and local law. 
All condominium projects shall comply with federal and state statutes and local ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 2.11, 2-21-1990)  
Secs. 18-272—18-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 18-291. - Site plan review and approval—Prior to recording master deed. 
Prior to the recording of the master deed as required by section 72 of Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.172), the condominium project shall undergo site plan review and approval pursuant to chapter 38, article II, division 2. In addition, the Township shall require appropriate engineering plans and inspections prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 3.1, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-292. - Same—Prior to expansion or conversion. 
Prior to expansion or conversion of a condominium project to additional land, the new phase of the project shall undergo site plan review and approval pursuant to chapter 38, article II, division 2, and all other applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 3.2, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-293. - State and county approval of freshwater system and wastewater disposal system. 
The developer or proprietor of the condominium project shall establish that appropriate state and county approvals have been received with regard to the freshwater system and the wastewater disposal system for the proposed project. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 3.3, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-294. - Temporary occupancy. 
The Township Supervisor may allow occupancy of the condominium project before all improvements required by this article are installed, provided that a bond is submitted in a sufficient amount and type to provide for the installation of improvements before the expiration of the temporary occupancy permit without expense to the Township. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 3.4, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-295. - Three-phase approval process. 
Approval under this division shall be required as a condition for the right to construct, expand or convert a condominium project in the Township. The approval process shall involve the following three phases: 
(1)  Tentative preliminary plan approval. 
(2)  Final preliminary plan approval. 
(3)  Final engineering plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 3.5, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-296. - Tentative preliminary plan. 
(a)  Tentative preliminary plan submittals must be received by the Township Clerk at least 21 days prior to the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting. The Township Clerk shall not place the submittal on the agenda until all required information has been properly provided. Once the submittal is officially placed on the agenda, the Planning Commission shall have 60 days to approve, conditionally approve, or deny with findings in fact, the petition. 
(b)  A developer of a condominium project shall initially submit to the Township Clerk 20 copies of a proper and complete application for a tentative preliminary plan and shall provide all required information described in section 18-261. The plan shall also contain the name and address of the developer, and the name, address and seal of the engineer who prepared the plan, all legibly printed or typewritten. Qualified persons may assist in the preparation of the development plan or accompanying documents, to assist in the representation of the type and scope of the development plan. 
(c)  When the Township Clerk finds the application, the tentative preliminary plan and the supporting documentation to be complete as required in subsection (a) of this section, the tentative preliminary plan shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Planning Commission. 
(d)  The Planning Commission shall review the tentative preliminary plan and the comments of the Township Planners, engineer and attorney, and shall recommend approval, denial or grant conditional approval subject to specified modifications and changes to be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
(1)  Should the approval be conditional, such conditions shall be met to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission within the time set by the Planning Commission, or the plan will be recommended for denial. 
(2)  Should the Planning Commission recommend denial of the tentative preliminary plan, it shall record findings of fact, the reasons of rejection and requirements for tentative approval in its minutes. Copies of the minutes shall be sent to the proprietor and filed in the Office of the Township Clerk. 
(3)  Should the Planning Commission find that all conditions have been satisfactorily met and the tentative preliminary plan conforms to chapter 38, zoning, and this article, it shall recommend approval of the tentative preliminary plan to the Township Board. The chairman shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the tentative preliminary plan, and make provisions and distribute copies thereof as follows: 
a.  One copy shall be returned to the proprietor. 
b.  One copy shall be retained as a matter of permanent record for the Planning Commission's files. 
c.  Two copies shall be forwarded to the Township Board. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the recommendations from the Planning Commission, the Township Board shall review thee tentative preliminary plan and shall approve and note its approval on the copy of the tentative preliminary plan to be returned to the proprietor, or set forth in writing its reasons for rejection and requirements for tentative approval. The Township Board may require the submission of other pertinent related data as it deems necessary. After such approval, the Township Clerk shall distribute approved copies of the tentative preliminary plan as follows: 
(1)  One copy shall be returned to the proprietor. 
(2)  One copy shall be retained as a matter of permanent record in the Township Board's files. 
(f)  The proprietor, upon receiving approval from the Township Board, shall submit the tentative preliminary plan to all authorities as required by the condominium act (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
(g)  Tentative preliminary plan approval shall confer upon the developer a commitment of approval for a period of one year with regard to the size, shape and layout of building sites and street layout. Such tentative preliminary plan approval may be extended if applied for by the proprietor within the effective period and approved by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 3.6, 2-21-1990; Ord. No. 78A, § 1, 3-15-1995)  
Sec. 18-297. - Final preliminary plan. 
(a)  Following approval of the tentative preliminary plan, the developer shall submit an application for final preliminary plan approval in accordance with the requirements of division 2 of this article. In addition to any information required to be submitted under section 18-261, the developer shall include with the application for final preliminary plan approval, sufficient information for determination of whether the project conforms with all applicable laws, codes and ordinances, and the design requirements of article III, division 3 of this chapter, and any applicable rules and regulations adopted by other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over site condominium plans. 
(b)  The application for final preliminary plan review shall also include a copy of the proposed master deed and any additional documentation to be recorded with the register of deeds for review and approval by appropriate Township consultants. 
(c)  Design standards shall be followed and sufficient information provided to document compliance. 
(d)  Review procedures for a final preliminary plan shall be the same as set forth in section 18-296(c)—(f), except the term "tentative" shall be changed to "final." 
(e)  Final preliminary plan approval shall be effective for a period of one year. Such approval may be extended if applied for by the developer within the effective period and granted by the Township Board. Approval will allow the developer to begin final design, specifications and bid documents for all required public improvements. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 3.7, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-298. - Final engineering plan. 
Following the grant of final preliminary plan approval, a developer shall submit an application for final engineering plan approval, which shall include plans and information in sufficient detail for the Township, and the Township Planners and the Township Engineer to determine compliance with all applicable laws, codes and ordinances for the construction of the project and the design requirements set forth in article III, division 3 of this chapter and any applicable rules and regulations adopted by other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over site condominium plans. Subject to applicable provisions of section 18-294, a building permit for construction shall be issuable at such time as the final engineering plan has been approved and all improvements for the project have been constructed; provided, however, the Planning Commission may determine that certain improvements need not be constructed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy on the condition that all improvements will be completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and the developer posts cash or a letter of credit, in the form and amount determined appropriate by the Township Board, following the advice of the Township Engineer, for the timely completion of such improvements. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 3.8, 2-21-1990)  
Sec. 18-299. - Additional regulations. 
(a)  There shall be compliance with other provisions of this article, all requirements of article III of this chapter, chapter 38, zoning, and other applicable ordinances, with the understanding that reference to the term "lot" in such regulations means and refers to a "building site" as that term is defined in section 18-231, and reference to the term "building" (meaning principal building) or "structure" (meaning principal structure) means and refers to a "building envelope" as that term is defined in section 18-231. In the review of tentative preliminary plans, final preliminary plans and final engineering plans, it is recognized that it may not be feasible to precisely apply traditional definitions and measures which would be made for developments proposed under, for example, the land division act. However, the review of plans submitted under this article shall be accomplished with the objective and intent of achieving the same results as if the improvements were being proposed pursuant to the land division act. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of building permits, the developer shall demonstrate approval by county and state entities having jurisdiction with regard to any aspect of the development, including, without limitation, public roads, stormwater management, water supply, sewage disposal, wetlands and floodplains. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy, the developer shall demonstrate approval by any other governmental entities having jurisdiction, and the Township Supervisor shall determine that all improvements have been completed in accordance with the approved plan. Occupancy permits may be issued prior to full completion, and such a temporary certificate of occupancy may be granted for a specified period, on the condition that a suitable letter of credit or corporate surety bond, issued by a company licensed to do business in the county, in the form and amount approved by the director, following the advice of Township consultants. The security shall be in an amount based upon either a contract executed by the Township Engineer or as determined appropriate by the supervisor. 
(d)  The fees for all reviews shall be established by resolution of the Township Board. 
(e)  Any proposed amendment of a master deed shall be submitted for review by the Township Supervisor. If such proposed amendment appears to have no direct or indirect effect upon any matter reviewed or approved under this division, such amendment shall be approved by the Township Supervisor. Otherwise, the Township Supervisor shall submit such amendment to the Planning Commission and Township Board for review and approval pursuant to this article, provided, such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. No. 78, § 3.9, 2-21-1990)  
Chapter 20 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 8; environment, ch. 10; offenses, ch. 22; traffic and vehicles, ch. 32. 
State Law reference— Law enforcement officer training council act, MCL 28.601 et seq.; minimum employment standards, MCL 28.609; obstruction or resistance of an officer, MCL 750.479. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 20-1—20-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS 
 
Sec. 20-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCL 600.101 et seq.). 
Authorized Township Official means a police officer or other personnel of the Township authorized by this article or any Township ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
Bureau means the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau, as established by this article. 
Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice, prepared by an authorized Township official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice, prepared by an authorized Township official, directing a person to appear at the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the Township, as authorized under section 8396 of the act (MCL 600.8396) and section 8707(6) of the act (MCL 600.8707(6)). 
(Ord. No. 106, § 1, 8-7-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 20-32. - Commencement of action. 
A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized Township official of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court, or a municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 2, 8-7-2002)  
Sec. 20-33. - Issuance and service of citations. 
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized Township officials as follows: 
(1)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)  The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court. 
(3)  Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the Township and issued to the alleged violator. 
(4)  The citation, signed by an authorized Township official, shall be treated as if it were made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: 
"I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge and belief." 
(5)  An authorized Township official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(6)  An authorized Township official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a.  Based upon an investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.  Based upon an investigation of a complaint by a person who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and the Township Attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7)  Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized Township official as follows: 
a.  Except as provided in subsection (7)b of this section, an authorized Township official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b.  If the municipal civil infraction involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 3, 8-7-2002)  
Sec. 20-34. - Contents of citations. 
(a)  A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the: 
(1)  Name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  Municipal civil infraction alleged; 
(3)  Place where the alleged violator shall appear in court; 
(4)  Telephone number of the court; and 
(5)  Time at, or by, which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)  The citation shall inform the alleged violator that he may do one of the following: 
(1)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, by mail, in person or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, with explanation, by mail, by the time specified for appearance, in person or by representation. 
(3)  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or District Court Magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the Township. 
b.  Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)  The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)  If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility, with explanation, in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court, in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation, within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)  If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court, in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation, within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)  A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the Township. 
(4)  At an informal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or District Court Magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)  At a formal hearing, the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or District Court Magistrate, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)  The citation shall contain a notice, in boldface type, stating that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 4, 8-7-2002)  
Sec. 20-35. - Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established a Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau (referred to in this article as the "bureau"), as authorized under section 8396 of the act (MCL 600.8396), to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized Township officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this article or any other Township ordinance. 
(b)  Location; supervision and control; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at the Township Hall and shall be under the supervision and control of the Township Treasurer. The Township Treasurer, subject to the approval of the Township Board, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified Township employees to administer the bureau. 
(c)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact alone that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not necessarily entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this article shall prevent or restrict the Township from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law. 
(d)  Scope of authority. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions, and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of such admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(e)  Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized Township officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as are provided for citations in section 20-33(6) and (7). In addition to any other information required by this article or any other Township ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the: 
(1)  Time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau; 
(2)  Methods by which an appearance may be made; 
(3)  Address and telephone number of the bureau; 
(4)  Hours during which the bureau is open; 
(5)  Amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violator; and 
(6)  Consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f)  Appearance and payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person or by representation. 
(g)  Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized Township official issues and serves a municipal civil infraction notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines set forth in section 20-37 for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court, and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by sections 8705 and 8709 of the land division act (MCL 600.8705, 600.8709), but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal civil infraction violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 5, 8-7-2002)  
Sec. 20-36. - Authority to issue citations and notices. 
The Township Building Official and/or his sworn designees, the Township Fire Chief and/or his sworn designees, and any sworn Township Police Officer shall be authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices within the Township. In addition, any other Township official designated as having civil infraction issuing authority in any other Township ordinance shall have such jurisdiction in relation to the empowering ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 6, 8-7-2002)  
Sec. 20-37. - Schedule of civil fines. 
(a)  A schedule of civil fines payable to the Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau for admissions of responsibility to municipal civil infraction violation notices is hereby established. Such fines, which may from time-to-time be amended by resolution of the Township Board, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall not be less than $75.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)  Increased civil fines shall be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a first repeat offense shall not be less than $150.00, plus costs and other sanctions for each offense, and the increased fine for second or any subsequent offense shall not be less than $300.00, plus costs and other sanctions for each offense. 
(b)  In addition to the civil fines set forth in subsection (a) of this section, costs in the amount of $10.00 shall be assessed by the bureau if the fine and costs are paid within ten days of the date of service of the municipal civil infraction violation notice; otherwise, costs of $20.00 shall be assessed by the bureau. 
(c)  The following offenses are to be assessed under the provisions of a municipal civil infraction: 
(1)  Chapter 6, buildings and building regulations. 
(2)  Chapter 10, article II, antiblight. 
(3)  Chapter 10, article IV, noise control. 
(4)  Chapter 10, article V, noxious weeds. 
(5)  Chapter 12, fire prevention and protection. 
(6)  Chapter 16, historical preservation. 
(7)  Chapter 18, land divisions and subdivisions. 
(8)  Chapter 24, outdoor assemblies. 
(9)  Chapter 26, parks and recreation. 
(10)  Chapter 28, peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. 
(11)  Chapter 30, telecommunications. 
(12)  Chapter 32, traffic and vehicles, sections 32-33 and 32-34. 
(13)  Chapter 34, utilities. 
(14)  Chapter 36, waterways. 
(15)  Chapter 38, zoning. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 7, 8-7-2002)  
Chapter 22 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 20; traffic and vehicles, ch. 32. 
State Law reference— Michigan penal code, MCL 750.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Engaging in illegal occupation or business. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in an illegal occupation or business. 
(Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(4), 1-25-1978) 
State Law reference— Disorderly person defined, MCL 750.167(1)(d).  
Sec. 22-2. - Loitering at a place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly loiter in or about a place where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted. 
(Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(10), 1-25-1978) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(j).  
Secs. 22-3—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Loitering for purpose of solicitation. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to loiter in or about a police station, police headquarters building, county jail, hospital, court building or other public building or place for the purpose of soliciting employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances. 
(Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(11), 1-25-1978) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(k).  
Secs. 22-32—22-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 12-31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-51. - Authority at fires and other emergencies. 
The fire official or duly authorized representative in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/or property is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fire, gas leak or other hazardous condition or situation, or taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The fire official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove, or cause to be removed, from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. The fire official may remove, or cause to be removed, any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the fire official. 
(Ord. No. 7D, § 2, 9-9-1981) 
State Law reference— Disobeying firefighters, MCL 750.241.  
Sec. 22-52. - Interfering with operations. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department operation. 
(Ord. No. 7D, § 3, 9-9-1981) 
State Law reference— Obstructing, endangering or disobeying firefighters, MCL 750.241.  
Sec. 22-53. - Compliance with orders required. 
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire official or interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual. 
(Ord. No. 7D, § 4, 9-9-1981) 
State Law reference— Disobeying firefighters, MCL 750.241.  
Sec. 22-54. - Boarding or tampering with emergency equipment. 
A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire official in charge of fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the vehicle is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with, any lever, valve, switch, starting device, brake, pump or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 7D, § 9, 9-9-1981) 
State Law reference— Disobeying or interfering with firefighters, MCL 750.241.  
Sec. 22-55. - Damaging or injuring vehicles and personnel. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface, any fire department emergency vehicle at any time, or injure, attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire department personnel while such personnel are performing department duties. 
(Ord. No. 7D, § 10, 9-9-1981) 
State Law reference— Destruction of department property, MCL 750.377b.  
Sec. 22-56. - Obstructing fire hydrants and connections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or fire department connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department connections that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property. 
(b)  If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the fire official shall proceed to remove such obstructions or encroachments. The cost incurred in the performance of such necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the fire official and with the approval of the chief administrative official, and the legal authority of the municipality shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(Ord. No. 7D, § 12, 9-9-1981) 
State Law reference— Obstructing firefighters, MCL 750.241.  
Secs. 22-57—22-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
 
Sec. 22-91. - Assault, and assault and battery. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or assault and battery. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 2, 10-12-1971) 
State Law reference— Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq.  
Sec. 22-92. - Begging and soliciting alms by accosting or forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accosting means approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon the person or upon the property in his immediate possession. 
Ask, beg and solicit mean and include the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed, or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)  Exceptions. Except when performed in the manner and locations set forth in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, it shall not be unlawful to ask, beg or solicit money or other things of value. 
(c)  Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property, if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance to or exit from the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance to or exit from the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  In any public transportation vehicle, or bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxistand; 
(6)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passenger of such vehicle; 
(7)  From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including any residence, business or athletic facility; or 
(8)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from a building, public or private, including any residence, business or athletic facility. 
(d)  Manner. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value by: 
(1)  Accosting another; or 
(2)  Forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(8), 1-25-1978) 
Cross reference— Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants, ch. 28. 
State Law reference— Begging, MCL 750.167(1)(h).  
Sec. 22-93. - Window peeping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township to look into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the Township in such a manner that would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(3), 1-25-1978) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c).  
Sec. 22-94. - Harassment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, to: 
(1)  Follow a person in or about a public place; or 
(2)  Engage in a course of conduct, or repeatedly commit acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 3B, 10-12-1971)  
Sec. 22-95. - Jostling. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to jostle or roughly unnecessarily crowd people in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(12), 1-25-1978) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(l).  
Sec. 22-96. - Neglect to support family. 
It shall be unlawful for a person of sufficient ability to refuse or neglect to support his family. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 3A, 10-12-1971; Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(1), 1-25-1978) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(a).  
Secs. 22-97—22-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 22-131. - Larceny. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of larceny by stealing the property of another, any money, goods or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money, or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt, release or defeasance, or any writ, process or public record. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 4, 10-12-1971) 
State Law reference— Larceny, MCL 750.356.  
Sec. 22-132. - Trespass upon land or premises of another. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter upon the land or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant, or agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or for any person being upon the land or premises of another, after being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, or the agent or servant of the owner or occupant, without lawful authority, to neglect or refuse to depart therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 7, 10-12-1971) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.552.  
Sec. 22-133. - Malicious destruction of house, barn or building. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure any house, barn or other building of another, or the appurtenances thereof. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 6, 10-12-1971) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.380.  
Sec. 22-134. - Malicious destruction of personal property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure the personal property of another. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 5, 10-12-1971) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.377a.  
Secs. 22-135—22-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Disorderly conduct, § 26-43. 
 
Sec. 22-161. - Disturbing peace and good order. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or assist in making, any noise, disturbance, trouble or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace or good order of the Township is disturbed. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 3, 10-12-1971) 
State Law reference— Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170.  
Sec. 22-162. - Public intoxication. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated in a public place and to directly endanger the safety of another person or property, or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(5), 1-25-1978) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e).  
Sec. 22-163. - Loitering in public places. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Loitering means remaining idle in essentially one location, and includes the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around, and includes the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. The term "public place" also includes the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and the public grounds, areas or parks. 
(b)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such a manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding, or tending to hinder or impede, the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians after having been told to move on by a police officer; 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by any person in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto after having been told to move on by a police officer; 
(3)  Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 3B, 10-12-1971)  
Secs. 22-164—22-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-191. - Exemptions. 
Prohibitions regarding discharge of firearms shall not apply to peace officers or members of any branch of the armed forces in the discharge of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 71, § 3, 9-17-1986; Ord. No. 76, § 3, 9-21-1988)  
Secs. 22-192—22-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIREARMS AND WEAPONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Firearms and weapons, MCL 750.222 et seq.; dangerous weapons, MCL 750.422 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-221. - Hunting areas restricted. 
Hunting with, or the discharge of, a firearm is unlawful within the following described areas of the Township: 
(1)  Beginning at the intersection of U.S. 23 and Nine Mile Road; thence easterly on Nine Mile Road to East Shore Road; thence southerly to the Livingston/Washtenaw County line; thence westerly along such county line to U.S. 23; thence northerly along U.S. 23 to the point of beginning. 
(2)  On or over the waters of Whitmore Lake. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 2, 9-17-1986; Ord. No. 76, § 2, 9-21-1988) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4.  
Sec. 22-222. - Hunting for wild animals or birds. 
Hunting for any wild animal or bird with a firearm or the discharge of a firearm is prohibited in: 
(1)  Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Township bounded on the east by the west one-eighth line of section 3, on the south by the Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad, on the west by U.S. 23 and on the north by the Brighton-Green Oak Township line. 
Editor's note— This area is addressed in administrative rule R317.147.1. 
(2)  Sections 21, 22, 23, 26, 27 and 28 of the Township bounded on the east by Rushton Road, on the south by Nine Mile Road, on the west by Marshall and Silver Lake Roads and on the north by Silverside Drive and Doane Road. 
Editor's note— This area is addressed in administrative rule R317.147.2. 
(Ord. No. 26A, §§ 1, 2, 1-9-1973) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4. 
State Law reference— Control of hunting, MCL 324.41901.  
Secs. 22-223—22-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
 
Sec. 22-251. - Indecent or obscene conduct in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in indecent or obscene conduct in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(6), 1-25-1978) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(f).  
Sec. 22-252. - Prostitution. 
No person shall engage in any act of prostitution. 
(Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(2), 1-25-1978) 
State Law reference— Common prostitute deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(b); prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq.  
Sec. 22-253. - Loitering in places of prostitution. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found knowingly loitering in a house of ill-fame or prostitution, or a place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged or allowed. 
(Ord. No. 37B, § 3A(9), 1-25-1978) 
State Law reference— Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(b).  
Secs. 22-254—22-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES AFFECTING UNDERAGE PERSONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-281. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquid or compound, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, which is fit for use for beverage purposes. 
Control means any form of regulation or dominion, including a possessory or management right or duty. 
Drug means a controlled substance as defined in Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 72, § 1, 4-15-1987) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, MCL 436.1105.  
Sec. 22-282. - Adult responsibility. 
(a)  A person who has the ownership, possession or control of any premises in the Township and who permits the consumption or use of alcoholic liquor or drugs in any form by any person less than 21 years of age on such premises, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether such person is a person less than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. In an action for violation of this section, proof that the defendant demanded and was shown, before permitting such person less than 21 years of age to consume such alcoholic liquor, a motor vehicle operator's license or other bona fide documentary evidence that such person is not a person less than 21 years of age, shall be a defense to an action under this section. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a person related to a person less than 21 years of age as parent or guardian, or to a person placed in the position of a parent by a parent or guardian of the person less than 21 years of age and to legally protected religious observances, educational activities or medical treatments. 
(b)  A person who has the ownership, possession or control of any premises in the Township and who stores or displays, or allows to be stored or displayed, alcoholic liquor or drugs in any form on such premises shall take reasonable steps to prevent any person less than 21 years of age on such premises from obtaining possession of such alcoholic liquor or drugs for any purpose whatsoever, and any such person who fails to take such reasonable steps shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 72, § 2, 4-15-1987) 
State Law reference— Prohibited conduct, providing alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, MCL 750.141a; vendor's responsibility, MCL 436.1906.  
Secs. 22-283—22-300. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR 
 
Sec. 22-301. - Furnishing to persons less than 21 years of age. 
Any person who knowingly gives or furnishes any alcoholic liquor to a person less than 21 years of age, except upon authority of, and pursuant to, a prescription of a duly licensed physician, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 8, 10-12-1971; Ord. No. 04-2017, § 1, eff. 10-31-2017)  
Sec. 22-302. - Misrepresentation of age to secure alcoholic liquor. 
A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person under 21 years of age, or, notwithstanding subsection (a) of section 22-303, a person under 21 years of age who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 9, 10-12-1971; Ord. No. 37C, § 9, 4-25-1979; Ord. No. 04-2017, § 1, eff. 10-31-2017) 
State Law reference— Purchase or possession of liquor by minor, MCL 436.1703.  
Sec. 22-303. - Purchase, possession or transportation by person less than 21 years of age. 
(a)  A person under 21 years of age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in this section. For purposes of this section, a person under the age of 21 is deemed a "minor." A person less than 21 years of age who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines and sanctions: 
(1)  For the first violation of this section, MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, the minor is responsible for a civil infraction, shall be fined not more than $100.00, and shall be subject to the court orders described in subsection (a)(4) and (d). A minor may be found responsible or admit responsibility only once under this subsection (a)(1), MCL 436.1703(1)(a), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute. 
(2)  If a violation of subsection (a), MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, occurs after one (1) prior judgment for an alcohol or controlled substance violation identified in subsection (a)(6), the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if the court finds that the person violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction, a fine of not more than $200.00, or both, and the court orders described in subsections (a)(4) and (d). A minor who pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile delinquency proceeding to a violation of this subsection (a)(2), may request deferral of proceedings and placement on probation under subsection (b). 
(3)  If a violation of subsection (a) of this section, MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, occurs after two or more prior judgments for an alcohol or controlled substance violation identified in subsection (a)(6), the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor which is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if the court finds that the person violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction, a fine of not more than $200.00, or both, as applicable, and the court orders described in subsections (a)(4) and (d). A minor that pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile delinquency proceeding to a violation of this subsection (a)(2), may request deferral of proceedings and placement on probation under subsection (b). 
(4)  The court may order a minor that is responsible for or guilty of a violation under this subsection (a) to: (i) participate in substance use disorder services as defined in MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, (ii) perform community service, and (iii) to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment as provided in MCL 436.1703(5) and subsection (d), all of which shall be at the minor's own expense 
(5)  A minor that is subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of subsections (a)(2) or (3), may be ordered by court to submit to random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis, which may be requested by the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian as provided in MCL 436.1703(5). 
(6)  For purposes of subsections (a)(2) and (3), "prior judgment" means a conviction, juvenile adjudication, or finding or admission of responsibility for a violation of the statutes listed in this subsection, or any federal or state law or local ordinance that substantially corresponds to any of those listed statutes: 
a.  This subsection (a) or MCL 436.1703(1). 
b.  A misdemeanor violation that is dismissed under subsection (b), MCL 436.1703(3), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute 
c.  Section 22-301 or MCL 436.1701 (Sale/furnish alcohol to minors.) 
d.  MCL 436.1707 (Sale/service/furnish alcohol to intoxicated persons. 
e.  MCL 257.624a (Transport/possess open alcohol in motor vehicle. 
f.  MCL 257.624b (Transport/possess open alcohol in motor vehicle by minor.) 
g.  MCL 257.625 (Operating motor vehicle while intoxicated/impaired.) 
h.  MCL 324.80176 (Operating boat while under influence.) 
i.  MCL 324.81134 (Operating off-road vehicle while under influence. 
j.  MCL 324.82127 (Operating snowmobile while under influence.) 
k.  MCL 750.167a (Hunting with firearm/weapon while intoxicated.) 
l.  MCL 750.237 (Carry/possess/use/discharge firearm while under influence.) 
(b)  If a minor pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile delinquency proceeding to a violation of subsection (a)(2), the court may defer further proceedings and place the minor on probation under MCL 436.1703(3), which provides for dismissal of the proceedings upon the terms and conditions of probation being fulfilled. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation or upon a finding that the individual is utilizing this subsection in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, and proceed as otherwise provided by law. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection shall be without adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense, and will proceed as otherwise provided by law. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of built or without a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is not a conviction or juvenile adjudication for purposes of subsection (a) of this section of for purposes of disqualification or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under MCL 436.1703(3) as to an individual. The court shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The Secretary of State shall retain a nonpublic record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this subsection. This record shall be furnished to any of the following: 
(1)  To a court, prosecutor, or police agency upon request for the purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized this subsection; and 
(2)  To the state department of corrections, a prosecutor, or a law enforcement agency, upon the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following conditions: 
a.  At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of the state department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency; and 
b.  The record is used by the state department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine whether an employee has violated his conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets criteria for employment. 
(c)  The court may order the person found responsible for or convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section to undergo screening and assessment to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs as provided in MCL 436.1703(5). 
(d)  The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of violating subsections (a)(2), (a)(3), or (b) of this section as provided in section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.319). 
(e)  A police officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person under 21 years of age has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If a person under 21 years of age does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not be administered without a court order, but a police officer may seek to obtain a court order. A police officer may initiate municipal civil infraction or misdemeanor charges for a violation of subsection (a) based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a municipal civil infraction or criminal prosecution to determine whether the person has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. 
(f)  The police department, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated under Public Act No. 293 of 1968 (MCL 722.1—722.6), allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the police department. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than 48 hours after the police department determines that the person who allegedly violated subsection (a) of this section is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under Public Act No. 293 of 1968 (MCL 722.1—722.6). The notice may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a) of this section, his parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(g)  This section does not prohibit a person under 21 years of age from possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his employment if employed by a person licensed under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, as amended, by the State Liquor Control Commission, or by an agent of that Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his personal consumption. 
(h)  This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation of this section or any other law or act. 
(i)  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under 21 years of age who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this section if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course. 
(j)  The consumption by a person under 21 years of age of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by this section. 
(k)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a person under 21 years of age who participates in either or both of the following: 
(1)  An undercover operation in which the person purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action; or 
(2)  An undercover operation in which the person purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the state liquor control commission, or the Township Police Department as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the person under 21 years of age was not under the direction of the state police, the state liquor control commission, or the Township Police Department and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(l)  The state police, the state liquor control commission, or the Township Police Department shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a person less than 21 years of age for participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(m)  In a municipal civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution for the violation of subsection (a) of this section concerning a person less than 21 years of age having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the person consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal. 
(n)  As used in this section, the phrase "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
(1)  An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine; or 
(2)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(Ord. No. 37, § 10, 10-12-1971; Ord. No. 37C, § 10, 4-25-1979; Ord. No. 04-2017, § 1, eff. 10-31-2017) 
State Law reference— Transport or possession of liquor by minor, MCL 257.624b; purchase and possession of liquor by minor, MCL 436.1703.  
Chapter 24 - SPECIAL EVENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-2015, §§ 1, 2, effective Aug. 30, 2015, amended Ch. 24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 24, §§ 24-1—24-3, 24-31—24-39, pertained to outdoor assemblies and derived from Ord. No. 91, §§ 1—12, adopted July 17, 1996. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Attendant means any person who obtains admission to a special event or special event by the payment of money, or the rendering of services in lieu of the payment of money for admission, or who attends the special event without payment of money. 
Licensee means any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this article. 
Special event means any event, gathering, or aggregation of persons, promoted or conducted in order to encourage the gathering of 150 or more people at a specified location, all or any part of which includes any ceremony, show, demonstration, exhibition, dance, pageant, party, circus, concert, sporting event, musical festival, peace festival, carnival, or other exhibition. A "special event" does not include such events as weddings, graduation parties, and parties or events of similar nature. A "special event" shall be deemed to be an extraordinary occurrence or condition which could affect the public health, safety or welfare in the Township, and shall be subject to the provisions of Ordinance No. 110. Such term does not mean an event: 
(1)  Which is conducted or sponsored by a government unit or agency on publicly owned land or property which will not, in the judgment of the Township Board, utilize or draw upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided by the Township; 
(2)  Which is conducted or sponsored by an entity qualifying for tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 USC 501(c)(3), as incorporated by reference in the income tax act of 1967, section 201 of Public Act No. 281 of 1967 (MCL 206.201)), which will not, in the judgment of the Township Board, utilize or draw upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided by the Township; or 
(3)  Held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed and covered structure which will not, in the judgment of the Township Board, utilize or draw upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided by the Township. 
Sponsor means any person who organizes, promotes or conducts, or causes to be conducted, a special event. The sponsor shall be the person to whom the license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-2. - Findings. 
The Township Board finds and declares that the interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township require the regulation, licensing and control of assemblages of large numbers of people in excess of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police, transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided by and in the Township. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-3. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be a violation for a licensee, or his employee or agent, to knowingly: 
(1)  Advertise, promote or sell tickets to conduct or operate a special event without first obtaining a license as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Conduct or operate a special event in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance. 
(3)  Conduct or permit, within a special event, any obscene display, exhibition, show, plan, entertainment or amusement. 
(4)  Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a disturbance in, around or near the special event by obscene or disorderly conduct. 
(5)  Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell or possess intoxicating liquor while on the premises. 
(6)  Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotics, narcotic drugs, drugs or other substances as defined in article 7 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.). 
(b)  Classes of violations are as follows: 
(1)  A violation of subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section shall be a civil infraction pursuant to section 1-11 
(2)  A violation of subsections (a)(3)—(a)(6) of this section shall be a misdemeanor, punishable pursuant to section 1-11 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 1, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Secs. 24-4—24-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 24-31. - Required. 
A person shall not sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote a special event in the Township unless the person shall have first made application for, and obtained, as prescribed in this article, a license for each such special event. The applicant shall state under oath or affirmation such facts, as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of a license. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-32. - Application. 
A complete application, including all required information for a license to conduct a special event, must be made in writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the Township, and shall be made at no later than 90 days prior to the date of the proposed special event. The application shall be submitted to the Township supervisor. Failure to submit a complete application containing all of the required information in the time period set forth herein shall result in an automatic denial of the license. Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as set by resolution of the Township Board. The application shall be distributed to the Police Department, Fire Department, Zoning Department and Building Department for review. The application shall include the following information, at a minimum: 
(1)  Name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the application. Where the person making the application is a partnership, corporation or other association, such information shall be provided for all partners, officers and directors or members. Where the person is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation shall be filed, as well as evidence that the corporation remains in good standing in the state in which it is incorporated, and the names and addresses shall be provided of all shareholders having a financial interest greater than $500.00. 
(2)  A statement of the kind, character and type of the proposed special event. 
(3)  Address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed special event is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective licensee, the person shall submit an affidavit from the owner indicating his consent to the use of the site for the proposed special event. 
(4)  Dates and hours during which the proposed special event is to be conducted. 
(5)  An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the special event for each day the special event is conducted and a detailed explanation of the evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential numbering or other method which will be used for accounting purposes. 
(6)  Certification of approvals of other governmental entities including the Livingston County Road Commission and Livingston County Health Department, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-33. - Plans and maps required. 
(a)  Each application shall be accompanied with specific information, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective licensee's plans to provide for the following: 
(1)  Police and fire protection. 
(2)  Food and water supply and facilities. 
(3)  Health and sanitation facilities. 
(4)  Medical facilities and services, including emergency vehicles and equipment. 
(5)  Vehicle access and parking facilities, and traffic control measures both on and off site. 
(6)  Camping and trailer facilities. 
(7)  Illumination facilities. 
(8)  Communications facilities. 
(9)  Noise control and abatement. 
(10)  Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal. 
(11)  Insurance and bonding arrangements. 
(12)  Any other information the Township determines is necessary to evaluate the specific application and the possible impact of the special event on the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map of the overall site of the proposed special event. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-34. - Application review and investigation. 
Upon receipt of the application by the Township Supervisor, copies of the application shall be forwarded to the Township Chief of Police, the Township Fire Chief, the Zoning Administrator, the Township Building Official, the County Health Officer and such other appropriate individuals or entities the Township deems are necessary for an evaluation of the special event and its potential impacts on the public health, safety and welfare, including the Township's planning consultant, Township Engineer, and Township Attorney. The individuals shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and, within 20 days of receipt thereof, shall report their findings and recommendations to the Township Supervisor. The applicant shall pay all costs and charges incurred by the Township in reviewing the application prior to issuance of any license. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-35. - Decision; notice. 
Within a reasonable time after receipt of a complete application and the recommendations required in section 24-34 above, the Township Supervisor will make a determination on the application, and may approve, approve with conditions or deny a license. The Township Supervisor may require that adequate security or insurance be provided before a license is issued. Where conditions are imposed as a prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license is denied, within five days of such action, notice thereof will be mailed to the applicant by certified mail and, in the case of denial, the reasons for such denial shall be stated in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-36. - Reasons for denial. 
A license shall be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this chapter or conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter, or with any other applicable provision of state or local law; or 
(2)  The applicant knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document. 
(3)  The license would violate the terms of a site plan governing the property; 
(4)  The property or premises is in violation of any Township ordinances; or 
(5)  The property owner is not current on all property taxes on the property where the special event is to take place. 
(6)  The applicant or property owner is involved with pending/active litigation with the Township. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-37. - Contents; posting; transferability. 
(a)  A license shall specify: 
(1)  The name and address of the licensee; 
(2)  The kind and location of the special event; 
(3)  The maximum number of attendants permitted; 
(4)  The duration of the license; and 
(5)  Any other conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the special event, and shall not be transferred to any other person or location. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-38. - Minimum requirements. 
In considering an application, the Township Supervisor shall, at a minimum, require the following: 
(1)  Security personnel. The licensee shall employ, at his own expense, such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the special event and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of the special event. No license shall be issued unless the Township Chief of Police is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee for the duration of the special event. Security personnel shall be appropriately identified for the safety of the attendees of the special event. 
(2)  Water facilities. The licensee shall provide potable water, sufficient in quantity and pressure to assure proper operation of all water-using facilities under conditions of peak demand. Such water shall be supplied from a public water system, if available, and if a public water system is not available, then from a source constructed, located and approved in accordance with part 127 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12701 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law, or from a source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the county health officer. 
(3)  Restroom facilities. 
a.  The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flush-type water closets as defined in Public Act No. 266 of 1929 (MCL 338.901 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. If such flush-type facilities are not available, the county health officer may permit the use of other facilities which are in compliance with section 12771 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12771), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
b.  The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities, constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with Public Act No. 266 of 1929 (MCL 338.901 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. All lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold water, and soap and paper towels. The number and type of facilities required shall be determined, on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
Facilities 	Male 	Female 
Water closets 	1:100 	1:50 
Urinals 	Not over 50 percent substitution of required water closets 
Lavatories 	1:150 	1:150 
Drinking fountains 	1:1000 	
Taps or faucets 	1:500 	
 
c.  Facilities required for the state barrier free design would be the same as set forth in subsection (3)b. of this section. 
d.  Where special event is to continue for more than 12 hours, the licensee shall provide shower facilities, on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following manner: 
Facilities 	Male 	Female 
Showerheads 	1:100 	1:100 
 
e.  All facilities shall be installed, connected and maintained free from obstructions, leaks and defects, and shall at all times be in operable condition as determined by the county health officer. 
(4)  Food service. 
a.  If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in accordance with the provisions of part 129 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12901 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
b.  If the special event is distant from food service establishments open to the public, the licensee shall make such food services available on the premises as will adequately feed the attendants. 
(5)  Medical facilities. If the special event is not readily and quickly accessible to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to provide such facilities on the premises of the special event. The kind, location, staff strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of such facilities shall be as prescribed by the county health department and county ambulance department, or the Green Oak Charter Township Fire Marshal. 
(6)  Liquid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid waste disposal in accordance with all of the rules and regulations pertaining thereto established by the county health officer. If such rules and regulations are not available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste disposal shall be in accordance with the United States Public Health Service Publication No. 526, entitled, "Manual of Septic Tank Practice." If liquid waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, such pumpers and haulers shall be licensed in accordance with part 117 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.11701 et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law and, prior to the issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the county health officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which agreement will assure proper, effective and frequent removal of liquid wastes from the premises so as to neither create, nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
(7)  Solid waste disposal. 
a.  The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on, and removal from, the premises. Storage shall be in approved, covered, fly tight and rodent proof containers, provided in sufficient quantity to accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to issuance of any license, the licensee shall provide the county health officer with a true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed refuse collector, which agreement will assure proper, effective and frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither create, nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. 
b.  The licensee shall implement effective control measures to minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the premises. Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides, shall not be used in any way so as to contaminate food or equipment, or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health. Solid waste containing food or water shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin. 
(8)  Public bathing beaches. The licensee shall provide, or make available or accessible, public bathing beaches only in accordance with part 125 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12541—333.12546), and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(9)  Public swimming pools. The licensee shall provide or make available public swimming pools only in accordance with part 125 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12521—333.12534), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(10)  Access and traffic control. The licensee shall provide for ingress to, and egress from, the premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic onto and off of the premises. Access to the premises shall be from a highway or road which is a part of the county system of highways or which is a highway maintained by the county or state. Traffic lanes and other space shall be provided, designated and kept open for access by ambulance, fire equipment, helicopter and other emergency vehicles. Prior to the issuance of a license, the Township Chief of Police must approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic control. 
(11)  Parking. The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to accommodate all motor vehicles, but in no case shall the licensee provide less than one automobile space for every four attendants. There shall be no use of the public right-of-way for the parking or stacking of any vehicles. 
(12)  Camping and trailer parking, and facilities. A licensee who permits attendants to remain on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall provide for camping and trailer parking, and facilities in accordance with part 125 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12501—333.12516), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law. 
(13)  Illumination. The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all occupied areas that is sufficient to ensure safety and comfort of all attendants. The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved by the building and zoning official. 
(14)  Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain public liability insurance with limits as set from time-to-time by resolution of the Township Board and property damage insurance with a limit as set from time-to-time by resolution of the Township Board from a company approved by the commissioner of insurance of the state, which insurance shall insure liability for death or injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the conduct of the special event or conduct incident thereto and which insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts for the duration of the license. The evidence of insurance shall include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify the clerk of the Township in writing at least ten days before the expiration or cancellation of such insurance. 
(15)  Performance guarantee. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall post cash or an irrevocable automatically renewing letter of credit in an amount set from time-to-time by resolution of the Township Board, in a form to be approved by the Township Attorney, to ensure the licensee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of state or local law. 
(16)  Indemnification. The licensee shall indemnify the Township, its agents, officers, employees, and consultants and the Township Board against any and all loss, injury or damage whatsoever arising out of, or in any way connected with, the special event and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining the special event site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash or other waste resulting from the special event. 
(17)  Fire protection. The licensee shall, at his own expense, take adequate steps as determined by the Township Fire Chief to ensure fire protection. 
(18)  Sound-producing equipment. Sound-producing equipment, including, but not limited to, public address systems, radios, phonographs, musical instruments and other recording devices, shall not be operated on the premises of the special event so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous, or so as to be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the citizens of the Township, and shall comply with the Township's Noise Ordinance. 
(19)  Communications. The licensee shall provide public telephone equipment for general use on the basis of at least one unit for each 1,000 attendants. 
(20)  Removal. The licensee shall remove all items used or constructed for the special event within 15 days after the conclusion of the special event. Failure to timely remove shall be a violation of this chapter. Failure to timely remove shall result in the licensee being prohibited from future special event consideration. 
(21)  Miscellaneous. Prior to issuance of a license, the Township Supervisor may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or the citizens of the Township. The Township Supervisor may waive any conditions or requirements of this chapter upon finding that the conditions of this chapter are not required for the intended event to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or the citizens of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-39. - Term of license. 
The Township Supervisor shall, when considering the application for a license, determine the specific term of the license. Generally, a license shall only be issued for the specific period of time set forth in the application. However, where the special event is a recurring event on an annual basis, and the applicant has demonstrated through its actions that the applicant has complied with all ordinance requirements, this chapter, and all requirements of any previous license, and that the special event has not negatively impacted the public health, safety and welfare, the Township Supervisor may, in his/her sole discretion, grant a license for a period not to exceed three years, with specific dates and times that the approved special event can occur during that extension. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-40. - License refusal. 
Any person whose initial request for a license is denied shall have the right to a hearing before the Township Board provided a written request therefor is filed with the Township Supervisor within ten days following such denial. The Township Board shall have the right to affirm the denial of the license, or the Township Board may grant the license, or grant the license with conditions, after hearing. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-41. - Certification of other governmental agencies. 
In all cases where the certification of any other governmental agency, including but not limited to the Livingston County Health Department, is required prior to the issuance of any license by the Township Supervisor, such certification shall be submitted at the time of application for a license to the Township. No license shall be issued by the Township Supervisor until other required governmental approvals are obtained and proof of such approval is presented to the Township Supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-42. - Inspection. 
The police chief, police officers, fire chief, fire department personnel, building official, ordinance enforcement officers or other authorized inspectors or personnel from the Township and the Livingston County Health Department shall have the right from time to time to make inspection of the licensed special event for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to allow any such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-43. - Transferability. 
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this chapter. No licensee shall, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this chapter, transfer or attempt to transfer his or her license to another, nor shall he or she make any improper use of the same. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-44. - Revocation. 
The Township Supervisor may revoke a license whenever the licensee, or his employee or agent, fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth in this chapter, or with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes or other laws incorporated in this chapter by reference. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-45. - Unlawful to sponsor or participate in an special event without a license. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor an special event unless a license has been issued for the special event, or for any person to participate in such an special event with the knowledge that the sponsor of the special event has not been issued the required license or with the knowledge that a license has been issued and subsequently revoked. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-46. - Violations and penalty violations. 
Violation of a provision of this article is a municipal civil infraction, unless otherwise specified herein. In addition, a violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and the Township specifically reserves the right to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restraining order, or other appropriate remedy to compel compliance with this article. Every day on which any violation of this article continues, constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties and sanctions as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Sec. 24-47. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any agency of the United States of America, the State of Michigan, or any political subdivision thereof. Homeowner Association events shall be excluded if they are conducted within the confines of the development. 
(b)  The time limits prescribed above for the filing of a license application may be waived by the Township Supervisor, in his/her sole discretion, if the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed special event is for the purpose of spontaneous communication of topical ideas that could not have been foreseen in advance of the required time period or that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant prevented timely filing of the application. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, § 2, eff. 8-30-2015)  
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Waterways, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Township powers to acquire property for public purposes, MCL 41.2; Township parks, MCL 41.421 et seq.; authority to operate system of public recreation, MCL 123.51; playground equipment safety act, MCL 408.681 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF HURON-CLINTON METROPOLITAN AUTHORITY LAND[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Huron-Clinton Metropolitan Authority, MCL 119.51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authority means the Huron-Clinton Metropolitan Authority, a public body corporate under the laws of the state, and its duly authorized officers, employees, rangers, ranger aides, agents and representatives. 
Beach area means an area set aside for the purpose of swimming, including the marked water area and land adjacent to the water area, including any buildings or parking area directly serving persons swimming. 
Facility means any building, room, area or equipment that has been built or purchased by the authority. 
Footpath means a path provided for foot travel only. 
Launch means the act of putting into, or taking out of, the water any watercraft. 
Nature trail means footpaths provided and developed for use in nature interpretive programs. 
Swim means moving the body through the water by movement of the arms, legs or attached equipment. 
Wade means to walk in or through the water. 
Watercraft means any boat, raft, canoe or sailing vessel. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 14, 10-9-1973; Ord. No. 44A, § 8, 3-15-1995) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-32. - Swimming and wading. 
(a)  Swimming and bathing are prohibited within the boundaries of authority lands, except in specially constructed swimming pool facilities or in areas marked as swimming areas. No person shall use any swimming pool facility or marked swimming area, except in accordance with posted rules and regulations governing such use and when authority lifeguards are on duty. 
(b)  Wading is prohibited within the boundaries of authority lands, except in swimming pool facilities or marked swimming areas, provided that the prohibitions of this subsection shall not apply to fishermen actually engaged in fishing. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 1, 10-9-1973)  
Sec. 26-33. - Dangerous or obnoxious materials or equipment. 
(a)  No person shall deposit or abandon in or on any lands or water areas within the boundaries of the authority lands any garbage, sewage, bottle, refuse, trash, waste or other obnoxious material, except in receptacles provided for such purposes. 
(b)  No person shall have in his possession or control any glass bottle or container in or on any pool area, beach area or baseball diamond on authority lands or in any other locality in said land where possession of glass bottles and containers is prohibited by posted notices. 
(c)  No person shall have in his possession or control any rifle, shotgun, pistol or other firearm, slingshot, bow, arrow, crossbow, pellet gun, air rifle, noxious gas ejecting devices, fireworks, explosive or other dangerous devices or materials within the boundaries of authority lands; it is also provided that a law enforcement officer duly appointed by the United States and the State of Michigan, or by a political subdivision thereof, may otherwise lawfully possess and carry a firearm. Furthermore, this section shall not apply to those who are specifically otherwise permitted by the authority or state law to possess and/or carry a firearm within the Metropark. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 2, 10-9-1973; Ord. No. 44A, § 1, 3-15-1995; Ord. No. 44B, § 1, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 26-34. - Signs, handbills, etc. 
(a)  Handbills, newspapers or other circulars, not precluded by section 26-39, may be offered or distributed within the boundaries of authority lands only by passing such handbills, newspapers or circulars hand-to-hand, and such distribution will be allowed only in automobile parking lots, unless other areas for such distribution are designated by the authority. 
(b)  No person shall post, fasten, paint or affix any placard, bill, notice or sign upon any structure, tree or automobile within the boundaries of authority lands, except that temporary directional signs for group picnics or events may be placed on signposts designated for such purposes by the authority and must be removed at the conclusion of the event. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 3, 10-9-1973; Ord. No. 44A, § 2, 3-15-1995)  
Sec. 26-35. - Fires. 
(a)  No person shall start or maintain a fire while on authority lands, except in picnic stoves, fireplaces or spaces provided for such purposes. 
(b)  No person shall dump any burning material or hot ashes into any trash container or elsewhere within the boundaries of authority lands unless such containers or locality shall be marked as a receptacle for such material. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 4, 10-9-1973) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 12.  
Sec. 26-36. - Closing hours. 
(a)  No person shall enter or remain on authority lands after the posted closing hours, except by written permission of the authority. 
(b)  No person shall use or occupy any area or facility on authority lands when such area or facility is closed to the use of the public by order of the authority and such order has been announced to the occupants of such area or facility orally or by posted notice, or by the closing of an entire area or park by closing the entrances. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 5, 10-9-1973; Ord. No. 44A, § 3, 3-15-1995)  
Sec. 26-37. - Dogs, pets, horses and livestock. 
(a)  No person shall bring into, or have in his possession or control while on, authority lands, any dog or pet unless such dog or pet shall be kept on a leash not over six feet in length and under the immediate control of a responsible person. This subsection does not apply to guide, leader, hearing and service dogs or dogs under the control of the authority. 
(b)  No person shall bring into, or have in his possession or control while on, authority lands, any dog or pet, except in picnic areas and other areas designated by the authority by posted notices, provided that this subsection shall not apply to leader, guide, hearing and service dogs or dogs under the control of the authority. 
(c)  No person shall ride or lead any horse on authority lands, except in areas designated by the authority. 
(d)  No person shall permit or allow the running at large, herding, grazing or driving of any livestock of any kind on authority lands. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 5, 10-9-1973) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 4. 
State Law reference— Guide, leader and service dogs, MCL 750.502(c).  
Sec. 26-38. - Alcoholic liquors. 
(a)  No person shall have in his possession while on authority lands any alcoholic liquor stronger than beer or wine. 
(b)  No person shall have in his possession while on authority lands any beer, wine or other alcoholic liquor during times when such beverages are prohibited by posted notices. 
(c)  No person shall consume any beer, wine or other alcoholic liquor while on authority lands, except in picnic areas. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 7, 10-9-1973)  
Sec. 26-39. - Commercial activities. 
No person or organization, other than the authority, its hirees and licensees, shall, within the boundaries of authority lands, advertise, offer for hire, vend or sell any service, food, beverage, merchandise or other personal property, or advertise, carry on or conduct any other business or commercial activity, nor shall any person or organization beg or solicit contributions or donations while on authority lands. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 8, 10-9-1973)  
Sec. 26-40. - Preservation of property and natural resources. 
(a)  No person shall injure, deface, disturb, befoul nor in any manner destroy, or cause to be destroyed, any portion of authority lands, or any facility, building, sign, structure, equipment, utility or other property found therein. 
(b)  No person shall dig for, remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing thing, or any wildlife, except as otherwise provided by law, or any rock, mineral, artifact or other material within the boundaries of authority lands without written permission from the authority. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 10, 10-9-1973) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 10.  
Sec. 26-41. - Musical instruments, radios, record or tape players, sound-amplifying devices, etc. 
No person shall operate or play any musical instrument, radio, mechanical record or tape player, loudspeaker, public address system or sound-amplifying equipment of any kind while on authority lands in such a manner as to cause the sound emanating therefrom to exceed a loudness of 75 decibels (db) when measured on the 70 db scale at a distance of 15 feet from the sound source without a written permit issued by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 11, 10-9-1973)  
Sec. 26-42. - Receipt of service, privilege or license without payment of fee. 
Where a fee or charge is requested for any service, privilege or license offered by the authority or its licensees within the boundaries of authority lands, no person shall obtain, or attempt to obtain, such service, privilege or license without payment of such fee or charge. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 12, 10-9-1973)  
Sec. 26-43. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  No person on authority lands shall: 
(1)  Engage in any drunken, loud, boisterous, disorderly or indecent conduct, nor shall any person commit or engage in any assault or other activity which shall endanger or annoy other persons or disturb the peace or good order within the boundaries of authority lands; 
(2)  Intentionally expose the male or female buttocks or genital areas or the female breasts, either openly or by wearing beach attire calculated to expose such areas; 
(3)  Observe, or attempt to observe, persons of the opposite sex while occupying a bathhouse or restroom facility; 
(4)  Use a skateboard, roller skates, inline skates, Frisbee, football, soccer ball or other game equipment in any area where use of such equipment is prohibited by posted notices; 
(5)  Obstruct, resist, hinder, assault or oppose any ranger, ranger aide, ordinance officer, Township officer or Sheriff's deputy in the performance of his official duties; 
(6)  Provide or furnish false identification concerning himself to any ranger, ranger aide, ordinance officer, Township officer or Sheriff's deputy in the performance of his official duties; or 
(7)  Remain on authority lands after being requested by a ranger, ranger aide, ordinance officer, Township officer or Sheriff's deputy in the performance of his official duties to leave such lands for violation of a rule or regulation of the authority. 
(b)  Violations of this section are misdemeanors. 
(Ord. No. 44, § 13, 10-9-1973; Ord. No. 44A, § 6, 3-15-1995) 
Cross reference— Offenses against public peace, § 22-161 et seq.  
Sec. 26-44. - Large group events. 
No person or group of persons shall hold or conduct any organized picnic or activity, field day, carnival, concert, address, rally, dramatic presentation, etc., at which more than 50 persons are in attendance or can reasonably be expected to be in attendance on authority lands unless a permit for such event has first been granted by the authority and the event is conducted in compliance with the conditions of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 44A, § 7, 3-15-1995)  
Sec. 26-45. - Watercraft restricted. 
The launching and operation of watercraft from authority lands shall be restricted as follows: 
(1)  No motorboat shall be launched or operated unless such motorboat is registered and marked in accordance with the laws of the state; 
(2)  No person shall launch a watercraft without a permit issued by the authority; 
(3)  No person shall launch any watercraft, except at designated launching sites; and 
(4)  No person shall have or allow a watercraft on authority lands between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except by written permission of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 44A, § 7, 3-15-1995) 
State Law reference— Marine safety act, MCL 324.80101 et seq.  
Secs. 26-46—26-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TOWNSHIP PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 26-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Facility means any building, room, structure, area or equipment built, purchased or under the control of the Township. 
Person means any individual, male or female, singular or plural; firms, corporations, or any group or gathering of individuals. 
Township park property means all lands, facilities and properties administered by or under the jurisdiction of the Township, which are set aside for and utilized by the public for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 2, 7-21-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-82. - Park hours. 
Township parks shall be open from sunrise to sunset unless otherwise posted. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 3, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-83. - Playing fields. 
Township park playing fields are meant for the use and enjoyment of the public at large; however, a person may reserve a particular playing field and/or the pavilion for a designated period of time by applying for a use permit from the Township Clerk. Said permits will be issued on a first-come, first-served basis and will be governed by regulations for use which shall be from time-to-time adopted by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 4, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-84. - Prohibition of alcohol. 
With the exception of transporting alcoholic beverages from the parking area along the provided walkway to the pavilion, and within the pavilion itself and within a 15-foot area around the pavilion itself it shall be unlawful for any person to consume, possess or control any type of alcoholic beverage in the park. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 5, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-85. - Dangerous or obnoxious materials or equipment. 
(a)  No person shall deposit or abandon in or on any Township parklands any garbage, sewage, bottles, refuse, trash, waste or other obnoxious materials, except in receptacles provided for such purposes. 
(b)  No person shall have, possess or control any glass bottle or container in or on park playfield areas. 
(c)  No person shall possess or control any rifle, shotgun, pistol or other firearm, slingshot, bow, arrow, crossbow, pellet gun, air rifle, noxious gas ejecting device, fireworks, explosive or other dangerous device or material within any Township park, provided that a law enforcement officer duly appointed by the United States, the state or a political subdivision thereof may carry a firearm as required for the performance of official duties, and may have such possession of other dangerous devices and materials referred to in this section as is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 6, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-86. - Signs, handbills, etc. 
No person shall post, fasten, paint or affix any placard, bill, notice or sign upon any structure, tree or automobile within the boundaries of any Township park. This section does not prohibit bumper stickers previously affixed to any motor vehicle parking within the park. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 7, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-87. - Fires. 
(a)  No person shall start or maintain a fire in any Township park except in picnic stoves, fireplaces or spaces provided for such purposes. 
(b)  No person shall dump any burning material or hot ashes into any trash container or elsewhere within the boundaries of a Township park unless such containers or locality is marked as a receptacle for such material. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 8, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-88. - Animals in parks. 
(a)  No person shall bring into, possess or control while on, or in, a Township park any dog or pet unless such dog or pet shall be kept on a leash and under the immediate control of a responsible person. This section does not apply to guide, leader, hearing and service dogs. 
(b)  No person shall bring into, possess or control while on or in a Township park any dog or pet, except in picnic areas and other areas designated by the Township by posted notices, provided that this section shall not apply to leader, guide, hearing and service dogs. 
(c)  No person shall ride or lead any horse on or in any Township park. 
(d)  No person shall permit or allow the running at large, herding, grazing or driving of any livestock of any kind in any Township park. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to allow or permit such animal to soil, defile, defecate, or to commit any nuisance within any Township park, unless such owner shall: 
(1)  Immediately remove any droppings deposited by such animal by any sanitary method and, for such purposes, shall possess a container of sufficient size to collect and remove the droppings mentioned in this subsection and exhibit the container, if requested by any official empowered to enforce this article; and 
(2)  Deposit said droppings or container of droppings in a toilet or a receptacle ordinarily used for garbage and covered by a lid, or in an otherwise lawful and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 9, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-89. - Motor-driven vehicles; operation and parking. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor-driven vehicle in any Township park except in designated parking areas. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motor-driven snowmobile, sled, toboggan, unlicensed vehicles or all-terrain vehicles in any Township park unless permitted by posted notice. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle in other than a designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with posted directions. 
(d)  No person shall park or store any motor vehicle overnight in any park owned by the Township without written permission of the Township. The vehicle may be towed by the Township or Township contractor at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 10, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-90. - Commercial activities. 
No person or organization, other than the Township or its licensees, shall, within the boundaries of any Township park, advertise, offer for hire, vend or sell any service, food, beverage, merchandise or other personal property, or advertise, carry on or conduct any other business or commercial activity, nor shall any person or organization beg or solicit contributions or donations while in any Township park. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 11, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-91. - Use of park property. 
(a)  No person in a park shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove, any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving materials, water lines or other utilities or parts of appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities on park property or appurtenances whatsoever. 
(b)  Users of park bathroom facilities shall maintain same in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(c)  No person in a park shall dig or remove any sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, flowers, downed timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
(d)  No person in a park shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any device, rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural conditions of any area. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 12, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-92. - Bicycles. 
(a)  Bicycles shall be operated as closely to the righthand curb or righthand side of the path, trail or roadway as conditions will permit and not more than two bicycles shall be operated abreast. Pedestrians and individuals utilizing wheelchairs shall have the right-of-way anywhere within the park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle when upon any path, trail or roadway, to carry any person upon the handlebar or frame of any bicycle, or for any person to so ride upon such bicycle. 
(c)  Bicycles may be operated upon such paths, trails or roadways as may be posted allowing such use. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 13, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-93. - Musical instruments, radios, record or tape players, sound-amplifying devices, etc. 
No person shall operate or play any musical instrument, radio, mechanical record or tape player, loudspeaker, public address system or sound-amplifying equipment of any kind while in a Township park in such a manner so as to be heard at any adjacent property line. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 14, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-94. - Large group events. 
No person or group of persons shall hold or conduct any organized picnic or activity, field day, carnival, concert, address, rally, dramatic presentation, etc., at which more than 25 persons are in attendance or can reasonably be expected to be in attendance in any Township park unless a permit for such event has first been granted by the Township and the event is conducted in compliance with the conditions of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 15, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-95. - Governing law. 
In addition to the provisions of this article, all other federal, state, county and local laws, regulations and ordinances shall also control. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 16, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-96. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Officials. Officers of the police department and the Code Enforcement Officer shall take such actions as are necessary for the enforcement of this article, consistent with Township ordinances and state law. 
(b)  Seizure of property. Officers of the police department and the code enforcement officer shall have the authority to seize, impound or confiscate any property, thing, or device in the park used in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 17, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-97. - Civil infractions. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, a violation of this article shall be a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 18, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-98. - Misdemeanor. 
Failing to obey the lawful directive of any person authorized to enforce this article shall be a 90-day misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 19, 7-21-2004)  
Sec. 26-99. - Restitution. 
In addition to the penalties specified herein, restitution shall be made for any damage to or removal of park property. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 20, 7-21-2004)  
Chapter 28 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, effective Aug. 27, 2017, amended Ch. 28 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 28, §§ 28-1—28-5, 28-41—28-43, pertained to peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants and derived from Ord. No. 36, §§ 1—8, adopted May 11, 1971. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 28-1 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public health, safety and welfare through regulations that promote public safety and help protect residents, businesses and the general public from crime, fraud and undue annoyance and interference with privacy rights that can be caused by peddlers, solicitors, and/or canvassers, in a manner that does not unlawfully interfere with or burden the exercise of First Amendment and other constitutional rights. To those ends, this chapter defines and provides different procedural requirements for peddling, and general regulations applicable to all peddlers, solicitors, and canvassers where applicable, with the peddler licensing regulations intended to: (i) deter persons with criminal or fraudulent intent from posing as legitimate peddlers; (ii) provide a minimal amount of basic information necessary to the Township and its Police Department to allow efficient and effective performance of governmental, law enforcement and crime prevention functions; and (iii) provide Township residents with a right to know if persons coming upon their property are in compliance with those regulations and a basis for reporting persons that are not in compliance with the these regulations to the Township Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvass and canvassing means to enter upon private property, without any prior specific invitation or appointment, to inform, educate, advocate, petition, secure petition signatures, request or enlist support or opposition, or to convey any other message regarding religion, philosophy, ideology, politics, including parties, candidates, initiatives and issues, charitable organizations, or other cause or issue, by verbal, written, or other forms of communication, including the distribution of handbills, flyers, or other materials. 
Canvasser means a person that engaged in canvassing in the Township without requesting or accepting the payment, delivery, donation, pledge, or commitment of money, credit, financial assistance, membership, property, goods, services, or other thing of value, and without selling or attempting to sell any property, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement, subscription, membership, or other thing, whether of value or not. 
Charitable purpose means a charitable, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, veterans support, religious, youth, fraternal, social, civic, conservation, recreational, or other nonprofit objective of a charitable or religious organization, or political organization. Charitable purpose does not include political campaign fundraising or nonprofit objectives of an individual. 
Charitable, religious or political organization means a charitable, religious, political, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, fraternal, social, or civic organization, registered and in good standing under section 501(c) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, that solicits or obtains contributions from the public of such organization. 
Parent organization means: (1) the person or organization that a peddler is employed by or represents in the course of peddling, the principal manufacturer and distributor of goods being peddled, or the principal provider of services being peddled; or (2) a charitable, religious or political organization that a solicitor is employed by or represents in the course of soliciting in the Township, or such organization that sends multiple solicitors for purposes of soliciting in areas of the Township on its behalf. 
Peddle and peddling mean: means traveling by foot or automobile from place to place or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, including food produces, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, books or magazines, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether the subject is collecting advanced payments on such sales or not. 
Peddler means any person engaged in peddling. The term "peddler" shall not include a person who conducts such activities at a social gathering within a home at the invitation of the owner or an occupant of the home. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association, nonprofit corporation, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, organization or league, political party or organization, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
Police Chief means the Police Chief for the Green Oak Charter Township, or his or her designee. 
Public way shall mean all areas legally open to public use such as public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, alleys and public parking lots. 
Solicit and soliciting means a direct or indirect request by or on behalf of a charitable, religious, or political organization to any person in the Township for the payment, delivery, donation, pledge, or commitment of money, credit, financial assistance, membership, property, goods, services, or other thing of value, on the plea or representation what is requested will be used for charitable purposes of the charitable, religious or political organization, and includes sales and sales offers of any property, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement, subscription, membership, or other thing, whether of value or not, on the pleas or representation that the proceeds of the sale will be used for charitable purposes of the charitable, religious, or political organization. 
Solicitor means any person engaged in soliciting in the Township. 
Special event shall mean any occasion including, but not limited to parades, golf tournaments, fairs, shows, exhibitions, Township-wide celebrations, festivals, etc., within a specifically defined area of the Township. 
Stand shall mean any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart or any other fixture or device which is not required to be licensed and registered by the department of motor vehicles, and is used for the display, storage or transportation of goods and/or services offered for sale by a peddler or vendor. 
Street and curb soliciting means soliciting on any street, road, highway, lane, sidewalk, curb, road edge, alley, public parking lot and/or driveway in a manner that requires the solicitor, when engaged in the transaction, to stand within the limits of streets, roads, highways, lanes, sidewalks, curbs, road edges, alleys, public parking lots and/or driveways within the Township. 
Street soliciting means soliciting for charitable purposes where solicitors are allowed to be within the travelled portion of a street and areas of the street abutting the traveled portion. 
Township Clerk means the Township Clerk for Green Oak Charter Township, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-3. - Waivers, modifications and variances. 
A person claiming that application of one or more provisions of this chapter to activities that person desires to engage in violates a constitutional right, may request that the Township Board waive, modify or vary such provision by filing a written request and statement of that position and basis for it to the Township Clerk who shall place the request on the next Township Board Agenda that is at least five days after receipt of the request. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-4. - Violations and sanctions; civil infraction. 
Unless otherwise specified, a violation of this chapter is a civil infraction punishable as provided in the Code. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS 
 
Sec. 28-5. - Peddler licensing. 
(a)  No person shall be a peddler or engage in peddling in the Township without first obtaining a peddler license from the Township Clerk, unless such person is specifically exempt from this licensing requirement under section 28-6 below. 
(b)  To obtain a peddler license required by this chapter, a peddler shall apply for said license upon forms prescribed and furnished by the Township Clerk. The information provided by the applicant shall include all the following: 
(1)  The name of the applicant who proposes to peddle within the Township, including his or her business street address, website address (if any) and telephone number, and the applicant's home address and telephone number, driver's license number and physical description including height, weight, and color of hair and eyes. 
(2)  The complete name, street address, website address (if any) and telephone number of the parent organization and where and when the parent organization was established or incorporated and the form of its organization. 
(3)  A detailed description of the type of peddling to be undertaken and the method to be used in conducting the peddling. 
(4)  The dates and times when, and locations where, peddling will occur, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such peddling and the hours of the days thereof. 
(5)  The types of goods, wares, merchandise and services to be sold or for which the peddling will be made. 
(6)  Whether the applicant or parent organization has ever been denied a license for peddling, had a license for peddling suspended or revoked, or been prohibited from peddling in the Township or in any other community. 
(7)  Whether the applicant, or any officer, partner, member or director of the parent organization has been convicted of a felony or any misdemeanor within the past ten years of a violation of federal, state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations reflecting adversely on the applicant's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person, or any type of criminal sexual conduct, and if so, a brief description of the crime or violation, including its location and date, and an explanation of the reason therefore. 
(8)  Two color photographs of the applicant, one being a photograph taken within 60 days prior to the date of filing of the application and the other photograph being from the applicant's driver's license, a copy of such driver's license to be attached to the applicant's application. The photograph that is not from the applicant's driver's license shall be at least two inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. If the applicant has not been issued a driver's license or it has been revoked, then the applicant shall submit a second separate photograph with the application, such photograph being at least two inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(9)  The applicant's State of Michigan sales tax license number. 
(10)  A criminal background report of the applicant's criminal history. Such reports shall be obtained by the applicant through the Internet Criminal History Access Tool (ICHAT) for applicants residing in Michigan and/or through another state-sponsored or authorized criminal history access source for applicants who reside in other states or have resided in other states within five years prior to the date of the application. The applicant is responsible for all charges incurred in requesting and receiving the ICHAT report or other criminal history report and the report must be dated within 30 days of the date of the application. 
(11)  If under 18 years of age, the applicant must provide a copy of a valid work permit issued by the applicant's school, school district offices or other authorized issuing agency to the applicant for purposes of the peddling activity proposed to be undertaken in the Township. 
(12)  If the applicant will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the streets and roads of the Township, the applicant must provide information to verify that the applicant has a valid driver's license, has not been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony moving violation within the last three years, or has not been found responsible for three or more motor vehicle moving violations under the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code or local ordinances within the last three years. 
(13)  If the applicant will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the streets and roads of the Township, the vehicle from which the peddling is to occur shall be brought to the Township and inspected by a designated representative of the police department and must be found to meet any safety standards adopted by the police department and any standards adopted by the State of Michigan, and the police department's checklist form signed by the designated police department representative verifying such compliance shall be submitted with the application. 
(14)  If the applicant will be engaging in the sale of food or beverages, a health license issued by the Livingston County Health Department. Such peddler's equipment shall be subject to inspections by the Livingston County Health Department at the time of application, as required by the state public health code. 
(c)  An administrative processing and license fee for a peddler license application shall be established by resolution of the Township Board and such fee shall be paid when the application is filed with the Township. Township Board shall also establish fees for licenses issued for special events. 
(d)  The Township Clerk and Police Chief shall examine all peddler license applications and shall make or cause to be made such further investigation of the application or applicant as the Township Clerk and/or Police Chief shall deem necessary. If the Township Clerk and Police Chief both find the application to be complete and satisfactory in consideration of the purpose, intent and applicable provisions of this chapter, the Township Clerk shall approve and issue the license. The Township Clerk may deny issuance of a license if he or she finds that: 
(1)  The applicant failed to truthfully provide in his or her application the information required in this chapter; 
(2)  The applicant has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted within the past ten years of a violation of federal, state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations reflecting adversely on the applicant's ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person, or any type of criminal sexual conduct; 
(4)  The applicant is listed on any criminal sex offender registry or has any outstanding warrants for any misdemeanor or felony; 
(5)  If the applicant will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the streets and roads of the Township, the applicant does not have a valid driver's license, has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony moving violation within the last three years, or has been found responsible for three or more motor vehicle moving violations under the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code or local ordinances within the last three years; 
(6)  The applicant has had a license to conduct peddling or soliciting suspended or revoked within the past ten years. 
(e)  A peddler license shall bear the name, address and photograph of the peddler; the date issued; the dates within which the license holder may peddle; the expiration date of the license; and a statement that the license does not constitute an endorsement by the Township of the purpose or products involved or of the persons or parent organization conducting the peddling. All peddler licenses shall be signed by the Township Clerk. 
(f)  A peddler license shall be valid for a period of up to 120 days as determined by the Township Clerk with consideration of the application, except for special events, which shall be limited to the period of the special event. Peddler licenses issued under this chapter are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-6. - Exempt persons. 
(a)  The following shall be exempt from the licensing, registration and fee requirements of this chapter, but shall be subject to the other sections of this chapter: 
(1)  Persons engaged in the occupation of distribution of newspapers. 
(2)  Green Oak Charter Township merchants and representatives engaging in year-round business with a permanent location in the Township. 
(3)  Any honorably discharged veteran who is a resident of this state and who has obtained a veteran's license from a county clerk within the state of Michigan. 
(4)  Any person who proposes to sell produce which he has raised himself. Produce may only be sold on the site where it is raised. 
(5)  Persons peddling or soliciting to fellow members of the peddler's or solicitor's parent organization. 
(6)  Persons peddling or soliciting by telephone, email or mail. 
(7)  Recognizing that the Township maintains or has available to it the information otherwise required for licensing under this chapter, Township public safety personnel shall be exempt from the fee and licensing requirements set forth in this chapter, provided the Township Clerk is provided advanced notification describing the peddling activity and its duration and verification that the peddling activity is for a recognized, legitimate and valid charitable police or fire association project. Such persons shall be subject to all other regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(8)  An individual or organization entering upon private property to inform, educate, advocate, petition, secure petition signatures, request or enlist support or opposition, or to convey any other message regarding religion, philosophy, ideology, politics, including parties, candidates, initiatives and issues, charitable organizations, or other cause or issue, by verbal, written, or other forms of communication, including the distribution of written materials. 
(9)  Solicitations made to a congregation or group in attendance at one location and made by the person or organization inviting the individuals composing the congregation or group. 
(10)  Solicitations made over the radio, television or telephone. 
(11)  Any peddler traveling on an established route at the request, express or implied, of their customers. 
(12)  Salespersons calling on regularly-licensed business establishments. 
(13)  The distribution of written materials where the individual distributing them does not accept payments, orders or contributions. 
(14)  Persons under 18 years of age engaged in peddling or soliciting within three miles of their residence for a bona fide school, charity, religious or youth organization. 
(15)  Solicitors and canvassers. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-7. - Peddler license renewals. 
Peddler licenses may be renewed provided an application for renewal and license fees are received by the Township no later than the expiration date of the current license. Applications received after that date shall be processed as new applications. The Township shall review each application for renewal to determine that the applicant is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If the Township finds that the new application meets the above requirements, the Township shall issue a new license. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-8. - Peddler license suspension. 
(a)  The Township Clerk may suspend a peddler license upon determining that any of the following circumstances exists: 
(1)  The licensee failed to truthfully provide in his or her application the information required in this chapter, or that the licensee has engaged in a fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(2)  The licensee has been convicted of a violation of federal, state or local laws, ordinances, or regulations reflecting adversely on the licensee's ability to conduct the business for which the license has been issued in an honest and legal manner, including, but not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person, or any type of criminal sexual conduct; 
(3)  The licensee is listed on any criminal sex offender registry or has any outstanding warrants for any misdemeanor or felony; 
(4)  If the licensee will be engaging in peddling from or out of a motor vehicle in the public ways of the Township, the licensee's driver's license has been suspended or revoked or the licensee has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony moving violation; or 
(5)  The licensee has, in the course of peddling in the Township, engaged in conduct that is contrary to the peace, privacy, safety, health and welfare of the residents, businesses and persons in the Township. 
(6)  Intervention by the state or county health department due to uncorrected health or sanitation violations. 
(b)  A licensee shall be given written notice of the cause and term of the suspension. A licensee shall have the right to appeal the suspension within 30 days of the date of suspension. A licensee shall provide written notice and request for a reversal of the suspension, and a hearing shall be conducted by the Township Board no later than 15 days following receipt of a written request by the licensee, unless a later date is set by agreement of the licensee. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the Township Clerk and the right to present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. At the hearing, or at an adjourned date, the Township Board shall determine whether to reverse, modify or affirm the suspension and shall put its decision and the reasons therefore in the form of a resolution, which the Township Clerk shall forward to the licensee. The Township Board's decision may be appealed and reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-9. - Peddler license revocation. 
(a)  The Township Board may revoke a peddler license upon the recommendation of the Township Clerk and after a hearing at which it is shown that any of the circumstances listed in section 28-8(a)(1)—(6). 
(b)  Reasonable written notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee not less than ten days prior to the hearing date. The written notice shall be mailed by regular mail to the license holder at the business address provided on the licensee's application and shall set forth the alleged reason or reasons for considering revocation of the license and also the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the Township Clerk and the right to present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. At the hearing, or at an adjourned date, the Township Board shall determine whether the license should be revoked or suspended and shall put its decision and the reasons therefore in the form of a resolution, which the Township Clerk shall forward to the licensee. The Township Board's decision may be appealed and reviewed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITORS 
 
Sec. 28-10. - Voluntary notification. 
(a)  In the interest of the general public, and to protect against the potential for crime or fraud, the Township requests that solicitors voluntarily notify the Township Clerk's Office that soliciting will be taking place the Township. It is further requested that the following information be voluntarily provided: 
(1)  The names of the individuals who will be soliciting in the Township and the identity of the organization associated with the solicitation efforts. 
(2)  A description of the type of soliciting to be undertaken and the method to be used in conducting the soliciting. 
(3)  The dates and times when and locations where the soliciting will occur, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such soliciting and the hours of the days thereof. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-11. - Failure to provide notification. 
The failure of a solicitor to provide the voluntary notification shall not be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
ARTICLE IV. - CANVASSERS 
 
Sec. 28-12. - Voluntary notification. 
(a)  In the interest of the general public, and to protect against the potential for crime or fraud, the Township requests that solicitors voluntarily notify the Township Clerk's Office that soliciting will be taking place the Township. It is further requested that the following information be voluntarily provided: 
(1)  The names of the individuals who will be soliciting in the Township and the identity of the organization associated with the solicitation efforts. 
(2)  A description of the type of soliciting to be undertaken and the method to be used in conducting the soliciting. 
(3)  The dates and times when and locations where the soliciting will occur, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such soliciting and the hours of the days thereof. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-13. - Failure to provide notification. 
The failure of a solicitor to provide the voluntary notification shall not be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR PEDDLERS/SOLICITORS/CANVASSERS 
 
Sec. 28-14. - Material change to application information. 
(a)  While any peddler license issued pursuant to this chapter is in effect, a peddler shall, within seven calendar days, report to the Township Clerk in writing any material change in any information previously provided on the application form. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person knowingly to file or to cause to be filed an application for a peddler license containing one or more false statements. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-15. - Inferred endorsement by the Township. 
A peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall not represent that its activities or speech are endorsed by the Township or by any department, officer or employee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-16. - Hours for peddling. 
No peddling shall take place in the Township after 8:00 p.m. or sunset (whichever is earlier) or before 10:00 a.m., prevailing time. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-17. - Display of peddlers license. 
While carrying on peddling in the Township, a peddler shall visibly display on the exterior of his or her clothes at all times a valid peddler license issued under this chapter and shall tender such license, upon request, to any police officer, Township employee, or any person dealing with the peddler. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-18. - Obstructing traffic. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall not block, obstruct, impede or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon a public highway, public parking lot, street, road, alley, drive or sidewalk or within public buildings and other public areas within the Township by means of a barricade, object or device, or with his person. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-19. - Harassment and noise. 
No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall threaten or harass any resident of the Township in the course of their activities or in any way engage in any conduct that would tend to threaten the health and safety of another. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-20. - Misrepresentation. 
No fraudulent or misleading representations to any person shall be made in connection with any peddling, soliciting or canvassing, including, but not limited to, any misleading representation concerning the product or service involved, the purposes for which contributions solicited will be used, the name of the peddler, solicitor, or canvasser, the trade name and nature of the parent organization, or the purposes for which the parent organization was organized. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-21. - Peddling on public property. 
(a)  Peddling is prohibited within a public right-of-way, including any street corner or intersection road, and on any highway, street, road, lane, sidewalk, driveway, alley, public parking lot any or publicly-owned property, except for peddling conducted as provided in subsections (b) and (c), below. 
(b)  For special events conducted by or with the approval of the Township, a peddler shall apply for a peddler's license at least 30 days prior to the scheduled special event and provide the information required in this chapter, unless exempt under this chapter. If the peddler license is approved by the Township, the term of the license shall be limited to the period of the special event. If the peddler license is approved by the Township, a peddler may conduct activities only on the specific public property in the location identified and approved by the Township for the special event. If the special event in any of the public parks and/or adjacent public property, roads or parking lots, a peddler license shall be obtained under this chapter. 
(c)  Peddlers of food products from a vehicle approved by the police department may engage in peddling on residential public streets and rights-of-way only, and may not peddle on streets considered major thoroughfares or public parking lots, provided such peddlers comply with all otherwise applicable requirements of this Code, including provisions relating to noise and hours of operation, and otherwise applicable laws and regulations. In the case of ice cream trucks, the ringing of an unamplified bell is permitted so long as it does not unreasonably disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhoods or structures. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-22. - Fixed stands prohibited; miscellaneous. 
(a)  No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall establish a fixed stand and/or store for peddling upon any street, road, highway, lane, sidewalk, driveway, alley, public parking lot or publicly-owned property. 
(b)  Peddler temporary stands shall not impede access to the entrance, parking lot or driveway of any adjacent building. Such stands shall be located only on private property within the Township, when permission of the property owner has been obtained, unless permission to be located in public property is granted by the Township for a special event in accordance with section 28-21(b). Nothing herein shall be constructed as relieving an applicant from applying for any other approvals that may be required by the Township Code. 
(c)  All peddlers selling food or beverages must provide trash receptacles adjacent to or as a part of their stands. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-23. - Posted property; access to premises restricted. 
(a)  No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall enter into or upon any property that has posted a "no peddling," "no solicitation," "no soliciting", "no canvassing" or "no trespassing" sign, or similar notice, in accordance with subsection (c), below. 
(b)  No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall engage in peddling, soliciting, or canvassing in any residential subdivision, condominium or other neighborhood that has a privately posted "no peddling," "no solicitation," "no soliciting", "no canvassing" or "no trespassing" sign, or similar notice at each entrance to the subdivision, condominium or other neighborhood, in accordance with subsection (c), below. 
(c)  A sign posted under subsection (a), above, must be a weatherproof sign measuring a minimum of three inches by four inches, the letters must be at least one-third inch in height, and the sign must be exhibited upon or near a main entrance door to the main structure, building or residence on the property. A sign posted under subsection (b), above, must be a weatherproof sign measuring a minimum of two square feet, the letters must be at least two inches in height, and the sign must be exhibited in a location visible to the drivers of vehicles at each entrance to the subdivision, condominium or other neighborhood. A sign posted under subsection (b), above, must comply with all otherwise applicable requirements of this code and Township standards, including, without limitation, the requirement to obtain a permit if the sign is to be located within a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-24. - Request to leave. 
No peddler, solicitor, or canvasser shall remain on private property after having been asked or directed to leave the premises by any person lawfully in possession of the premises. In addition, no person shall remain on public property during a special event when asked or directed to leave the premises by any police officer or event staff. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Sec. 28-25. - Contracts. 
The Township reserves the right to contract with individual vendors to provide limited vending services in public areas. 
(Ord. No. 02-2017, § 1, eff. 8-27-2017)  
Chapter 29 - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Green Oak Right-of-Way Management Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-2. - Purpose/legislative findings. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 29 of Article 7 of the Michigan Constitution of 1963, and other applicable state and federal legislation, including but not limited to, MCL 247.183, the Township has the authority to exercise reasonable control over its highways, streets, alleys and public places. The Township finds that, in the furtherance of this control and to ensure and protect the public health, safety and welfare, it is appropriate for the Township to monitor, review and regulate activities and persons that disrupt and/or use a right-of-way in the Township. 
(b)  This chapter is further intended to minimize disruption, disturbance and damage to the Township's rights-of-way, to exercise reasonable control over and monitor the use of the same, and to maintain aesthetic, quality, and property values by requiring those persons who seek to disrupt and/or use a Township right-of-way by constructing, installing, locating, operating, using and/or maintaining improvements, including utilities and telecommunications, gas, and/or electric transmission systems therein, to obtain a construction permit and/or a use permit and pay fair and reasonable permit fees. 
(c)  The Township further finds that requiring the payment of the application, consultant and permit fees when authorized by law will assist in protecting the Township's interests in its rights-of-way, by allowing the Township to cover some of its costs of maintaining, monitoring, and ensuring quality control with regard to its rights-of-way and related records. 
(d)  This chapter is further intended to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002 ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the Township qualifies for distributions under the act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the act. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-3. - Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated. Other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined or provided in the Act. 
Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
Authority means the Authority as defined in Section 2 of the Act. 
Construction permit means a nonexclusive limited permit issued by the Township to a person pursuant to this chapter allowing an activity which will result in disruption to the Township's right-of-way. 
Disruption or construction means a physical change, modification, alteration, disturbance, injury and/or damage to or in a Township right-of-way, including but not limited to, construction, installation, location, maintenance, modification, alteration, replacement or repair of improvements, and the removal or alteration of a right-of-way surface grade or material, tree, sign, marker, hydrant or other material or object. 
Franchise means a non-exclusive limited Township Board approved authorization to transact, conduct and/or operate a use in the Township, including but not limited to, the operation or use of improvements in the Township's right-of-way. 
Franchise disruption means disruption that is necessary for the franchisee to satisfy or comply with its rights or duties under a franchise and which is performed by the franchisee or its authorized contractor whose authority is disclosed in writing to the Township in advance of the disruption. 
Improvement means any equipment, conduit, facility, pipe, pole, structure, wire, cable, fiber, building or any other man-made or placed material or object, including but not limited to any water or sewer main, pipe, catch basin, manhole or other structure used for the accumulation or transportation of water, storm-water, sewage, liquid or gas and any overhead or underground cable, wire and/or a combination thereof, for the transmission or distribution of electrical energy, telephone service, telecommunications services or other utility or communication services or signals, including service connections and any other material protecting said cable or wire used in connection therewith. 
Minor disruption means disruption in connection with work or an improvement on an individual lot or parcel that: 
(a)  Will not extend into the right-of-way adjacent to the parcel except for new gas, electric or telephone services to directly serve that parcel; 
(b)  Will not result in any obstruction or interference with the traveled portion of the right-of-way, 
(c)  As determined by the Township, will not have any impact on existing or planned Township utilities or other existing or permitted improvements in the right-of-way, and 
(d)  As determined by the Township, is not of sufficient size or consequence and has no other aspects or components that warrant or necessitate compliance with otherwise applicable construction permit requirements. 
MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act. 
Ordinances means all laws, codes and regulations duly enacted and adopted by the Township. 
Permittee means a person who has been issued a construction or use permit pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter and all employees, agents, contractors and other persons that direct or perform any activity covered by the permit. 
Person means a natural person, company, corporation, partnership, joint venture, voluntary association, organization or other form of legal entity. 
Public easement means any area of land which has been granted or dedicated to the Township or to public use, including but not limited to, road or right-of-way, utility, water main, sewer line, access, drainage, recreation, conservation and other public areas, whether as easements or in fee. 
Public place means any area owned, under the jurisdiction of, or controlled by the Township. 
Street means the paved area or area designated for vehicular travel within the right-of-way, and is synonymous with the words "highway" and "road." 
Telecommunication facility or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
Telecommunication system means conduit, improvements and other materials which are designed and/or used to provide telecommunications services. 
Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a provider also includes: 
(a)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service; 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by the act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way; and 
(c)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
Township means the Green Oak Charter Township, and unless this chapter or resolution of the Township Board indicates otherwise, means the Township Supervisor or Township Supervisor's designee for purposes of reviews, decisions and actions on all permit and ordinance issues and applications. 
Township or Township's right-of-way or right-of-way means any and all public rights-of-way, streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, thoroughfares, public easements and public places located within the Township, including within any curbs, shoulders, landscaped areas and/or other areas incidental and/or appurtenant thereto. "Right-of-way" shall not include federal and state highways for purposes of telecommunication permit applications. 
Use may be limited by the Act to meaning the ownership of an improvement by a telecommunications provider. For all other persons, use means the ownership, lease or rental, possession, operation, occupancy or use of all or part of an improvement. 
Use permit means a nonexclusive limited permit issued by the Township to a person pursuant to this chapter or a prior ordinance, allowing use of the Township's right-of-way for an improvement therein, and includes a use permit described in article III and a telecommunications permit described in article IV. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-4. - Application. 
This chapter applies to all disruption or use of Township right-of-way, regardless of whether persons are excepted or exempted from the construction and/or use permit requirements, with the provisions of article IV applying to telecommunications providers and controlling in the event of any conflict or inconsistency with other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Secs. 29-5—29-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 
 
Sec. 29-11. - Construction permit required. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person, including persons who have or are exempt from having a use permit, shall direct or perform any activity which causes or results in any disruption to any Township right-of-way unless the consent of the Township Supervisor is first obtained, after review and recommendation by the Township's Planning Consultant, Building Official and Township Engineer, as evidenced by a construction permit issued by the Township Supervisor pursuant to this chapter. Activity shall be performed in accordance with the construction permit and in the manner provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  Exemptions and emergencies. A construction permit is not required for: 
(1)  Activities by or under contract with the State Department of Transportation or County Road Commission or Township. 
(2)  Activities that have been disclosed and described to the extent required by this chapter and that are thereafter approved as part of a permit, site plan, plat or other approval under another Township ordinance. 
(3)  Temporary obstructions which are incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises. 
(4)  The lawful operation and parking of vehicles within a Township right-of-way. 
(5)  The lawful and customary use of property by adjoining property owners for such things as landscaping and lawful repairs, maintenance and other activities of, for or on a sidewalk, driveway or other similar improvement in a Township right-of-way, provided that all other Township required permits are first obtained. In an emergency, including, but not limited to natural disaster, civil disorder, flood, war and/or severe weather condition, a person and/or a permittee may disrupt a Township right-of-way without first receiving a construction permit from the Township provided that the Township has approved the emergency repairs before the disruption takes place. 
(c)  Violations. Failure to obtain a construction permit under this article shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the violating person to the penalties provided for in this chapter. A person who violates this article shall pay the required application fee and construction permit fee, as well as any additional charge established by resolution of the Township Board for that period of time that the person did not have a valid construction permit pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-12. - Forms of and applications for construction permits. 
(a)  Applications. A person that wants to direct or perform any activity which will or may result in any disruption to a Township right-of-way shall apply to the Township Supervisor for a construction permit pursuant to this article and article V. 
(b)  Franchise disruptions. An annual construction permit may be applied for and issued for all franchise disruptions in a calendar year under a single franchise, provided that the plans and other applicable information for each disruption are filed with the Township Supervisor sufficiently in advance of the work that they may be reviewed. 
(c)  Minor disruptions. Permits for minor disruptions may be approved and issued by the Township Supervisor without requiring full compliance with the application requirements in article V. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-13. - Construction permit fees. 
(a)  At the time of filing an application, the applicant must pay a nonrefundable application fee and an application review and processing fee in an amount necessary to reimburse the Township for all costs in reviewing, processing, investigating, granting or denying and issuing the construction permit, including any consultant or legal reviews, as estimated by the Township Supervisor based on rates and factors established by resolution of the Township Board. If review and processing costs exceed the Township's estimate, they shall be paid by the applicant prior to permit issuance. 
(b)  In addition to the nonrefundable application fee and application review and processing fees, at or prior to the time the Township Supervisor issues the construction permit, the permittee shall pay the Township a construction permit fee in an amount which will cover all of the Township's administrative, inspection, consulting, plan review, monitoring and other costs in conjunction with the permittee's disruption of the Township right-of-way. The construction permit fee shall be based on rates and factors established by resolution of the Township Board in an amount representing the Township's estimate of what its costs in connection with the disruption are likely to be. Additional construction permit fees may be required by the Township during construction to cover unanticipated inspection costs, and shall be paid by the permittee within three calendar days of the Township's notice. If they are not, the permittee shall immediately restore the work site to a safe condition and suspend activities authorized under the permit until the additional inspection fees are paid. Upon completion of the disruption activities, the permittee shall pay to the Township any and all costs incurred in connection with the disruption activities that are over and above the amount paid to the Township by the permittee as estimated or additional construction permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-14. - Construction permit term and extension. 
(a)  The construction permit granted to the permittee by the Township Supervisor shall be for a specified time period established by the Township Supervisor after taking into consideration the information in the permittee's construction permit application. 
(b)  Prior to the expiration of the term of the construction permit, a permittee may apply in writing to the Township Supervisor for an extension of the permit, which may be granted by the Township Supervisor if the permittee demonstrates a valid reason and explanation for why the disruption activities could not be completed during the term initially established. For purposes of seeking an extension of its construction permit, the applicant shall pay an extension application fee to the Township in an amount established by resolution of the Township Board. The Township Supervisor shall have the right to impose additional conditions on construction permit extensions. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-15. - Construction permit terms and conditions. 
In addition to any individual conditions included by the Township in a permit as provided in article V, all construction permits shall be considered to include and require compliance with all terms and conditions set forth in article VI. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-16. - Revocation of permit and stop work orders. 
All construction permits shall be subject to stop work orders and/or revocation under the standards and procedures contained in article VII. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Secs. 29-17—29-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - USE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 29-21. - Use permit required. 
(a)  Generally. Except as modified for telecommunications permits under article IV and as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall use a Township right-of-way for any improvements therein unless the consent of the Township Supervisor is first obtained, as evidenced by a use permit issued by the Township Supervisor pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Exemptions. An exemption described in this section shall not apply until it has been documented and proven in written form by the person claiming it to the Township Supervisor's satisfaction. A use permit is not required for any person that has a valid, effective and current franchise from the Township to use the Township's rights-of-way for improvements. 
(c)  Township Supervisor permit decisions. Applications to use and/or occupy Township rights-of-way that do not abut real property owned by the applicant, shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied for issuance by the Township Supervisor as provided in article V. 
(d)  Violations. Failure to obtain a use permit shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the violating person to the penalties provided for in this chapter. A person who violates this article shall pay the required application and use permit fee, as well as any additional charge established by resolution of the Township Board for that period of time that the person did not have a valid permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-22. - Use permit application procedures and fees. 
(a)  A person that wants to use a Township right-of-way shall apply to the Township for a use permit as provided in the permit application requirements and procedures in article V. 
(b)  At the time of filing an application, the applicant must pay to the Township a nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by resolution of the Township Board and an application review and processing fee in an amount necessary to reimburse the Township for the costs in reviewing, processing, investigating, granting or denying and issuing the use permit, as estimated by the Township based on rates and factors established by resolution of the Township Board. If review and processing costs exceed the Township's estimate, they shall be paid by the applicant prior to permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-23. - Use permit fee. 
(a)  Except for telecommunications permits under article IV, in addition to the nonrefundable application fee and application review and processing fees, for each year the use permit is in effect, the permittee shall pay an annual use permit fee to the Township in an amount established by resolution of the Township Board. The annual use permit fee shall be paid prior to use permit issuance, and for each year thereafter, on or before the last Township business day prior to January 1, said fee being payable in advance of the year it is for. 
(b)  The amount of the use permit fee shall be fair and reasonable, competitively neutral, nondiscriminatory and reasonably related to the Township's costs in connection with the permit and Township right-of-way involved and shall not exceed what is authorized by applicable laws. Upon the written request of the Township Supervisor or applicant, the fees established by the Township Board resolutions shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis for the purpose of determining whether the fee should be more or less. In making such determination, the Township Board shall take into consideration the following factors: 
(1)  The annual fixed and variable cost to the Township in maintaining the right-of-way in, under or over which the permittee's use occurs. 
(2)  The total amount of area that the permittee will be using and occupying in the Township right-of-way, including but not limited to, the length of right-of-way and the number and size of the improvements to be used. 
(3)  The frequency and unit cost of monitoring the rights-of-way on a regular basis to ensure that the use by permittee conforms with applicable law, ordinance and permit conditions, and that such use has not created the need for public attention. 
(4)  The proportionate cost of maintaining and administering records of right-of-way use, including administration to assist in the avoidance of conflicts in the use of the rights-of-way by other users, and auditing of the extent of permittee's use. 
(5)  Any unique aspects of permittee's use or improvements that are likely to affect the cost to the Township of permittee's use of the rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-24. - Use permit term, renewal and reviews. 
(a)  Except for telecommunications permits under article IV, a use permit may be issued for a term of up to ten years, with the first year ending on December 31 of the year the use permit is issued. The permittee may apply to the Township Supervisor for ten-year renewals of its use permit, which renewal periods would run from January 1 to December 31 of each ten-year term. Unless earlier terminated by the permittee or the Township Supervisor, a permittee must file an application for renewal of its use permit with the Township Supervisor not less than 120 days before the expiration of the current term, and pay a renewal application fee to the Township in an amount established by resolution of the Township Board. The Township Supervisor shall review and approve, conditionally approve, or deny all renewal applications. Decisions on renewal applications shall be made by the Township Supervisor in the same manner as the original permit. The Township Supervisor shall have the right to impose additional reasonable conditions on those use permit renewals. 
(b)  Although permits may be granted for a ten-year term, the Township Supervisor may conduct an interim review at the end of the third and sixth years of a permit to determine whether the use permit fee then in effect should be revised and/or to require the permittee to affirmatively demonstrate that it is complying with all permit and ordinance terms and conditions. If the Township Supervisor determines that the fee should be revised, a resolution to do so shall be presented to the Township Board, and upon approval, shall be established and be effective for the balance of the permit term. If a permittee fails to demonstrate ordinance and permit compliance, the Township Supervisor may impose further conditions upon the use permit, or, where the review reveals a material failure of compliance, may initiate revocation proceedings as provided in article VII. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-25. - Use permit terms and conditions. 
In addition to any individual conditions imposed by the Township Supervisor on a permit as provided in article V, all permits shall be considered to include and require compliance with all terms and conditions set forth in article VI. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-26. - Revocation of permit and stop use orders. 
All use permits shall be subject to stop use orders and/or revocation under the standards and procedures contained in article VII. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Secs. 29-27—29-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS PERMITS 
 
Sec. 29-31. - Permit required. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use Township rights-of-way for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a telecommunications permit, which is a form of use permit, pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the Township under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the Township to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Compliance. The Township declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions of this article should be construed in such a manner as to achieve such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-32. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act by filing three copies with the Township Supervisor. Upon receipt, the Township Supervisor shall make and distribute copies of the application to other Township staff and consultants as necessary. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
(b)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(c)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(d)  Additional information. The Township Supervisor may request an applicant to submit such additional information required for a use permit applications under article V, which the Township Supervisor deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the Township Supervisor. If the Township Supervisor and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the Township Supervisor, the dispute shall be resolved as provided in the Act. 
(e)  Existing providers. A telecommunications provider with facilities located in a Township right-of-way in the Township that as of November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the Township Supervisor an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article and within the time required or extended under Sections 5(3) and 5(4) of the Act. Pursuant to Section 5(3)of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (c) above. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-33. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The Township Supervisor shall have the authority to approve or deny an application for a permit. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the Township Supervisor shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under Section 14.5-032, for access to a Township right-of-way within the Township. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the Township Supervisor shall notify the MPSC when the Township has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The Township Supervisor shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the Township Supervisor shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the Township Supervisor may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the Township right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the Township Supervisor may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the Township right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. If the right-of-way is not returned to its original condition within 60 days of receipt of notice from the Township, the Township may use the bond to restore the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-34. - Construction permit. 
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction in a Township right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit as provided in articles II and V. Unless authorized by law, no otherwise applicable fees may be charged by the Township for such a construction permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-35. - Conduit or utility poles. 
Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-36. - Route maps. 
Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the Township, submit route maps to the MPSC and the Township Supervisor, showing the location of the telecommunications facilities. The route maps shall be in the format (electronic, paper or otherwise) as finally determined by the MPSC (or a court of competent jurisdiction) in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-37. - Repair of damage. 
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a Township right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a Township right-of-way in the Township, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the Township right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-38. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the Township set forth in Section 14.5-032, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the Township's rights-of-way shall pay an annual fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-39. - Modification of existing fees. 
In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the act, the Township hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, relating to access and usage of the Township rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the act, which shall be paid to the authority. in compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the act, the Township also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in Township rights-of-way within the Township's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the act. to the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the Township's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the Township, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-40. - Savings clause under the act. 
Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 29-40, shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-41. - Use of funds. 
Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the Township from the authority shall be used by the Township solely for right-of-way related purposes. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-42. - Annual report. 
As required by Section 10(5) of the Act, the Township shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-43. - Cable television operators. 
Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the Township shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-44. - Existing rights and permits. 
Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the Township may have under a permit issued by the Township or under a contract between the Township and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the Township rights-of-way. 
Upon the written request of a telecommunications provider holding such a permit, the Township shall issue a replacement permit in the form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act, with the effective date of the replacement permit to be the same date as the original permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-45. - Compliance. 
The Township hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The Township shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the provisions referenced in this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-46. - Reservation of police powers. 
Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the Township's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the Township's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-47. - Violations. 
Failure to obtain or violation of a permit under this article shall be subject to the penalties and procedures provided for in the Act, and to the extent authorized by law, to the penalties and procedures in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Secs. 29-48—29-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCESS 
 
Sec. 29-51. - Filing of complete applications required. 
At least three copies of a permit application, and more if necessary to secure all Township staff and consultant reviews, shall be filed with the Township Supervisor and shall not be considered as complete for any purposes, including any time periods for Township reviews and decisions, until the required application fee and all required information has been provided. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-52. - General application information requirements. 
(a)  Except for telecommunications use permits and as otherwise provided in this chapter, permit applications shall include all of the following information, as applicable, on a Township application form or by attachment to the form of applicable documents and plans. 
(b)  With the Township Supervisor's approval, an applicant may rely on information submitted in connection with a specifically identified, previously issued permit, upon a written certification to the Township Supervisor that the information has not changed and remains accurate. 
(c)  Upon an applicant's written request and demonstration to the Township Supervisor's satisfaction that one or more application requirements serve no useful purpose or have been adequately addressed in an alternative manner or form, and for minor disruptions, the Township Supervisor may waive or modify one or more of the information requirements, with or without conditions. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-53. - Information required for all permits. 
(a)  The name, age if an individual, and address of the applicant, and if the applicant is not a natural person, the date, state and form of business organization. 
(b)  The character of the business the applicant engages in and the lengths of time and locations where that business has been conducted. 
(c)  Written documentation of the applicant's lawful existence, authorization and good standing to conduct its business in the state. 
(d)  The names, phone numbers, fax numbers, addresses, e-mail addresses if applicable, and position, relationship or affiliation with applicant for the following persons: 
(1)  Applicant's contact person(s); 
(2)  The person(s) that is authorized to and will sign and agree to permits that are issued on behalf of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's resident agent for service of process; 
(4)  The person(s) responsible for preparation and revisions of applicant's maps and plans; 
(5)  All contractors that will be performing any work in Township right-of-way for the applicant under the permit(s) requested; 
(6)  The construction and engineering personnel that will be responsible for supervision of disruption, maintenance and repair work in Township right-of-way and for communication with the Township regarding such work; 
(7)  Identification of all other permits the applicant has been issued by the Township and proof of full compliance with them. 
(e)  For proposed aboveground improvements, the application shall demonstrate that they cannot be placed underground or that the applicant is exempted by law from the requirement of this chapter that all new improvements be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-54. - Required route and improvement information for use permits. 
Use permit applications shall include a textual description and scaled drawing or map on 8½-inch by 11-inch paper or other size accepted by the Township that shows or contains: 
(a)  The general route and horizontal and vertical (above or below ground) location within the right-of-way of improvements to be installed and/or used; 
(b)  The relationship of the improvements to existing and proposed improvements in adjoining municipalities; 
(c)  The length, area or other applicable measurement of Township right-of-way that will be used by applicant, expressed in lineal feet of aerial and underground portions of proposed and existing improvements, and for improvements that are not measurable in lineal feet, the number of square feet of right-of-way that will be used; 
(d)  If the applicant is proposing to construct new aerial poles or new underground conduit or pipe improvements, a description of why it is not physically and financially feasible for applicant to utilize existing poles, pipes, conduits and improvements; 
(e)  A detailed description of the services to be provided by applicant's improvements, which shall include a description of the system those improvements will be a part of and the categories or classifications and locations of existing, intended and potential customers or persons that are or may be served by the improvements; and 
(f)  A copy of a current financial statement for the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-55. - Construction plans required for construction permits. 
Detailed construction plans and a separate list or index of same, at a scale of no less than one inch equals 50 feet for the improvements applicant proposes to construct and/or use, with each plan to clearly show or contain all of the following information: 
(a)  The name and address of the person that prepared the plan, the dates of preparation and revisions, a job/work title and/or number and a drawing/sheet number. 
(b)  Whether the improvements are existing or proposed. 
(c)  All Township right-of-way lines and property lines if within the Township right-of-way and the location of the improvements in relation thereto. 
(d)  The lineal feet or other area of Township right-of-way occupied or proposed to be occupied by the improvements shown on the plan, expressed separately for aerial and underground portions. 
(e)  Match lines by which each plan can be related to the applicant's other plans. 
(f)  A description of the improvements shown on the plan that includes the size, components, capacity, ownership and existing, proposed and potential uses. 
(g)  For aerial improvements, all existing and new poles or structures to which the improvements are or will be attached shall be shown and designated as such together with the owner of each such pole or structure. 
(h)  For aerial improvements, elevations shall be depicted on a drawing that shows applicant's improvements in relation to all other existing improvements and the poles or structures to which they are or will be attached. 
(i)  For underground improvements, in addition to the applicant's, the plans shall show all other existing underground appliances, conduits and improvements, it being the applicant's responsibility to determine the existence and location of such other improvements. The plans shall show the applicant and other existing improvements by reference to the horizontal and vertical location and separation between improvements that exist or are proposed. 
(j)  The locations of rivers, streams, drains, bodies of water and state or Township regulated wetlands crossed by applicant's improvements. 
(k)  The location of all Township right-of-way that will or may be disrupted by the installation, use, maintenance or repair of applicant's improvements. 
(l)  The location of any above ground structures or landscaping including but not limited to, trees, shrubs, signs, hydrants, mail boxes and driveways within or adjoining the Township right-of-way, that will or may be disrupted or damaged by the installation, use, maintenance or repair of the applicant's improvements. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-56. - Construction and schedule information for construction permits. 
The following information is required: 
(a)  A description of the manner in which the improvements will be installed, maintained and repaired by reference to the number and types of vehicles, equipment and personnel involved and the area of Township right-of-way within which disruption activities will be occurring at any given time. 
(b)  A description of the time and manner in which applicant will restore Township rights-of-way that may be disrupted or damaged by applicant's activities. 
(c)  If the applicant is proposing to construct new aerial poles or new underground conduit or pipe improvements, a description of why it is not physically and financially feasible for applicant to utilize existing poles, pipes, conduits and improvements. 
(d)  The cost of the improvements to be installed and such other information as may be required for the Township to issue and establish individual terms and conditions for a permit. 
(e)  The length of time it will take applicant to complete the installation and required restoration under a proposed construction permit, expressed in terms of the number of weeks from the date the permit is issued, and noting any changes to the schedule that may be needed based on the time of year the permit is issued or any other variable that is not within applicant's control. 
(f)  Copies of Michigan Department of Transportation, Livingston County Road Commission, and other governmental permits or approvals that are required for applicant's improvements, or documentation that such permits have been applied for. 
(g)  If applicant proposes to locate its improvements on, within or as part of poles, conduits or improvements of another person, that person's written confirmation of applicant's rights to do so. 
(h)  Notes on the plans requiring traffic control devices in accordance with Township ordinance, the most recent edition of the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices Guide, and reasonable engineering specifications required by the Township Supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-57. - Additional information for construction permits. 
If the Township Supervisor determines it to be necessary to the proper and efficient administration of this chapter, he/she may also require an applicant for a construction permit to provide plans on a larger scale, elevations, locations and topography at specified contours for existing and proposed improvements, landscaping and natural features, property lines and other relevant information for areas within 100 feet of the proposed improvement. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-58. - Application reviews and permit decisions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the Township Supervisor shall endeavor to approve, conditionally approve or deny a permit for issuance within 45 days from the date the applicant files a complete application. The time limit for the Township Supervisor to make a decision may be extended with the applicant's written agreement, and except for telecommunications permits under article IV, by the Township Supervisor for good cause. Approval of a permit for issuance does not authorize any disruption or use of Township right-of-way. 
(b)  The Township Supervisor review and decision on an application shall be based on this chapter, which establishes the terms and conditions under which the Township Supervisor consents to disruption in and use of the Township rights-of-way. The Township Supervisor will not approve a permit for issuance to an applicant that is in violation of or has unsatisfied obligations to the Township under a prior permit. 
(c)  Approval of a permit for issuance does not authorize any disruption or use of Township right-of-way and may be subject to conditions that must be satisfied prior to permit issuance and the commencement of permitted activities. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-59. - Permit conditions and performance guarantees. 
The Township Supervisor may impose conditions on any permit it approves as it determines necessary to ensure and protect the public health, safety and welfare. Subject to any limitations for telecommunications permits under article IV, the Township Supervisor may require, as a condition of the permit, that a performance guarantee in the form of cash, or an automatically renewing irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the Township Supervisor be posted by the applicant, which performance guarantee shall not exceed the reasonable costs to ensure that the Township's rights-of-way that are to be disrupted and/or used by the applicant are returned and restored to their original condition after the applicant's disruption and/or use of the rights-of-way, that all required fees are paid, that all permit conditions are satisfied and that acceptable as-built plans are provided to the Township. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-60. - Permit issuance. 
Upon approving a permit for issuance, the Township Supervisor shall provide the applicant with two copies of a completed permit form and documents that contain or incorporate all terms and conditions under article VI of this chapter and any individual permit conditions. To obtain permit issuance, the applicant shall accept and agree to the permit by signing both copies of the permit and applicable permit documents in the form and manner specified and delivering them to the Township Supervisor together with any required fees, performance guarantees, insurance certificates and any other documents that were specified by the Township Supervisor as conditions for permit issuance. When all requirements for permit issuance have been satisfied, the Township Supervisor shall issue the permit by dating and signing each of the permit forms, keeping one for Township records and mailing or delivering the second to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-61. - Permit display. 
A construction permit or copy thereof, together with the approved construction plans shall be in the possession of the permittee's employee or representative at each work location at all times. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-62. - Permit amendments. 
Construction permit amendments are in the discretion of the Township Supervisor, who for more than minor changes or alterations, may require that a new permit be applied for and obtained. Use permits may be amended by the Township Supervisor upon a written application of the permittee, to include the right to use additional right-of-way for the remainder of the original use permit term. All application, application review and processing and annual use permit fees shall be paid in connection with such an amendment. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-63. - Appeals. 
Any person, firm or corporation whose permit application is denied or approved with conditions the applicant wishes to challenge, may appeal to the Township Board by filing a written appeal with the Township Supervisor not more than ten days after the decision. The application for appeal shall fully and particularly set forth the nature and grounds upon which the appeal is based. The Township Board, shall, within 30 days after the filing of such notice of appeal, unless a later date is agreed upon by the parties, hold a hearing on the appeal. Upon hearing the appeal, Township Board shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the permit for issuance, and in doing so, may in its sole discretion, on the applicant's request or its own motion, waive or modify ordinance requirements that were the basis for permit denial. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Secs. 29-64—29-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ORDINANCE AND PERMIT TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
 
Sec. 29-71. - General ordinance regulations and permit terms and conditions. 
Except for telecommunications permits issued under article IV, the following terms and conditions shall apply to all persons directing or performing disruption or use of Township right-of-way, regardless of whether they have or are required to have a permit, and shall be considered a part of every construction and use permit issued under this chapter. 
(a)  Nonexclusive. A permit shall be nonexclusive and does not restrict the Township Supervisor from at any time issuing additional permits to other persons to disrupt and/or use the same Township right-of-way. The issuance of a permit does not establish any priority for the disruption and/or use of a Township right-of-way and permittees shall coordinate their work to avoid conflicts with the Township and all other persons lawfully working in the right-of-way. 
(b)  Compliance with permits and laws. All persons shall strictly comply with all of the terms and conditions of a permit and with all applicable laws, codes, restrictions and ordinances, including the public utility notification provisions of Act 174 of the Public Acts of 2013, as amended, and Part 91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended, and no person shall disrupt and/or use any Township right-of-way without first obtaining all other required Township or other governmental permits and approvals and paying all other applicable fees. 
(c)  Permit fees and taxes. A permittee shall timely pay all annual use and other permit fees and all personal and real property taxes and any other obligations due and payable to the Township. 
(d)  Transfer/assignment. A construction permit shall not be assigned or transferred without the written consent of the Township Supervisor which he/she shall have no obligation to grant. Prior to completion of the construction of the improvements in the Township public rights-of-way covered by a use permit, there shall not be any transfer, conveyance or assignment of the permit or the rights/privileges granted by it or any change in control of permittee, in whole or in part, voluntarily, involuntarily, or by operation of law, merger, consolidation, substantial change in the ownership or control or other means, without prior written consent of the Township Supervisor, which shall not be unreasonably withheld for reasons unrelated to the ability and/or willingness of the proposed transferee/assignee to comply with the permit and all of its terms and conditions. After the completion of such construction, such a conveyance, transfer, assignment or change in control may be done without Township Supervisor consent provided that permittee provides written notice to the Township Supervisor of same no later than 30 days after such occurrence and: 
(1)  Any transferee or assignee shall be qualified to perform under the permit terms and conditions and comply with applicable law, shall be subject to the obligations of the permit, including responsibility for any defaults which occurred prior to the transfer or assignment, shall supply the Township Supervisor with written notice of the same identification, address and contact information required of a permittee and shall comply with any updated insurance and performance guarantee requirements under the permit which the Township Supervisor reasonably deems necessary; and 
(2)  A change in control shall not be to an entity lacking the qualifications to assure permittee's ability to perform under the terms and conditions of the permit and comply with applicable law and shall be subject to compliance with any updated insurance and performance guarantee requirements which the Township Supervisor reasonably deems necessary. If a permit is assigned in whole or in part, its terms and conditions shall be binding upon the successors or assigns of the permittee. A security interest in a permit and the improvements covered by it may be granted at any time without notice to the Township Supervisor. 
(e)  As-built plans. A permittee shall deliver to the Township Supervisor, as-built plans in a form and at a scale acceptable to the Township Supervisor for the permitted improvements which are in the Township right-of-way within 60 days after completion of installation or commencement of use, whichever first occurs. 
(f)  G.I.S. Within 60 days of completion of improvements, a permittee shall provide the Township Supervisor with a geographical information system layer in a media form acceptable to the Township, which accurately portrays the permittee's as-built improvements and shall be updated to accurately reflect any changes to the same which are approved by the Township Supervisor. 
(g)  Additional and/or future use. The issuance of a permit does not confer rights to any additional disruption and/or use of the Township's right-of-way, except as specifically granted and described in the permit. 
(h)  Township modifications and future use. The issuance of a permit does not prohibit the Township Supervisor from requiring modifications to permittee's construction activities or from using the Township's right-of-way in a manner which may interfere with, disrupt or prevent the permittee's disruption and/or use of the same. Permittees acknowledge and accept this risk and shall not be entitled to receive any compensation from the Township in the event that the Township uses the Township right-of-way in that manner. The expense of making any necessary modifications of its improvements in order to accommodate a conflict shall be borne by the permittee. In addition, should the Livingston County Road Commission require use of the right-of-way for purposes of a road widening or otherwise, permittee shall be required to remove, modify or relocate its installations and improvements, at its sole cost, upon request of the Road Commission, without entitlement to receive any compensation from the Road Commission. 
(i)  No interference in Township rights-of-way. No person shall disrupt a right-of-way or construct, install, locate, maintain, use or operate its improvements in the Township's rights-of-way in a manner that interferes with Township or other lawful use, existing water mains, gas lines, sanitary sewer lines, drains or drain pipes, or other improvements that are existing in the Township's right-of-way. Any portion of improvements that so interfere, or that will interfere with a proposed public utility or street improvement project, shall, at the request of the Township Supervisor, be removed or modified by a permittee or owner of the improvements at its cost, without entitlement to receive any compensation from the Township. Such removal or modification shall be made within a reasonable time of request, as stated in a written notice from the Township Supervisor. If the removal or modification is not made within such time, the Township Supervisor may remove or modify the interfering improvement(s) to the extent required, and bill the permittee or owner of the improvements for the expenses incurred in doing so. If such a bill is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of billing, the Township may recover its expenses from a permittee's performance guarantees and/or by an action at law. With regard to interference with the use of the right-of-way for pedestrian, vehicular or other related purposes, all activities of a permittee shall be undertaken in a manner to minimize interference, and all due precautions shall be taken to maximize public safety. 
(j)  No interference in Livingston County Road Commission rights-of-way. No person shall disrupt a right-of-way or construct, install, locate, maintain, use or operate its improvements in the rights-of-way in a manner that will interfere with a proposed public utility, drainage or street improvement project. At the request of the Livingston County Road Commission, permittee shall be required to remove or modify or remove its improvements at permittee's cost, without entitlement to receive any compensation from the Livingston County Road Commission. Such removal or modification shall be made within a reasonable time of request, as stated in a written notice from the Road Commission. If the removal or modification is not made within such time, the Road Commission may remove or modify the interfering improvement(s) to the extent required, and bill the permittee or owner of the improvements for the expenses incurred in doing so. If such a bill is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of billing, the Road Commission may recover its expenses from a permittee's performance guarantees and/or by an action at law. With regard to interference with the use of the right-of-way for pedestrian, vehicular or other related purposes, all activities of a permittee shall be undertaken in a manner to minimize interference, and all due precautions shall be taken to maximize public safety. 
(k)  Plan, schedule and permit compliance; costs. The installation of improvements in, and the permittee's disruption and/or use of the Township's rights-of-way, shall be in compliance with the plans submitted to and approved and all permits issued by the Township Supervisor. All costs of the permittee's improvements in use of the right-of-way shall be the sole responsibility of the permittee. All construction and installation of improvements in the Township's rights-of-way, shall be performed by the permittee in compliance with the schedule submitted to and approved by the Township Supervisor, shall be done and maintained with all necessary precautions to prevent injury or damage to persons and property and in a good and workmanlike fashion in accordance with recognized construction industry and other applicable standards and shall be subject to inspection and final approval of the Township. 
(l)  Restoration of property. Any portion of the Township's right-of-way that is disrupted by the construction, installation, location, maintenance, use or operation of improvements shall be restored to its prior condition by the permittee, owner of the improvements and/or the persons that caused or directed the disruption. The disrupted right-of-way shall be restored and returned to a condition that is as good as or better than that which existed at the time the disruption occurred. The time period and the manner in which the restoration is to take place shall be established by the Township Supervisor, and, in the event the permittee does not complete the restoration in that time and/or does not undertake the restoration in the manner approved by the Township Supervisor, upon written notice the Township may complete the repair and restoration and recover its costs from any performance guarantee posted by the permittee and/or by an action at law. If the performance guarantee does not cover all of the costs incurred by the Township, the permittee shall immediately pay the outstanding balance of the costs to the Township, and reinstate the required performance guarantee. 
(m)  Maintenance and repair. During the term of a permit, the permittee shall maintain and repair its improvements in a good and workmanlike condition. If permittee fails to do so, the Township Supervisor may send a written notice to the permittee to correct the defective condition within a specified time. If the defective condition is not corrected within the time allowed, the Township shall be entitled, at its sole discretion, to perform said maintenance and repair, correct the defect and/or remove the improvement, and bill the cost of the same to the permittee. If such a bill is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of billing, the Township may recover its costs from any performance guarantee posted by permittee. In the event the performance guarantee does not cover all of the costs incurred by the Township, the permittee shall immediately pay the outstanding balance of the costs to the Township Supervisor and reinstate the required performance guarantee. 
(n)  Removal and/or relocation for or by Township. A permittee or owner of improvements shall remove, relocate and/or disconnect any portion of its improvements located in the Township's rights-of-way when the permittee is advised in writing by the Township Supervisor that the same is necessary for the Township to do any construction, excavation, maintenance, repair or other work in furtherance of the public health, safety and welfare. The Township may remove, relocate, damage, disrupt and/or disconnect a permittee's or owner's improvements in the event of an emergency, including but not limited to civil disorder, war, disaster, accident, fire, flood or severe weather occurrence, if the same is determined to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, with the Township not being liable to the permittee, owner or any persons receiving services from the improvements, for any damages or injuries caused by the Township's actions. 
(o)  Vacation/abandonment. If a right-of-way is vacated, discontinued, abandoned, terminated and/or released, the permittee's right to use that area of land shall immediately terminate and the permittee shall remove its improvements therefrom. 
(p)  Removal upon expiration or termination of use permit. Upon the expiration or termination of a permit, or if the permittee abandons or ceases operating or using its improvements in the Township's rights-of-way, within three months or a longer time period established by the Township Supervisor, permittee shall remove all of its improvements from the Township's right-of-way and restore the area to a condition that is as good or better than that which existed prior to the installation and use of its improvements in the Township right-of-way. If the permittee and Township Supervisor agree that it would not be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare for permittee to remove its improvements and the Township Board agrees to accept ownership of same, at no cost to the Township, permittee shall convey the improvements to the Township, who may thereafter use the improvements. The decisions as to whether a permittee shall remove its improvements from the Township's right-of-way and whether the Township will accept ownership, and if so, any conditions, is in the sole discretion of the Township Board 
(q)  Notice of commencement and completion of permitted activities. At least 48 hours prior to commencing or performing activities allowed by a permit, the permittee shall notify the Township Supervisor to arrange for inspection of the activities by the Township. Within five days of completing permitted activities, permittee shall notify the Township Supervisor so that final inspection may be made. 
(r)  Personnel and equipment identification. Personnel, including contractors and subcontractors of permittee conducting permitted activities shall at all times wear or have clearly visible identification as a representative of permittee, and all vehicles and equipment used in the activities shall be clearly identified with permittee's name. 
(s)  Prohibited work days. Except for emergencies, no disruption activities shall be performed on Sundays or legal holidays without the written authorization of the Township Supervisor. 
(t)  Traffic control. The permittee shall furnish, install and maintain all necessary traffic controls and protection during disruption activities in accordance with the current edition of the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and any special instructions set forth in the permit. 
(u)  Private property. A permit does not authorize entry upon private property or the use of private water supplies. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-72. - Indemnification. 
(a)  The Township and its officials, officers, employees, agents, volunteers, representatives and contractors shall not be liable or responsible for any damages or injuries that occur to or are suffered by any person or property which are caused by or result from the permittee's or its contractor's construction, installation, location, use or maintenance of improvements in the Township right-of-way. 
(b)  Permittees shall indemnify, defend and hold the Township and its officials, officers, employees, agents, volunteers, representatives and contractors harmless from any claims or encumbrances which may be imposed as a result of any indebtedness by the permittee to any contractors, subcontractors or any other persons providing services, labor or materials to the permittee. If the Township discovers that such a claim or encumbrance has been placed on or against a Township right-of-way, the Township Supervisor shall notify the permittee in writing to remove the same within 30 days from said notice, with failure to remove such a claim grounds for revocation of permit. If the permittee fails to remove the claim or encumbrance from the Township's right-of-way within 30 days from the Township Supervisor's written notice, the Township may apply any performance guarantee posted by the permittee towards the Township's cost of completely removing the claim or encumbrance. The permittee shall have the affirmative obligation to inform the Township Supervisor of any claims or encumbrances that the permittee is aware have been placed on or against the Township's right-of-way. 
(c)  Permittees shall indemnify, defend and hold the Township, its officers, agents, employees and officials harmless from any and all claims, losses, liabilities, causes of action, demands, judgments, decrees, proceedings, and expenses, including attorney fees, of any nature ("claims") arising out of or resulting from the acts or omissions of permittee, its officers, agents, employees, contractors, successors, or assigns or the permittee's use or installation of improvements in the Township right-of-way. The Township Supervisor shall notify permittees of any such claims and shall cooperate and consult with permittees in the defense and resolution of them, including the selection and direction of legal counsel. The Township Supervisor shall not settle any claim subject to indemnification under this section without the advance written consent of the permittee, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, with permittees, at their expense, having the right to defend or settle any claim against the Township for which permittee is responsible. 
(d)  The indemnification obligations of a telecommunications provider that has obtained a telecommunications permit from the Township as provided in the act and this chapter shall be as described in that permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-73. - Insurance. 
(a)  The permittee shall, at its own cost, maintain in full force and effect during the term of each permit, the following kinds of insurance in amounts established by Resolution of the Township Board, with the company providing same to be licensed and admitted to do business in the state and acceptable to the Township: 
(1)  Comprehensive commercial general liability insurance on an occurrence basis, with liability limits in an amount established by resolution of the Township Board, which liability insurance coverage shall include coverage for operations, products and completed operations, contractual liability, independent contractors and for explosion, collapse and underground liabilities, commonly referred to as "XCU" coverage; 
(2)  Motor vehicle insurance covering all owned and non-owned vehicles used in the permitted activities, including state no-fault coverage, with liability limits in amounts established by resolution of the Township Board; 
(3)  Owner's and contractors protective liability insurance with liability limits established by resolution of the Township Board; 
(4)  Worker's compensation insurance, including employer's liability coverage, in accordance with applicable state statutes; 
(b)  The Township and its officials, officers, employees, agents, contractors, consultants and representatives shall be named as additional insureds on the comprehensive commercial general liability insurance, owner's and contractors protective liability insurance and the motor vehicle liability insurance to be obtained by permittee. 
(c)  The permittee shall furnish to the Township Supervisor certificates of insurance and, upon request, certified copies of each insurance policy that the permittee is required by this section to obtain. No insurance policy and coverage that the permittee is required to obtain and keep in full force and effect by this section shall be cancelled, changed or subject to cancellation or reduction without prior written notice to the Township Supervisor. If any coverage will expire during the term of a permit, the permittee shall deliver renewal certificates to the Township Engineer at least ten days prior to the expiration date. 
(d)  The insurance obligations of a telecommunications provider that has obtained a telecommunications permit from the Township Supervisor as provided in the act and this chapter shall be as described in that permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-74. - Stop work/use orders and permit revocations. 
All permits shall be subject to the issuance of stop work or stop use orders by the Township Engineer and revocation as provided in article VII. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-75. - Other governmental approvals. 
Nothing in this chapter shall relieve an applicant from obtaining all other necessary governmental approvals for work within a right-of-way, including the approval of the Livingston County Road Commission. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Secs. 29-76—29-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - STOP WORK OR USE ORDERS, REVOCATIONS AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 29-81. - Stop work or use orders. 
In addition to any other rights or remedies the Township may have pursuant to this chapter or other applicable law, the Township, upon finding the existence of an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare, may order a stoppage of work and/or use pending: 
(a)  Removal or elimination of the threat; and/or 
(b)  A hearing on the order before the Township Board under section 29-83. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-82. - Revocation of permits. 
The Township Board may revoke a permit for any of the following reasons, subject to undertaking the procedure in section 29-83: 
(a)  Permittee's violation of and/or noncompliance with this chapter or a stop work or stop use order of the Township; 
(b)  Permittee's failure to comply with any of the terms, conditions and/or requirements of its permit; 
(c)  Permittee's failure to obtain permits and other approvals and to timely pay any fees required by this chapter and/or any other applicable ordinances, codes, statutes or laws; 
(d)  Violation of any ordinance, code, state or federal law or any other applicable law or legal requirement; 
(e)  A change to or cancellation of an insurance policy or coverage required by this chapter without the prior written approval of the Township; 
(f)  The cessation of operation, termination, dissolution or disbanding of the permittee; 
(g)  Causing, allowing and/or maintaining a nuisance as determined by the Township in the Township's right-of-way; 
(h)  Failure to timely pay to the Township any real property taxes, personal property taxes, assessments and/or other obligations; 
(i)  Failure to remove any liens or encumbrances from the Township's right-of-way; 
(j)  A material change of circumstance relating to the right-of-way which results in a material adverse condition in which to permit a continuation of permittee's use; 
(k)  Failure to maintain in place the required performance guarantees. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-83. - Hearing procedure. 
In the event a stop work or use order is issued or the Township Supervisor determines that a permit is subject to revocation under this article, the Township Supervisor shall do the following: 
(a)  Mail or deliver a written notice of hearing to the permittee at the last address furnished to the Township Supervisor by permittee, at least ten days prior to the hearing and containing the following information: 
(1)  Notice of the Township's proposed action and stop work or use order, if applicable; 
(2)  Reasons for the Township's proposed action and stop work or use order, if applicable; 
(3)  Date, time and location of hearing; and 
(4)  A statement that at the hearing the permittee may present witnesses, evidence, information and arguments on its behalf, and that the permittee has the right to be represented by counsel. 
(b)  At the hearing before the Township Board, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be represented by counsel and to present witnesses, evidence, information and arguments. Other interested persons shall also be permitted to attend the hearing and may present evidence, information and comments on the matters addressed at the hearing. 
(c)  Following the hearing, the Township Board shall make a decision to continue, modify or dissolve a stop work or use order and/or revoke a permit, as applicable. In the event the Township Board decides to revoke a permit or to continue or modify a stop work or use order, the Township Board shall state the reasons for its decision on the record and shall mail or deliver written notice of its decision and reasons to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-84. - Violations/penalties; civil infraction. 
(a)  Any person determined to be in violation of this chapter or a permit issued under it shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall pay a fine in the following amount: 
(1)  First offense: ..... $1,000.00 
(2)  Second or subsequent offense: ..... $5,000.00 
(b)  Any person in violation of this chapter or a permit issued under it shall be responsible for restoration of the right-of-way to the condition that existed prior to the violation. If such person fails or refuses to restore the right-of-way within 30 days of written notice from the Township Supervisor, and if the Township Supervisor determines that the civil infraction remedy is inadequate under the circumstances, the Township may initiate proceedings in the appropriate court to recover the cost estimated to accomplish the restoration, or recover such costs as have been actually expended by the Township in achieving the restoration, as the case may be. Such costs shall include finance and reasonable administrative costs estimated or incurred. 
(c)  Each occurrence of a violation, and each day a violation exists, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Violations of this chapter are considered to be a nuisance per se with such violations and correction of any conditions resulting from violations subject to abatement by injunctive or other appropriate order by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 29-85. - Election of remedies. 
Violations of this chapter and permits or orders issued under it subject the violator to Township enforcement through one or more of the remedies provided in this article, and the election by the Township to pursue one form of remedy does not waive or restrict the Township's option to pursue other remedies at the same or later time. 
(Ord. No. 03-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Secs. 29-86—29-90. - Reserved.  
Chapter 30 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-2015, § 3, effective July 26, 2015, amended the title of Ch. 30 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 30 was titled, "Telecommunications." 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 34; zoning, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Township control of highways, franchises, Mich. Const. art. 7, § 29; Michigan telecommunications act, MCL 484.2101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Public utility franchise, MCL 460.601 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Basic service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
Cable communications system and cable system mean a system of antennas, fiber optic cables, transmitters and receivers, coaxial cables and amplifiers, towers, microwave or other wireless transmission links, cablecasting studios and any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, switching or distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of electronic or electrical signals sold or distributed to subscribers. 
CATV commission means the advisory body created pursuant to this article to recommend measures in connection with the enforcement and development of this article. 
Franchise means a nonexclusive, limited authorization awarded by ordinance for the construction, maintenance and operation of a CATV system in the Township. 
Grantee means any holder of a CATV franchise granted pursuant to this article. 
Gross revenues. 
(1)  The term "gross revenues" means all amounts earned or accrued by the grantee or any entity in any way affiliated with the grantee in whatever form and from all sources which are in connection with or attributable to the operation of the cable television system within the Township or the grantee's provision within the Township of cable services. The term "gross revenues" includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  All subscriber and customer revenues (including those for basic cable services; additional tiers; premium services; pay per view; program guides; deposits (net of any deposits returned to subscribers in the applicable time period); installation, disconnection or service call fees; fees for the provision, sale, rental or lease of converters, remote controls, additional outlets and other customer premises equipment), revenues from the use of leased access channels, advertising revenues (national, regional or local), leased access rentals, commissions, per inquiry fees and all other moneys or considerations received from home shopping services, entities providing programming used on the cable television system, etc. 
b.  Amounts earned or accrued during a period, regardless of whether: 
1.  Received or not; 
2.  The amounts are to be paid in cash, in trade or by means of some other benefit to the grantee or any entity in any way affiliated with the grantee; 
3.  The goods or services with which the revenue is associated are provided at cost or the revenue amount can be matched against an equivalent expenditure; 
4.  The amounts are characterized, separately identified or accounted as being for goods, services or fees to be paid to units of government or government agencies; or 
5.  The amounts are initially recorded or received by the grantee or an entity in any way affiliated with the grantee. 
c.  Advertising revenues, tower rental revenues, Home Shopping Network revenues or other revenues whose source cannot be specifically identified with a particular subscriber shall be allocated among the units of government served by the grantee from the cable system headend serving the Township in proportion to the number of subscribers in each. 
Gross revenues shall be computed at the level where first received from an entity not in any way affiliated with the grantee and shall not be the net of any operating expense; any accrual, including, without limitation, any accrual for commission; or any other expenditure. 
(2)  The term "gross revenues" does not include uncollected accounts during the period, computed on a fair basis consistently applied. 
School system means each of the intermediate public school districts within the boundaries of the Township. 
Subscriber means any person who contracts with the grantee for, or is in any manner provided with, cable services. 
Transfer and transferred mean any form of sale, conveyance, assignment, lease, sublease, merger, pledge, deed, grant, mortgage, transfer in trust, encumbrance or hypothecation, in whole or in part, whether voluntary or involuntary, other than to secure indebtedness, of any right, title or interest of a company in or to the franchise or the cable television system, excluding, however, the replacement of portions of the cable television system in the course of ordinary operation and maintenance. 
User means any person who is provided the use of the grantee's CATV system, channels, equipment or facilities. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 2, 8-8-1995) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-32. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the construction, maintenance and operation of cable television systems in the Township and provide for the granting of franchises for the construction, maintenance and operation of cable television systems. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 1, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-33. - Franchise required. 
No person shall install, construct, maintain or otherwise operate a CATV system in the Township without first having obtained a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-34. - Franchise issuance. 
(a)  The Township Board may grant one or more franchises for the construction and operation of a CATV system in the Township after consideration of the applicants for such franchise as may be before the Township Board. Any franchise shall be granted subject to this article and other ordinances of the Township and applicable state and federal laws. 
(b)  The Township specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a CATV system as it deems appropriate. Additional franchises shall not be deemed to modify, revoke, terminate or damage any rights previously granted to any other grantee. 
(c)  If a license application is filed proposing a license territory which overlaps, in whole or in part, an existing area, a copy of such application shall be served by the applicant by certified mail upon the current licensed grantee. Proof that a copy of the license application has been served upon the current grantee shall be provided to the Township. No application for overlapping license territory shall be processed until proof of service has been furnished in the Township, and no such application shall be granted without a public hearing on the request. It is not the intent of this subsection to either require or prohibit overbuilding. 
(d)  Applications for a new, renewed or amended franchise shall be made in such form as the Township may prescribe by resolution, consistent with the terms of this article and federal or state law, and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application review fee as the Township may prescribe by resolution. 
(e)  Any franchise or franchise renewal, and the rights, privileges, authority and responsibilities established, shall take effect and be in force from and after final acceptance, and shall not continue in force and effect for a period established by the franchise, not to exceed 15 years from the date of execution, only if, within 30 days after the date of the granting of a franchise, the grantee files with the Township Clerk its unconditional acceptance of the franchise, all required letters of credit, construction bonds and insurance certificates, and pays to the Township Clerk all reasonable costs incurred by the Township in preparing, considering the cable TV ordinance, and awarding the franchise or renewal, including legal, engineering, technical, publication, public hearing and other expenses. If the grantee fails to comply with this subsection, it shall acquire no rights, privileges or authority whatsoever. 
(f)  Grantees shall, within 60 days after the execution of a franchise, apply to the Federal Communications Commission, any state agency and any appropriate utility companies for all necessary pole line agreements, authorizations or registrations for the construction of a cable system, and for all permits then normally available. Failure of a grantee to timely apply for such pole line agreements, authorizations or registrations shall render the franchise null and void and forfeit the grantee's security. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 4, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 88A, § 1, 11-12-1997)  
Sec. 30-35. - Construction. 
(a)  Service availability and extensions. All existing residential households within the cable service territory will be provided with access to service from the system as set forth in the schedule of service areas as stated in each franchise, provided that access to service can be provided from streets or public property and all such permission as may be required from property owners is reasonably and timely available without cost to the grantee, and that service to multiple dwelling units need be provided only on terms acceptable to the grantee. In addition to construction set forth in the franchise, areas with occupancy densities of more than 25 homes per mile which are contiguous to the system will be provided with access to service to the extent service is economically feasible and technically possible. In areas with less than 25 homes per mile, service shall be offered in conformance with the grantee's service extension policies. 
(b)  Poles and other facilities. 
(1)  The grantee shall make use of existing poles and other facilities available to the grantee. The grantee may erect its own poles and install its own conduit, with approval of the Township, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. All poles and conduit installed within the cable service territory shall be made available for attachment or use by the grantee at just and reasonable rates. 
(2)  In case of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give the grantee reasonable notice, not less than 30 days, prior to such construction or development, and of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at the grantee's expense. The grantee shall also provide specifications, as needed, for trenching. Easements required to bring service to the development shall be provided by the developer or property owner. 
(c)  Permits; arrangement of lines, cables and other appurtenances. The grantee shall obtain any required permits from the Township before commencing construction involving the opening or disturbance of any street or public property. The Township shall cooperate with the grantee and use its best efforts in granting any permits required. The grantee shall arrange its lines, cables and other appurtenances on any street or public property in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable interference with the usual and customary use of such street or public property of any person. 
(d)  Repair of streets and public property. Any and all streets or public property which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation or maintenance of the system shall be promptly repaired by the grantee, at its expense, and to the condition, or substantially similar condition, prior to the disturbance or damage. 
(e)  Temporary movement of facilities. If it is necessary to temporarily move or remove any of the grantee's wires, cables, poles or other facilities placed pursuant to the franchise, in order to lawfully move a large object, vehicle, building or other structure over the streets of the Township, upon 30 days' prior notice by the Township to the grantee, the grantee shall move, at the expense of the person requesting the temporary removal, such of the grantee's facilities as may be required to facilitate such movement. The grantee may require such expense payments be made in advance of performing any work. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 5, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-36. - Cable Television Commission. 
The Township Board may by resolution establish a five-member Cable Television Commission, which shall be advisory in nature and shall make recommendations to the Township Board on matters pertaining to the enforcement of this article and on such other matters as may be requested by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 6, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-37. - Rates and service charges. 
The following rate provisions shall be subject to applicable federal or state laws, rules or regulations. 
(1)  The Township expressly reserves the right, upon reasonable notice and opportunity for comment by the grantee, to regulate whatever rates for the provision of cable services and service charges that the Township is not preempted from regulating by law. The Township may adopt by resolution procedural guidelines for regulating rates subject to the U.S. Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984, as amended. 
(2)  The grantee may not deny, delay, interrupt or terminate existing cable service or the use of existing channels, facilities and equipment to subscribers or users because the Township denies a request for a rate or service charge increase unless such delay, interruption or termination is approved by the Township. 
(3)  No rate or service charge of any kind that the Township lawfully regulates shall be charged or collected from subscribers or users by a grantee without the written approval of the Township. Violation of this subsection shall be a material breach of the franchise. 
(4)  The grantee may request rate or service charge increases at any time; however, initial rates and service charges for regulated services shall remain in force for a minimum of 36 months from and after the date of execution of an initial franchise unless otherwise released by the Township. 
(5)  The grantee shall file with the Township, on or before December 31 of each year, a full schedule of all subscriber and user rates and service charges. 
(6)  Subscribers and users shall be notified of all increases in rates and service charges at least 30 days before the effective date thereof. Notice shall be filed with the Township Clerk before the effective date of such increases. 
(7)  The grantee shall not discriminate on the basis of age, race, creed, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, height, weight or familial status, except as provided in subsection (13) of this section. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the reduction or waiving of charges in conjunction with communitywide promotional campaigns for the purpose of attracting subscribers or users, or the establishment of bulk rates for apartments, condominiums and commercial customers. 
(8)  The grantee shall provide subscribers with itemized bills. The grantee may not require subscribers to pay for any cable service more than one month in advance. The grantee shall require no other advance payment, other than those required for security deposits. This subsection shall not be construed to prohibit an advance payment for installation of services. 
(9)  If a subscriber fails to pay, as properly due and owing, a rate or service charge, a grantee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet, upon giving ten days' written notice. 
(10)  If a grantee collects a deposit or advance charge of any service or equipment requested by a subscriber or user, the grantee shall provide such service or equipment within five days of the collection of the deposit or charge or the grantee shall refund such deposit or charge within two days. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed: 
a.  To relieve the grantee of any responsibility to subscribers or users under any contractual agreements into which the grantee enters with such subscribers or users; 
b.  As limiting a grantee's liability for fines or penalties which may be imposed under this article or any franchise for violation or breach of any of the provisions of this article or any franchise; or 
c.  As limiting a grantee's liability for damages because of the grantee's failure to provide the service for which the deposit or charge was made. 
(11)  If a subscriber terminates any cable service prior to the end of a prepaid period, the immediate effective pro rata portion of any prepaid rate which represents payment for services which are no longer to be rendered shall be refunded promptly, but in no case more than 45 days after receipt of the request for termination. 
(12)  A grantee shall not charge a security deposit greater than the equipment's actual cost to the grantee. Any security deposit collected by a grantee shall be returned to the subscriber upon termination of service by the subscriber and return of such equipment undamaged, with allowance for reasonable wear and tear, and payment of any outstanding balance due and payable. 
(13)  On or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, basic service shall be subject to a 15 percent discount for Township residents who submit a written request and qualify for the property tax exemption available under MCL 211.7u or meet one of the following qualifications: 
a.  Is the head of household and is 65 years of age or older; or 
b.  Is the head of household and is handicapped. For the purposes of this subsection, a person is considered to be handicapped if the person is receiving supplemental security income payments from the Social Security Administration because of disability under Title 16 of the Social Security Act. 
The grantee shall have the right to verify a subscriber's eligibility for the exemption as a precondition to receiving the discounted basic cable service rate. For purposes of this subsection (13), basic service shall consist of at least 30 full service channels. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 7, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 88A, § 2, 11-12-1997)  
Sec. 30-38. - Franchise fee payments. 
(a)  A grantee shall pay to the Township for use of its streets, public places and other facilities, as well as, for the maintenance, improvement and supervision thereof, a monthly computed franchise fee in an amount of zero—five percent of the gross revenue received by the grantee. Payments due the Township under the terms of this subsection shall be paid on or before the 25th day of the month following each calendar quarter. The Township shall be furnished a certificate with each payment reflecting the gross revenue, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. The maximum allowable franchise fee shall be reviewed upon any Federal Communications Commission amendments relating to the regulation of, and allowable, rate revisions. 
(b)  Franchise fee payments shall be in addition to any other tax, charge, fee or payment due the Township by a grantee. 
(c)  At least annually, a grantee shall provide the Township with an unqualified opinion of an independent certified public accountant, certifying the accuracy of the monthly franchise fee payments paid within the preceding 12 months. Such certification shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards as established by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). 
(Ord. No. 88, § 8, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 88A, § 3, 11-12-1997)  
Sec. 30-39. - New developments. 
(a)  The grantee may improve, upgrade and expand its cable television system and cable television services in order to incorporate new developments in the state-of-the-art. The grantee shall not implement or provide services other than cable television services without the express prior consent and approval of the Township; provided, however, that such approval will not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  In addition to the matters required in a franchise, the grantee recognizes: 
(1)  And agrees that the Township shall in no way be bound to renew or extend the franchise at the end of any franchise term, except as set forth in the U.S. Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, or as otherwise provided in federal or state law, rules or regulations. 
(2)  A franchise is a bilateral contract between the grantee and the Township. To the extent that this article is an exercise of the police power of the Township, it may be changed or modified without the grantee's consent. Acceptance of a franchise shall not be deemed a waiver of any rights or defenses by a grantee. 
(3)  A grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal government or any administrative agency unless released by law. However, if any such state or federal law or regulation shall require or permit a grantee to perform any service, or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the Township, then, as soon as possible, a grantee shall notify the Township of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the Township or the franchise. 
(4)  If any provision of the franchise is held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule or regulation in effect, or is held by such court to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any law, rule or regulation, such provision may be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of the franchise, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions. If such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with the law, rule or regulation, such provision shall return to full force and effect and shall be binding on the parties. 
(5)  If the Township determines that a material provision of a franchise is affected by action of a court, or the state or federal government, the Township shall have the right to modify any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 9, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-40. - Liability. 
(a)  A grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township at all times during the life of a franchise and will pay all damages and penalties which the Township may be required to pay as a result of granting a franchise to the grantee. 
(b)  A grantee shall at all times during the life of a franchise carry and require its contractors and subcontractors to carry public liability, property damage, worker's disability and vehicle insurance in such forms and amounts as shall be determined by the Township. All required insurance coverage shall provide for 30 days' notice to the Township in the event of material alteration or cancellation of such coverage prior to the effective date of such material alteration or cancellation. Failure of the grantee to provide appropriate insurance certificates to the Township within 60 days after the execution of a franchise shall render the franchise null and void. 
(c)  A grantee shall pay and, through acceptance of a franchise, specifically agrees to pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the Township in defending itself with regard to all damages, penalties or other claims resulting from granting the franchise and the acts of the grantee, its employees, contractors and subcontractors. 
(d)  In all instances where the Township seeks to obtain indemnification, or any other payment or expense pursuant to this section, the Township shall notify the grantee within ten days, or within a sufficient time to legally respond if less than ten days, of the receipt of any claim for which the Township believes the grantee is obligated under this section. The Township shall fully cooperate with the grantee in the defense of such claim and shall make available its employees, representatives and records, as reasonably necessary, to the defense. The Township shall not settle or compromise the claim in any way without the written permission of the grantee. The Township may employ its own legal representatives, at its own expense. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 10, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-41. - General capability. 
(a)  In furtherance of the general policy that the services provided be innovative and modern, a grantee will actively pursue a continuous policy of incorporating new technical developments, as economically feasible, into the system to reflect the state-of-the-art. Further, should a grantee, its parent, subsidiary or a related company, provide a service to any other community which it services within the state, the same service shall be provided in the Township. The Township may waive such requirement upon an affirmative demonstration by the grantee that such service would be impractical or unfeasible in the Township due to population, density or other relevant factors. 
(b)  Each CATV system shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Distribute in color and in stereo all television signals which it receives; 
(2)  Make available to subscribers, upon request, an RF switch (an A-B switch) permitting conversion from cable to antenna reception; 
(3)  Have at least 36 activated television channels (550 megahertz) on a cable system capable of carrying 77 television channels or a combination of video, FM, audio or digital information; 
(4)  Use fiber optic technology, whenever financially and technically feasible, in the subscriber and institutional networks; and 
(5)  Provide adequate facilities, equipment and personnel for public, educational and governmental access channels, including equipment to program the government access channel from the Township Hall. 
(c)  A grantee may sell or use, for program origination, any unused access channels to provide local information, entertainment and advertising under rules approved by the Township. 
(d)  At the request of the Township Board, the cable system shall be interconnected with other cable systems within or contiguous to the Township so as to enable each cable system to carry and cablecast the public, educational and governmental access programming of the other cable systems. Interconnection of cable systems may be done by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite or other appropriate method. 
(e)  A grantee shall, without charge for installation, maintenance or service, make installations of its CATV system and provide basic service to the Township Hall, police stations, fire stations, other public buildings, each public and parochial school, and each public library in the Township. Installations, including five multiple outlets, shall be made at reasonable locations in each building as shall be required by the Township and schools. 
(f)  In the event of an emergency or other urgent community need, a grantee shall, upon the request of the Township, make available its facilities to the Township for the duration of the emergency. Each cable television system shall include an emergency alert capability which will permit the Township, in times of emergency, to override, by remote control, the audio and video of all channels simultaneously. Each cable television system shall include the capability to activate and control the emergency alert from the Township headquarters for emergency management services. 
(g)  Every cable television franchise issued pursuant to this article shall provide for sufficient channels, as may be determined by the Township, for public educational and Township access channels, capable of carrying digital, video and audio transmissions pursuant to the provisions of section 611 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 USC 531). 
(h)  This article shall not be construed to limit the authority of the grantee to make payments in support of the use of public, educational and governmental access channels. 
(i)  Use of facilities and equipment for public, educational and governmental access upon the cable television system shall be made available, without rental, or other similar charges whatsoever, for use during reasonable hours in connection with the production of public, educational and governmental access programming to be cablecast upon the cable television system. Personnel for training and assistance shall be available during normal business hours. First-time users shall not be required to make a deposit; however, the grantee may charge any user its cost of repairing any equipment damaged by abuse or negligence and may demand payment and a deposit of an equal amount prior to reissuing equipment to the same user. A grantee shall establish such reasonable rules and procedures, designed to promote the utilization of such public, educational and governmental access programming and subject to the approval of the Township, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(j)  The grantee shall make all reasonable efforts to coordinate the cablecasting of public, educational and/or governmental access programming upon the CATV system at the same time and upon the same channel designations as such programming is cablecast upon other cable television systems within the area. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 11, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 88A, § 4, 11-12-1997)  
Sec. 30-42. - Service to customers. 
(a)  A CATV system shall be designed for operation 24 hours per day and shall endure service interruptions only for good cause and for a reasonable time. Interruptions of service shall be for the shortest possible time. 
(b)  A grantee shall maintain an office either in the Township or within a municipality contiguous with the Township, which office shall be open to the general public during normal business hours. Office hours shall be no less than 8:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and extended hours one evening per week and Saturdays, if the demand and use so warrant. The Township Board may waive the requirement of this subsection, at its discretion, provided that it is sufficiently demonstrated by the grantee that all other requirements of this section can be met by the grantee, and, provided further, that all other requirements of this section continue to be met by the grantee. At any time during the term of the franchise, should the Township Board determine that requirements of this section are not being met by the grantee, the Township Board may revoke its waiver and reinstate the requirement of this subsection. 
(c)  The grantee shall have a publicly listed, local telephone number. A grantee shall employ an operator, maintain a telephone answering device or otherwise be available, 24 hours per day, each day of the year, to receive subscriber calls. A written log shall be maintained by the grantee, listing all service complaints, the disposition thereof and all service interruptions affecting five or more subscribers. Such log shall be available for inspection by the Township upon reasonable notice. 
(d)  A grantee shall maintain an installation and repair service capable of making installations within seven days and repairs within 48 hours after a request for such repair. 
(e)  Upon failure of a grantee to remedy a loss of service within 24 hours of receipt of notification of such loss, the grantee shall rebate 1/30 th of the regular monthly charge to each subscriber affected, for each 24 hours, or fraction thereof, until service is restored, unless restoration is prevented by cause beyond the control of the grantee upon notice to the grantee identifying the loss by channel, date and time. 
(f)  Any change made by a grantee in its programming (channels carried), except those of an emergency nature beyond the grantee's control, shall not become effective until the grantee has notified its subscribers at least 30 days in advance. Notification must be made in writing to each subscriber. 
(g)  The Township may regulate provisions for the handicapped, including closed captioned programming equipment, bills and notices in large type or Braille. Such regulation shall be made after notice to the grantee and a public hearing by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 12, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 88B, § 1, 11-18-1998)  
Sec. 30-43. - Parental lock-out. 
The grantee shall, at no charge and upon written request, if technically feasible, install a trap which allows a parental guidance or lock-out device which permits the subscriber, at the subscriber's option, to eliminate comprehensible video and audio reception of any channel. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 13, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-44. - Condition of street occupancy. 
(a)  The poles, wires and appurtenances of a grantee's system shall be located, erected and maintained upon existing utility facilities, wherever feasible. A grantee shall use underground equipment in all cases where other utilities use underground equipment and where Township ordinance requires underground installation. 
(b)  A grantee shall be allowed, subject to appropriate regulation, to set its own poles, anchors, guys and similar facilities within public rights-of-way within the Township when necessary and upon the securing of permits from the Township. 
(c)  All facilities erected by a grantee within the Township shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of public rights-of-way and public places, and with the rights and convenience of adjoining property owners. 
(d)  In case of disturbance or damage to any street, sidewalk, alley, public way or other public property, a grantee shall, at its own expense, promptly and in a manner acceptable to the Township, replace, repair and otherwise restore such disturbance or damage. 
(e)  If, at any time during the term of a franchise, the Township shall properly elect to undertake public building or construction, altering the grade, alignment or location of any street, sidewalk, alley or public way, a grantee shall, upon reasonable notice from the Township, promptly remove and relocate its facilities, at the grantee's expense and in a manner acceptable to the Township. 
(f)  A grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain industry standards and services for preventing failures and accidents which would cause damage, injury or nuisance to the public. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 14, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-45. - Technical standards. 
(a)  Each grantee shall construct, install and maintain its cable television system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements and technical standards equivalent to those established by the Federal Communications Commission. Each grantee shall, upon request, provide to the Township written reports of the grantee's annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to Federal Communications Commission standards and requirements. 
(b)  Each grantee shall at all times comply with the National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); applicable federal, state and local regulations; and codes and other ordinances of the Township. In the event of conflict among any such codes, regulations and ordinances, the most protective requirements shall apply. 
(c)  In any event, the CATV system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property within the Township or other areas where the grantee may have equipment located. 
(d)  All working facilities, conditions and procedures used or occurring during construction of the cable television system shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(e)  Construction, installation and maintenance of a cable television system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner, and in close coordination with public and private utilities serving the Township, following accepted industry construction procedures and practices, and working through existing committees and organizations. 
(f)  All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering consideration. 
(g)  Any antenna structure used in the cable television system shall comply with construction, marking and lighting of antenna structures required by the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
(h)  RF leakage shall be checked at reception locations for emergency radio services to prove no harmful interference signal combinations are possible. Radiation shall be measured adjacent to any proposed aeronautical navigation or communication radio sites to prove no harmful interference to air navigational reception. 
(i)  A grantee shall develop an adequate preventive maintenance policy for inspection by the Township. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 15, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-46. - Maps, records and reports. 
(a)  A grantee, upon request by the Township, shall provide the Township with current maps of its existing and proposed installations. 
(b)  A grantee, upon request by the Township, shall file with the Township Clerk a copy of its annual financial reports, including its annual income statement applicable to its operations within the Township, a balance sheet and a statement of its properties devoted to CATV operations. A grantee shall submit such other reasonable information as may be requested by the Township with respect to its property and revenues, expenses or operations within the Township. 
(c)  A grantee shall, upon the request of the Township, furnish a current listing of its users, officers, owners, partners, shareholders and bondholders, and those of any guarantor. 
(d)  An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the grantee of all subscriber and user service complaints regarding the cable system. A procedure shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation of the system to quickly and reasonably remedy complaints to the satisfaction of the Township. Complete records of the grantee's actions in response to all service complaints shall be kept for a period of one year. 
(e)  A current independent polling service opinion survey report, which identifies satisfaction and dissatisfaction among subscribers and users with cable services, facilities, equipment and personnel offered by the grantee, shall be submitted to the Township on or before March 31 every third year. 
(f)  The grantee shall submit to the Township such other information or reports in such form and at such times as the Township may reasonably request. 
(g)  Subject to the privacy rights of section 30-57 and federal and state laws and regulations, a grantee shall keep open books and records. The Township shall have the right to inspect at any time during normal business hours all books, records, maps, plans, income tax returns, financial statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and other similar materials of the grantee which relate to the operation of the CATV system. Access to such records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis that the records contain proprietary information. 
(h)  A grantee shall allow the Township to make inspections of any of the grantee's facilities and equipment at any time upon one day's notice or, in case of emergency, upon demand without notice. 
(i)  The refusal, failure or neglect of the grantee to file any of the records or reports required to be provided to the Township under this section shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and shall subject the grantee to all penalties and remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the Township under the franchise or this article. 
(j)  Any material false or misleading statement or representation knowingly made by the grantee in any report required under the franchise shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and shall subject the grantee to all penalties and remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the Township. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 16, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-47. - Waiver. 
A grantee shall agree not to oppose intervention by the Township in any suit or proceeding to which the grantee is a party. A grantee shall agree to abide by all provisions of this article and its franchise, and shall further agree that it will not at any future time set up against the Township any claim that the provisions of this article or its franchise are unreasonable, arbitrary or void. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 17, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-48. - Transfer of rights. 
(a)  Prior approval of the Township shall be required where ownership or control of more than 40 percent of the right of control of a grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already owns or controls 40 percent or more of the right of control, singularly or collectively, of the grantee. This subsection shall not be deemed to restrict the transfer by bequest or descent of stock of the grantee or the assignment of the franchise as security for loans. 
(b)  A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of persons of 40 percent of the grantee. 
(c)  No initial franchise, nor any part or portion thereof, granted under this article may be sold, transferred or assigned until the facilities, equipment and personnel which the grantee has agreed to provide and install pursuant to the franchise are 100 percent complete and operational for a minimum period of two years. 
(d)  The grantee shall not transfer, sell or assign any portion of its interest in the franchise or its CATV system without prior approval of the Township. The grantee shall have the responsibility to: 
(1)  Show, to the satisfaction of the Township, whether the proposed purchaser, transferee or assignee (referred to in this section as the "proposed transferee"), which, in the case of a corporation, shall include all officers, directors, employees and all persons having a legal or equitable interest in five percent or more of its voting stock, or any of the proposed transferee's principals has: 
a.  Ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving moral turpitude (including, but not limited to, fraud, misrepresentation to any federal or state agency, or violation of any securities law) or is presently under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts; 
b.  Ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against it, him or them by any court of competent jurisdiction; 
c.  Pending, any legal claim, lawsuit or administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a CATV system which is not of a routine nature and may have a material impact on the operation of the cable system. 
(2)  Establish, to the satisfaction of the Township, the financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current financial data for the proposed transferee and such other appropriate data as the Township may reasonably request. 
(3)  Establish, to the satisfaction of the Township, that the financial standing of the proposed transferee is such that the proposed transferee shall be able to maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the franchise. 
(e)  Any proposed transferee shall execute an agreement, in a form and containing conditions approved by the Township, that it will assume and be bound by all of the provisions, terms and conditions of the franchise and all applicable federal, state and local laws, and further, that the transferee shall be liable and obligated under such documents. 
(f)  Nothing in any approval by the Township of an authorization of any transfer or assignment of any ownership interest shall be construed to waive or release any rights of the Township in and to the streets, public ways and public places of the Township or as a release of any of the Township's police powers, or as an exercise of eminent domain. 
(g)  The occurrence of any event which constitutes either an act of bankruptcy by the grantee as defined in the Federal Bankruptcy Act, or placement of the grantee into receivership, or the issuance of any order to the grantee or any of its stockholders by a government agency or court of competent jurisdiction to divest any interest related to the CATV system, or the entry of any judgment against the grantee which, in the opinion of the Township, impairs the grantee's credits or the grantee's failure to meet its financial obligations on a continuing basis, shall be deemed an unauthorized transfer and assignment under the provisions of this subsection and shall be deemed a material breach and default of the franchise and subject the grantee to the revocation and termination provisions of the franchise. 
(h)  The occurrence of an unauthorized transfer or assignment may, at the option of the Township, terminate the franchise and accelerate all of the obligations and rights under the franchise, including, but not limited to, the right of the Township to purchase the cable system. The grantee shall notify the Township of any occurrence which constitutes an unauthorized transfer and of the entry of any judgment against the grantee within 24 hours of knowledge of such occurrence. From and after any of the occurrences set forth in this subsection, the grantee shall not make, execute or enter into any deed, deed of trust, mortgage, contract, conditional sales contract or any loan, lease, pledge, sale, pole agreement or any other agreement or hypothecation concerning any of the facilities or property, real or personal, of the CATV system without the written approval of the Township, which approval shall not to be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 18, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-49. - Construction, performance bond and letter of credit. 
(a)  A grantee shall, within 30 days of the execution of the franchise, file with the Township Clerk, an irrevocable bank letter of credit, corporate surety bond, or the equivalent, which is acceptable to the Township, with a company authorized to do business in the state, in an amount set by resolution of the Township Board from time-to-time, and the grantee shall obtain and maintain, at its cost and expense, an irrevocable letter of credit, corporate surety bond, or the equivalent, which is acceptable to the Township, with a company authorized to do business in the state, in an amount set by resolution of the Township Board from time-to-time. The purpose of the irrevocable bank letter of credit, corporate surety bond, or the equivalent is to guarantee the timely construction and full activation of the CATV system. The irrevocable letter of credit, corporate surety bond, or the equivalent shall be for the purpose of allowing recovery by the Township of any and all damages, losses or costs suffered by the Township resulting from the failure of the grantee to satisfactorily complete and fully activate the CATV system throughout the Township. 
(b)  At that point in time when the grantee can show to the satisfaction of Township that energized trunk cable passes 75 percent of homes within the area to be served in the Township, the grantee may have the irrevocable letter of credit, corporate surety bond, or the equivalent terminated after written approval from the Township. 
(c)  When the CATV system is completed to the satisfaction of Township, irrevocable letter of credit, corporate surety bond, or the equivalent may be reduced to $10,000.00 and maintained for the duration of the franchise to secure the grantee's obligations under the franchise. 
(d)  The irrevocable letter of credit, corporate surety bond, or the equivalent shall contain the following endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond or letter of credit may not be canceled by the surety or holder. Should the surety or holder decide that this shall not be renewed, this decision shall be evidenced to the Township in writing not less than 60 days prior to the expiration of the bond or letter of credit." 
(Ord. No. 88, § 19, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 88A, § 4, 11-12-1997)  
Sec. 30-50. - Review, renewal, termination and cancellation. 
(a)  In order to provide for technological, economic and regulatory changes in the state-of-the-art of cable communications, facilitate renewal procedures, promote the maximum degree of flexibility in the CATV system and achieve a continuing, advanced, modern system for the Township, the Township and the grantee shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Prior to the granting or renewal of a franchise, or at any other time as the Township deems necessary, a public hearing shall be held for the purpose of reviewing and commenting on, among other things, services, rate structure, free or discounted services, application of new technologies, system performance, services provided, programming, subscriber complaints, user complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise, underground processes and developments in the law. Either the Township or the grantee may select additional topics for discussion at any regular or special review hearing. 
(2)  Public notice of the public hearing shall be given by advertisement two times in a newspaper of general circulation at least one week prior to the public hearing and at the sole expense of the grantee. In addition, if the grantee's CATV system is complete, the grantee shall televise notice of the public hearing at least one week prior to the public hearing on at least one of the channels referred to in section 30-41(g). 
(b)  After holding a public hearing, the Township may take such actions as it deems appropriate, including the grant or denial of a franchise or franchise renewal, by written decision and based upon the following factors, if applicable: 
(1)  Technical developments and performance of the grantee's CATV system; 
(2)  Local programming (i.e., access channels and local origination); 
(3)  Additional services, if offered by the grantee; 
(4)  Cost of service; 
(5)  Performance of all obligations of the grantee as prescribed by franchise and ordinance, including, but not limited to, programming, facilities, equipment and personnel available to subscribers and users for all forms of community communications; 
(6)  Cable industry performance nationwide; 
(7)  Comments from residents and representatives of the community and community organizations. 
(c)  Absent a timely request from the grantee to renew a franchise, the franchise shall terminate at the end of its initial or renewal term. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 20, 8-8-1995; Ord. No. 88A, § 5, 11-12-1997)  
Sec. 30-51. - Purchase option. 
The Township may exercise an option to purchase the CATV system at the expiration, termination or revocation of the franchise. The purchase price to be paid by the Township shall be the fair market value of the system as a going concern. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 21, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-52. - Removal. 
(a)  Upon expiration, termination or revocation of a franchise, if the franchise is not renewed, and if neither the Township nor an assignee purchase the CATV system, the grantee may remove any underground cable from the streets which has been installed in such a manner that it can be removed without trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed. The grantee shall not remove any underground cable or conduit which requires trenching or other opening of the streets along the extension of cable to be removed, except as provided in this section. The grantee shall remove, at its sole cost and expense, any underground cable or conduit by trenching or opening of the streets along the extension thereof, or otherwise, which is ordered to be removed by the Township, based upon a determination, in the sole discretion of the Township, that removal is required in order to eliminate or prevent a hazardous condition or promote future utilization of the streets for public purposes. Any order by the Township to remove cable or conduit shall be mailed to the grantee not later than 30 calendar days following the date of expiration of the franchise. A grantee shall file written notice with the Township Clerk no later than 30 calendar days following the date of expiration, termination or revocation of the franchise of its intention to remove the cable intended to be removed and a schedule for removal by location. The schedule and timing of removal shall be subject to approval and regulation by the Township. Removal shall be completed no later than 12 months following the date of expiration of the franchise. Underground cable and conduit in the streets which is not removed shall be deemed abandoned and title thereto shall be vested in the Township. 
(b)  Upon expiration, termination or revocation of a franchise, if the franchise is not renewed, and if neither the Township nor an assignee purchase the system, the grantee, at its sole expense, shall, unless relieved of the obligation by the Township, remove from the streets all aboveground elements of the cable television system, including, but not limited to, amplifier boxes, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and cable attached to, or suspended from, poles, which are not purchased by the Township or its assignee. 
(c)  The grantee shall apply for and obtain such encroachment permits, licenses, authorizations or other approvals and pay such fees and deposit such securities as required by applicable ordinance of the Township; conduct and complete the work of removal in compliance with all such applicable ordinances; and restore the streets to the same condition they were in before the work of removal commenced. The work of removal shall be completed no later than one year. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 22, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-53. - Continuity of service. 
It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the CATV system, or the Township terminates, revokes or fails to renew the franchise within a reasonable time, or the Township elects to purchase the CATV system, the grantee shall do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service, regardless of the circumstances, for a period of time not to exceed six months, during which time the relative rights and obligations of the parties as reflected in this article shall continue in full force and effect. In the event of purchase by the Township or a change of the grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the Township in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers, subject to the conditions and qualifications of the immediately preceding sentence. If interruption of service is required by the grantee for modification, repairs, etc., the interruption shall be as brief as possible and at times when the viewing audience is at a minimum. Records of such interruptions shall be kept. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 23, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-54. - Guaranty of parent. 
The effectiveness of a franchise is expressly conditioned upon the execution and delivery to the Township by each parent of the grantee of an unconditional guaranty of the timely performance of all obligations of the grantee, and such guaranty shall be in a form acceptable to the Township. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 24, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-55. - Acceptance of agreement and incorporation of application and article by reference. 
Upon execution of a franchise by the grantee, the grantee agrees to be bound by all of its terms and conditions, and accepts, unconditionally, the franchise, and promises to comply with, and abide by, all of the terms, provisions and conditions thereof. The grantee also agrees to provide all services set forth in its application and proposal, and cable television services within the confines of the Township, and by its acceptance of the franchise, the grantee specifically grants and agrees that its application and proposal is thereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this agreement. In addition, the grantee specifically agrees that this article is incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise. In the event of a conflict between the application and proposal of the grantee, and this article and the franchise, the provision which provides the greatest benefit to the Township, in the opinion of the Township Board, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 25, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-56. - Right of privacy. 
A grantee shall not transmit any signal to or from any dwelling or any other building without the express authorization of the owner of such dwelling or other building. Where such owner has leased the dwelling or other building, or a portion thereof, such express authorization shall be obtained from the lessee and not from the owner. No personally identifiable subscriber information shall be made public without the specific written permission of the subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 26, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-57. - Rights of residents. 
(a)  An owner or operator of an apartment building, condominium, nursing home or any other rental facility may not interfere with, or charge a fee for, the installation of cable facilities for the use of a lessee of such property or premises, except that such owner or operator may require: 
(1)  Installation to conform to reasonable conditions necessary to protect the safety, appearance and functioning of the premises; 
(2)  The grantee, occupant or tenant to pay for the installation, operation or removal of such facilities; 
(3)  The grantee, occupant or tenant to agree to indemnify the owner or operator for any damages caused by installation, operation or removal of such facilities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the grantee to reimburse, or offer to reimburse, any person, or for any person to demand or receive reimbursement from a grantee, for the placement upon the premises of such person of the grantee's facilities necessary to connect such person's premises to the distribution lines of the grantee in order to provide cable service to such premises. 
(c)  A landlord may not discriminate in the amount of rent charged to tenants or occupants who receive cable services and to those who do not. 
(d)  A grantee may not take actions which would diminish or interfere with the privilege of any tenant or other occupant of any such building to use or avail himself of master or individual antenna equipment. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 27, 8-8-1995)  
Sec. 30-58. - Liability of grantee in libel action. 
The grantee or its agents shall not, in an action for slander or publishing a libel, be held liable in damages for, or on account of, any defamatory matter uttered, telecast, cablecast or published over the facilities of the grantee by any person whose utterance, telecast, cablecast or publication is not, under the provisions of any law of the United States or any regulation, ruling, etc., of the Federal Communications Commission, subject to censorship or control by the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 28, 8-8-1995)  
Secs. 30-59—30-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-2015, § 2, effective July 26, 2015, repealed Art. III, §§ 30-91—30-110, which pertained to use of rights-of-way by the telecommunications providers and derived from Ord. No. 109, §§ 2—21, adopted April 2, 2003. 
 
Secs. 30-91—30-110. - Reserved.  
Chapter 32 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Removal of junk vehicles and abandoned vehicles, § 10-21; law enforcement, ch. 20; offenses, ch. 22; off-street parking and loading, § 38-311 et seq. 
State Law reference— Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Code adopted. 
(a)  Title. This section and the provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code and state laws adopted by reference herein shall be collectively known and may be cited as the "Green Oak Charter Township Traffic Code Ordinance". 
(b)  Adoption of Uniform Traffic Code by reference. The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages, Michigan Administrative Code Rules 28.1001 through 28.2075, as amended, as promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act 306 of 1969, as amended (MCL 24.201, et seq.) and made effective October 30, 2002, is hereby adopted by reference. All references in said Uniform Traffic Code to a "governmental unit" shall mean Green Oak Charter Township. 
(c)  Adoption of provisions of Michigan Vehicle Code by references. The following provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended (MCL 257.1, et seq.) are hereby adopted by reference: 
(1)  Chapter I (Words and Phrases Defined): MCLs 257.1 to 257.82, as amended. 
(2)  Chapter II (Administrative, Registration): MCLs 257.225, 257.228, 257.243, 257.244, 257.255, and 257.256, as amended. 
(3)  Chapter III (Operator's and Chauffeur's License): MCLs 257.310e, 257.311, 257.312a, 257.324, 257.325, 257.326, and 257.328, as amended. 
(4)  Chapter IV (Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws): MCLs 257.601 to 257.601b, 257.602 to 257.606, 257.611 to 257.616, 257.617a to 257.622, 257.624a to 257.624b, 257.625 (except felony provisions), 257.625a, 257.625m, 257.626 to 257.626b, 257.627 to 257.627b, 257.629b, 257.631 to 257.632, 257.634 to 257.645, 257.647 to 257.655, 257.656 to 257.662, 257.667 to 257.675d, 257.676 to 257.682b, 257.683 to 257.710e, 257.716 to 257.724, as amended. 
(5)  Chapter VIII (License Offenses): MCLs 257.904, 257.904a, 257.904e, 257.905, as amended. 
(d)  Adoption of other state laws by reference. The following provisions of state law are hereby adopted by reference. 
(1)  Section 3102 of the Michigan Insurance Code of 1956, Public Act 218 of 1956, as amended, pertaining to required insurance (MCL 500.3102). 
(2)  Subchapter 6 of Part 811 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended, pertaining to off-road vehicles (MCLs 324.81101 to 324.81147). 
(3)  Part 821 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended, pertaining to snowmobiles (MCLs 324.82101 to 324.82158). 
(4)  Section 703 of the Michigan Liquor Control Act, Public Act 58 of 1998, as amended, pertaining to minors and alcoholic liquor (MCL 436.1703). 
(5)  The Motor Carrier Safety Act, Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended (MCL 480.11, et seq.). 
(e)  Penalties. The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code and the provisions of the state laws hereinabove adopted by the reference are hereby adopted as the penalties for violations of the corresponding provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 97, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-2000; Ord. No. 05-2009, eff. 11-27-2009)  
Secs. 32-2—32-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Size, weight and load, MCL 257.716 et seq. 
 
Sec. 32-31. - Provisions adopted. 
The following sections of the motor carrier safety act of 1963, Public Act No. 181 of 1963 (MCL 480.11 et seq.), are hereby adopted by this article and shall be enforced by the Township: 
Section 13. MCL 480.11a. Definitions. 
Sec. 1a. 
(1)  This state hereby adopts the following provisions of title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, on file with the office of the secretary of state, except where modified by this act, to provide for the safe transportation of persons and property with the intent of following the policies and procedures of the United States Department of Transportation's Federal Highway Administration as they relate to title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the North American standard uniform out of service criteria and inspection procedures: 
(a)  Hazardous materials regulations, being 49 CFR 100 through 180. 
(b)  Motor carrier safety regulations, being 49 CFR 382, 387, 390 through 393, 395 through 397, and 399, including appendices 1, D, E and G, except for the following: 
(i)  Where the term "United States department of transportation," "federal highway administration," "federal highway administrator," "director," "bureau of motor carrier safety," "research and special projects administration" or "associate administrator for hazardous materials safety" appears, it refers to the department of state police. 
(ii)  Where "interstate" appears, it shall mean intrastate or interstate, or both, as applicable, except as otherwise specifically provided in this act. 
(iii)  Where "special agent of the federal highway administration," "administration personnel," or "hazardous materials enforcement specialist" appears, it either means a peace officer or an enforcement member or a vehicle inspector of the motor carrier division of the department of state police. 
(iv)  Where MCS 63 appears, it means MC 9 and MC 9b. 
(v)  Where MCS 64 appears, it means MC 5. 
(vi)  Exempt intracity zones and the regulations applicable to exempt intracity zones do not apply to this act. 
(2)  When a commercial motor vehicle is operated entirely within this state and not otherwise involved with the movement of interstate property or passengers in commerce, the definitions in this subsection apply. The definitions contained in those parts of 49 CFR adopted in subsection (1)(b) apply to this act, except for the following definitions as added or modified: 
(a)  "Appeal board" means the Motor Carrier Safety Appeal Board created in section 1b. 
(b)  "Bus" means any motor vehicle designed for carrying 16 or more passengers, including the driver. "Bus" does not include a school bus, a bus defined and certificated under the mass transportation system authorities act, Public Act No. 432 of 1982 (MCL 474.101 et seq.), or a bus operated by a public transit agency operating under any of the following: 
(i)  A county, city, township or village as provided by law, or other authority incorporated under Public Act No. 55 of 1963 (MCL 124.351 et seq.). Each authority and governmental agency incorporated under Public Act No. 55 of 1963 has the exclusive jurisdiction to determine its own contemplated routes, hours of service, estimated transit vehicle miles, costs of public transportation services and projected capital improvements or projects within its service area. 
(ii)  An authority incorporated under the metropolitan transportation authorities act of 1967, Public Act No. 204 of 1967 (MCL 124.401 et seq.), or that operates a transportation service pursuant to an interlocal agreement under the urban cooperation act of 1967, Public Act No. 7 of 1967 (MCL 124.501 et seq.). 
(iii)  A contract entered into pursuant to Public Act No. 8 of 1967 (MCL 124.531—124.536) or Public Act No. 35 of 1951 (MCL 124.1 et seq.). 
(iv)  An authority incorporated under the public transportation authority act, Public Act No. 196 of 1986 (MCL 124.451 et seq.), or a nonprofit corporation organized under the nonprofit corporation act, Public Act No. 162 of 1982 (MCL 450.2101 et seq.). 
(v)  An authority financing public improvements to transportation systems under the revenue bond act of 1933, Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.). 
(c)  "Commercial motor vehicle" means any self-propelled or towed vehicle designed or used on public highways to transport passengers or property, except for a bus exempted in subsection (b), if the vehicle is one or more of the following: 
(i)  Has either a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross weight or gross combination weight rating or an actual gross combination weight of 10,001 or more pounds. 
(ii)  Is designed for carrying 16 or more passengers, including the driver. 
(iii)  Is used in the transportation of hazardous materials in a quantity that requires the vehicle to be marked or placarded pursuant to 49 CFR 100 to 180. 
(d)  "Gross combination weight" or "GCW" means the combined weight of a combination of vehicles and any load on those vehicles. 
(e)  "Gross weight," "gross vehicle weight" or "GVW" means the combined weight of a motor vehicle and any load on that vehicle. 
(f)  "Hazardous material vehicle inspection or repair facility" is a commercial enterprise that performs inspections, certification, testing or repairs to commercial motor vehicles transporting hazardous materials as required by 49 CFR 100 to 180 and includes motor carriers that perform the inspections, certification, testing or repairs to vehicles owned or leased by the motor carrier. 
(g)  "Motor carrier" means a carrier of passengers or property in a commercial motor vehicle and includes a person who owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle or that assigns employees to operate the vehicle. "Motor carrier" includes a motor carrier's agents, officers and representatives, as well as employees responsible for hiring, supervising, training, assigning or dispatching of drivers and employees concerned with the installation, inspection and maintenance of motor vehicle equipment and accessories. 
Section 14. MCL 480.17. Violations; penalties; motor vehicles, stopping and inspecting, notice to appear, receipt of inspection. 
Sec. 7. 
(1)  Except as provided in sections 7b, 7c, and 7d, any driver or operator who violates this act or a rule promulgated under this act, or any owner or user of any bus, truck, truck tractor or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles, or any officer or agent of any individual, partnership, corporation or association, or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court which is the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate or drive any bus, truck, truck tractor or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles in violation of this act or a rule promulgated under this act, is guilty of a municipal civil infraction. 
(2)  A peace officer or an officer of the Motor Carrier Division of the Department of State Police, upon reasonable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is being operated in violation of this act or a rule promulgated pursuant to this act, may stop the motor vehicle and inspect the motor vehicle. If a violation is found, the officer may issue a notice to appear for that violation. If a motor vehicle is inspected by breaking the load seal, then the peace officer shall give to the driver a signed receipt of inspection and the peace officer shall be responsible for reapplying a Michigan Department of Transportation seal. 
Section 15. MCL 480.17b. Serious safety defect; requiring or permitting driver or operator to operate with defect, fine, definition. 
Sec. 7b. 
(1)  A driver or operator or an owner or user of any bus, truck, truck tractor or trailer, or certain other motor vehicles, or any officer or agent of an individual, partnership, corporation or association, or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court that is the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate a vehicle with a serious safety defect may be guilty of a municipal civil infraction for each violation. 
(2)  As used in this section, "serious safety defect" means a violation of this act or a rule promulgated pursuant to this act relative to brakes, tires, steering, coupling devices, headlights, taillights, brake lights and turn signals, that results in the vehicle being placed out of service. 
Section 16. MCL 480.18. Venue. 
Sec. 8. When this act or a rule promulgated under this act has been violated, the offense may be prosecuted in any county, city or jurisdiction in or through which the motor vehicle, driver or operator implicated was situated or passed when the offense was committed. 
(Ord. No. 92, pt. III, 2-15-1997)  
Chapter 33 - RESERVED  
Chapter 34 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 10; floods, ch. 14; historical preservation, ch. 16; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; drainage and utility easement design standards for subdivision planning, § 18-134; telecommunications, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Local government authority to provide and regulate water and sewer service, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; collection of water or sewerage charges, MCL 123.161 et seq.; sewage disposal, water supply and solid waste management system, MCL 124.281 et seq.; rates charged for use of public improvement in order to pay bonds, MCL 141.121; township water supply and sewage disposal services and facilities, MCL 41.331 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Cross connection control program. 
(a)  Adopted. In accordance with the requirements set forth by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, the Township has officially adopted the state cross connection control rules to protect the Township public water supply system. The term "cross connection" means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which a backflow could occur. The term "backflow" means water of questionable quality, waste, or other contaminants entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow. The cross connection control program will take effect immediately upon approval of the state department of environmental quality. 
(b)  Local ordinance. The Township to carry out and enforce a local cross connection control program will be in accordance with Green Oak Township Water Use and Rate Ordinance section 14, a copy of which is included in the program. 
(c)  Local inspection. The Township and/or its designated agent shall be responsible for making the initial cross connection inspections and reinspections to check for the presence of cross connections with the municipal water supply system. Individuals responsible for carrying out the cross connection inspections and reinspections shall have obtained necessary training through any available manuals on cross connection prevention, including the cross connection rules manual as published by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and attendance of any cross connection training sessions sponsored by the state department of environmental quality or other recognized agencies. 
(d)  Schedule for inspection. The schedule for inspection shall be in accordance with the following general outline: 
(1)  An initial cross connection inspection shall be performed on all water system customers when the water meter is installed by the Township or the Township's designated agent. 
(2)  Known or suspected secondary water supply cross connections shall be inspected first (surface water, class III wells, recirculated water, etc.). 
(3)  Known or suspected submerged inlet cross connections will be inspected next. 
In general, emphasis will be placed on making inspections initially of all industrial and commercial establishments or where cross connections are known or suspected to exist. A general review will follow in a logical sequence as time permits. Emphasis will be placed on inspecting all industrial and commercial establishments within a period of six months following approval of this program. 
(e)  Schedule for reinspection. In order to assure against the hazards of cross connections, it will be necessary to periodically and systematically reinspect for the presence of cross connections. The schedule for reinspection shall be in accordance with the schedule as noted in the cross connection rules manual. Whenever it is suspected or known that modifications have taken place with piping systems serving a particular water customer, reinspections of the premises will be made. 
(f)  Protective devices. The methods to protect against hazards of cross connections as outlined in the cross connection rules manual will be incorporated into the Township cross connection control program. Whenever any deviation from the recommended methods of protection is contemplated, approval from the state department of environmental quality shall first be obtained. 
(g)  Compliance time. The time allowed for correction or elimination of any cross connection found shall be as follows: 
(1)  Cross connections which pose an eminent and extreme hazard shall be disconnected immediately and so maintained until necessary protective devices or modifications are made. 
(2)  Cross connections which do not pose an extreme hazard to the water supply system, but nevertheless constitute a cross connection should be corrected within a reasonable period of time. The length of time allowed for correction should be reasonable and may vary depending on the type of device necessary for protection. The water utility shall indicate to each customer where a cross connection is found to exist, and the time period allowed for compliance (30 to 60 days is usually sufficient time for small devices). 
(h)  Testing. All testable devices shall be tested upon installation and at an interval to be determined by the water utility and in accordance with the cross connection rules manual. Records of test results shall be maintained by the Livingston Community Water Authority. Only individuals approved by the water utility shall be qualified to perform such testing. That individual shall certify the results of his testing. 
(i)  Recordkeeping. The Township shall maintain sufficient and accurate records of its local cross connection control program so as to report annually on the status of the local program to the state department of environmental quality on a form provided by the department. 
(Ord. of 1-19-2005, §§ 1—9)  
Secs. 34-2—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section unless the context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise: 
AWWA means the American Water Works Association. 
Benefit fee means a per day residential equivalent unit (REU) per use based on the Township adopted REU factor table. 
Commercial user means any user of the system other than a residential user. 
Commodity rate means a unit rate expressed in dollars per unit, payable by a user and applied to the actual water consumption as determined in this article. 
Commodity surcharge rate means a variable unit rate payable by a user for any actual water consumed in excess of the allowance for which a benefit fee has been paid. The commodity surcharge rate will be established by the Township Board. 
Consumer means the person or legal entity served by or using water supplied by the Township. 
Consumer's installation means all pipes, valves, stops, plumbing and contrivances of every kind and nature used in connection with, or forming a part of, the consumer's installation for using water for any purpose, connected directly or indirectly with the corporation stop at the main. 
Corporation stop means a valve which is inserted into the main for the connection of the water supply service pipes in sizes up to and including two inches in diameter. 
Cross connection means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminates could possibly flow back into the water distribution system because of a reversal of flow. 
Curb box means a box of metal housing which encloses, protects and provides access to the curbstop. 
Curbstop means a valve for insertion in the service pipes, in sizes of three-quarter inch to two inches in diameter, inclusive, at or near the curbline. 
Department means the division of water distribution of the Township. 
Director means the Director of Public Works or his authorized representative. The director is the person designated by the Township to supervise the operation of the Township water system. 
Inspector means the Township Plumbing Inspector or his designee. 
LCWA means the Livingston Community Water Authority. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a main building. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 
Meter box means any approved box or vault for the housing of water meter. 
Permittee means a consumer or his agent receiving a permit from the Township allowing a connection to be made to the water system. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation or public agency or instrumentality or any other entity receiving water service. 
Premises means each lot or parcel of land or building having any connection to the water system. 
Revenues means as defined in section 3, Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
Service cock means a valve for installation in water service pipes, located at or near the main. 
Service control valve box means a box or metal housing which encloses, protects and provides access to the service control valve. 
Stop and waste valve means a valve installed at the termination of the water supply service pipe of three-quarter inch and one inch sizes, and at the beginning of the consumer's installation. 
System means the water system. 
Tap means the drilling and threading of an opening in a main for insertion of a corporation stop. 
Township means the Township of Green Oak, Michigan, a general law Township, and any agent thereof. 
Township Board means the governing body of the Township of Green Oak. 
Water connection means that part of the water distribution system connecting the water main to a point terminating at a meter pit or vault. 
Water distribution system means the entire system for distribution of potable water in the Township. The term "water distribution system" includes all lines connecting it to the water system operated by the Livingston Community Water Authority. 
Water main means the part of the water distribution system located within easement lines or streets, and designed to supply more than one water connection. 
Water service pipe means the pipe connecting the water main with the premises served. This includes the connection to the water main or the corporation cock, the shutoff valve, and the valve on the inlet side of the meter. 
Water system means the complete facilities of the Township's water supply system including all wells, well houses, pumps, water storage facilities and transmission lines, including all appurtenances thereto and including all extension and improvements thereto, which may hereafter be acquired. It shall also consist of all plants, works, instrumentalities, lines and properties now or hereafter existing, used or useful in obtaining of a water supply, its treatment, distribution, and all other necessary functions, whether such installation is owned outright or used under lease or otherwise, by the consumer. The system may be comprised of separate facilities located in separate water supply districts. The system also includes all lines connecting it to the water system operated by the Livingston Community Water Authority. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 2-16-2005) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-32. - Provisions deemed incorporated in all contracts. 
(a)  Contract for service. All provisions and sections of this article about the Township water system and sale and use of water and/or amendments or additions which may be subsequently adopted, shall be considered a part of the contract with every person who is supplied with water through the water system of the Township, and every person by taking water shall be considered to express his consent to be bound thereby, and whenever any provision or section of this article is violated, water may be cut off from the building or place of violation at the discretion of the Township Board and shall not be turned on again except on correction of the violation and payment of the expenses of shutting off and turning on. 
(b)  Hold harmless clause. The consumer shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the Township against all claims, demands, costs or expenses for loss, damage or injury to persons or property in any manner, directly or indirectly, arising out of the transmission and use of water by the consumer from water service pipes installed by the consumer on the consumer's premises. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 2, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-33. - Administration/management. 
(a)  Establishment of a public utility. It is hereby determined to be desirable and necessary for the public health, safety and welfare of the Township that the Township's water system be operated on a public utility rate basis. 
(b)  Supervision and control. The operation and management of the system, shall be under the immediate supervision and control of the Township Board or its designee. 
(c)  Rights. The Township has the exclusive right to establish, maintain and collect rates and fees for water supply service from the water system. The Township Board may make such rules, orders or regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the system. The Township may employ or contract such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry out the efficient management and operation of the system. 
(d)  Operating year. The system operation shall be based on an operating fiscal year commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31. 
(e)  Compliance with state and federal standards and regulations. Standards and regulations established in this article or pursuant hereto are deemed to be the minimum standards consistent with the preservation of public health, safety and welfare and are necessary to fulfill the obligations of the Township concerning state and federal law and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(f)  Additional regulations. The Township Board may by resolution make additional rules and regulations concerning the water system, connections thereto, meter installation and maintenance, hydrants and water mains and appurtenances thereto, which are not inconsistent herewith. 
(g)  Restricting water use. The Township Board may regulate, limit or prohibit the use by a consumer of Township supplied water if it is necessary for the health, safety, and welfare of the public, including restricting the amount of water that would be available to a consumer because of water shortage emergencies. Such regulations may limit use of water by the consumer to the extent deemed necessary to ensure an adequate water supply for essential needs and for firefighting. Use of water for the irrigation of lawns and for other outside irrigations may be limited by restrictions as follows: 
(1)  Irrigation of lawns or other outside irrigation from the public water supply system is allowed on evennumbered calendar days at all properties which have an evennumbered street address and is prohibited on oddnumbered calendar days. 
(2)  Lawn sprinkling or other outside irrigation from the public water supply system is allowed on oddnumbered calendar days at all properties which have an oddnumbered street address and is prohibited on evennumbered calendar days. 
(3)  All lawn sprinkling and other outside irrigation from the Township public water supply system shall be prohibited upon published notice if the Township Board shall determine that a public water shortage is likely to occur, or that the amount of water pumped from the Township public water supply system has reached such volume that, unless restricted, the public health and safety and welfare is likely to be endangered. 
The Township Board may, during such times of water shortage emergency, direct that other measures be taken or restrictions be observed by users of the public water supply system when deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare and, when published, such measures and restrictions shall be followed by users of the public water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 3, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-34. - Township liability exemption. 
(a)  Interruptions. The Township shall not be responsible for interruptions of service because of natural calamities, equipment failures, or actions of the system users. It shall be the responsibility of the consumer that all connected equipment remains in good working order. No claim or cause of action may be asserted against the Township by reason of the breaking away of any pipe, service cock, or for any other interruption of the water supply. 
(b)  Expenses. The Township shall not be liable for any expenses incurred by a permittee in locating mains, services, curbstops and/or water records. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 4, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-35. - Access. 
(a)  Inspection. The director and other duly authorized representatives of the Township bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties served by the water system at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. Any person who requests water supply and/or receives water from the water system under this article shall be deemed to have consented to inspections pursuant to this section, including entrance upon such person's property at reasonable times to make inspections. 
(b)  Meter reader access. Any duly authorized agent or employee of the Township shall have access to the consumer's premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of reading meters, inspections, doing repairs or installing or removing any or all Township-owned apparatus used for providing service to the consumers. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 5, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-36. - Fluoridation of public drinking water. 
In accordance with Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.12721), the Township Board hereby rejects the addition of fluoride to its drinking water. 
(Ord. No. 43, § 1, 6-12-1973; Ord. No. 111, § 1, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-37. - Use. 
(a)  Consumer use of the water system. Any person owning property within a water supply district established by the Township and conforming to the standards, rules and regulations established in or under terms of this article shall be permitted to receive water from the water system provided necessary water supply lines are in existence and capacity to service is available and abutting the consumer's property. 
(1)  Required connection. Each new residential, commercial or industrial premises, other than sheds, residential garages and/or additions to existing structures, constructed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and abutting the system or contained within a Township water district within the Township, shall be required to immediately connect to the system. 
(2)  Turning on water service. No person, other than an authorized employee or agent of the Township, shall turn on or turn off any water service at the curbstop. Water service shall not be turned on unless all charges, fees, etc., have been paid. 
(3)  Turning off service. The Township reserves the right to terminate service to a consumer, after due notice has been given where payment for water supply has not been timely received, and/or for violation of this article or any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The Township may shut off the water in any main to make repairs or extensions, or for any other necessary purpose at any time without notice to consumers. The consumer shall maintain all service pipes free from leaks at all times. Whenever a leak appears in a consumer's installation, which allows water to escape without registering upon the meter, the Township shall give the consumer written notice thereof and the consumer shall immediately proceed to repair such service pipe. If such repairs have not been completed within 48 hours after notice has been given, the Township may stop the service by shutting off the water at the curbstop or by excavating and closing the corporation stop. The costs incurred by the Township of excavating and shutting off such service shall be paid by the consumer or by the owner of the property before service is restored. If, in the determination of the Township, any leak on the consumer's installation is of such nature that it endangers public safety or constitutes a nuisance or a source of waste, the Township may shut off or stop such service until such leak is repaired. 
(4)  Change of consumer. When the premises are to be vacated or there is a change of owner, occupant or agent, prompt written notice shall be given to the treasurer's office. The consumer may discontinue service by giving not less than 24 hours' written notice to the treasurers office during its regular office hours. If the premises is connected to the system operated by LCWA, such information shall be passed onto the billing department of the LCWA. 
(5)  Outside service connections. Water main extensions and domestic water connections to premises outside of water districts are prohibited, except where approved by the Township Board. 
(6)  Water extensions. The total expense of extending water mains shall be borne by the benefited property. Owners in accordance with provisions of a contract or by special assessments levied by the Township in accordance with state law. 
(b)  Connection permits required; applications; deposits; contents. 
(1)  Application. Any person desiring to connect to the water system shall file a written application with the Township Clerk, pay the water connection fee established by resolution by the Township Board and all other charges, fees and costs as provided by this article, which include but are not limited to, commodities surcharges and benefit charges established by the Township Board. Further, the applicant shall pay any delinquent special assessment installments which are due and owing at the time of the application. 
(2)  Permit required. No person in the Township shall connect to the water system unless the proposed connection has been approved by the Township or its designated representative. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the Township and shall contain the street name, house number, lot number, the name of the plumber or contractor, the names of the applicant and the owner, the size of the service pipe required by the consumer, and any other pertinent information which may be required by the Township. An application must be made and approval obtained from the Township at least 24 hours before the time a tap is to be made. 
(3)  Builders. Connection permits will be issued to builders if the prospective lessee or owner consents in writing to the obtaining of such permit by the builder. 
(4)  Installation. Water connections shall be installed in accordance with the applicable building codes and regulations of this article and upon the payment of the required charges and fees. 
(5)  Meters. All water furnished to structures through the Livingston Community Water Authority's public water supply shall be measured by a meter installed, owned and controlled by the said LCWA. The water furnished to structures within the Saxony, Wilmore and Meadows subdivisions shall be measured by a master meter installed owned and controlled by the LCWA. The owner of the structure outside the Saxony, Wilmore and Meadows subdivisions may, upon application and paying such costs and fees as determined by the LCWA, have an additional meter installed for the separate metering of water used for lawn sprinkling or other use where the water used does not pass through the sanitary sewage disposal system. Duplex residences shall have separate meters and services installed for each dwelling unit upon payment of such costs and fees as determined from time-to-time by the LCWA. 
(6)  Expense of installation. The expense of water pipe and meter installation shall be paid by the applicant. 
(c)  Use of one connection; limitation. 
(1)  Unless written approval is granted by the Township, separate premises shall have separate curbstops, service pipe installation, and shall be separately metered. 
(2)  Whenever water is to be supplied to more than one consumer located in a single building and supplied through one service, the property owner shall be responsible for the payment of water bills. 
(3)  In no event shall a consumer extend service pipes or plumbing across any public way, or to an adjacent property in order to furnish service thereto, even though such adjacent property may be owned by the same consumer. 
(d)  Existing private wells. 
(1)  Construction of private wells in established water service districts is prohibited after the public water system is placed into service and water is provided to users within the established water service districts. The Township Board may designate areas within the service district unavailable for water service therefore allowing for the installation of new or replacement wells. 
(2)  Private water wells that are located within a water supply district and are in operation prior in time to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be abandoned by the property owner in accordance with procedures established by the County Health Department prior to connection to the Township water system. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the abandonment of water wells in operation within a water supply district prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, provided that, after the property is connected to the system, the private water well previously serving the property shall only be used for outside irrigation purposes. If the prior existing private water well is not used for outside irrigation, the private water well shall be abandoned by the property owner in accordance with procedures established by the County Health Department and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality within 30 days of connection to the system. Existing private wells may be repaired and maintained for irrigation wells in the established water service districts after the system is placed into service. New wells may be installed for the sole purpose of outside irrigation provided there is no connection to the municipal water supply. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 6, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-38. - System prohibitions. 
(a)  Damaging water system prohibited. No person in the Township shall willfully, negligently or maliciously break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or alter, any structure, property, appurtenance, equipment or any other item which is part of the water system. 
(b)  Water meter, etc.; removal prohibited. No person in the Township shall remove any water meter, water pipe, other water equipment or tools. 
(c)  Prevention from measuring water prohibited. No person in the Township shall prevent or circumvent a water meter from measuring water supplied by the water system. 
(d)  Obtaining water fraudulently prohibited. 
(1)  Tampering with water system equipment or stealing water service shall be grounds for discontinuance of water service. Theft of water shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Opening valves at the curb or meter that have been turned off by the director or his designee; 
b.  Breaking, picking or damaging cutoff locks; 
c.  Bypassing meters in any way; 
d.  Taking of unmetered water from hydrants by anyone other than an authorized official of the Township or its designee, a recognized fire department; fire insurance company or utility for any purpose other than firefighting, testing or flushing of hydrants; 
e.  Use of sprinkler system water service for any purpose other than fire protection; 
f.  Removing, disabling or adjusting meter registers; 
g.  Connecting to or intentionally damaging water lines, valves or other appurtenances for the purpose of stealing or damaging water system equipment; 
h.  Moving the meter or extending service without permission of the director or his designee; 
i.  Any other intentional act of defacement, destruction or vandalism to water system property or act that affects water system property; 
j.  Any intentional blockage or obstruction of water system equipment. 
(2)  A notice of violation may be mailed or otherwise delivered, and the consumer shall be ordered to immediately cease any unlawful practice, at the discretion of the director or his designee if: 
a.  Evidence suggests the possibility of theft of water at the consumer's premises; 
b.  The violation does not constitute an immediate threat of safety or equipment integrity to the water system. 
(3)  No notice of violation will be mailed or delivered, consumer water service is subject to immediate shut off, and the consumer will be subject to a violation payment as provided in section 34-39 as well as service call charges, labor and replacement parts as detailed by the director or his designee, in any of the following situations: 
a.  In the opinion of the director or his designee, theft of water is definitely evident on the consumer's premises; 
b.  When in the opinion of the director or his designee a situation exists that may endanger public health. 
(4)  If the director or his designee determines theft of water has occurred, the Township reserves the right to adjust the consumer's current water bill and the consumer's water bills for the past 12 months of usage. If the approximate amount of water that was stolen cannot be reasonably determined, the consumer's usage will be set at two to four times the consumer's metered usage for metered consumers or estimated usage for flat rate consumers, as set on a case-by-case basis by the director or his designee according to the facts of each case. 
(5)  Water service will not be restored until all payments for the following are received by the Township: 
a.  Adjusted payment for water service; 
b.  Violation payment; 
c.  All service call charges; 
d.  Labor; 
e.  Replacement parts; 
f.  Turn-on charge. 
(6)  Water service will be reinstated only during regular working hours, Monday though Friday, except in the case of an emergency. 
(7)  Discontinuance of water service by the Township shall not release the consumer from liability for payment for water service already received or from liability from payments that thereafter become due under the Township's water rates and fees. 
(8)  The Township shall not be liable for any loss or damage resulting from the discontinuance of water service. 
(9)  The consumer whose name appears on the application for water service is the consumer responsible for payment of all charges. The consumer is also responsible for any rules or policy violations that occur regarding the water service to that property. Personal participation by the consumer in any such violation shall not be necessary to impose personal responsibility on the consumer. 
(10)  In the event any consumer fails to pay any water rate, fee or violation payment, the consumer shall pay all costs of collection, including court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in collecting such sums. 
(11)  The Township shall have the right to refuse to provide water service to an applicant or to any member of an applicant's household who is living at the same address whenever such person is delinquent on any payment to the Township or had his water service discontinued because of a violation of this article. 
(e)  Recordkeeping duration. All records regarding theft of water shall be kept for a minimum of three years. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 7, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-39. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Penalties. Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the violation and provided a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. Violation of any provision of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Violation. A violation of this article is also declared to be a public nuisance and the Township may enforce same by injunction or other remedy, including the right to correct the violation and recover the cost of obtaining the necessary correction from the owner or person in charge of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 8, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-40. - Establishment of rates and fees. 
(a)  Purpose of rates and fees. 
(1)  Connection and benefit fees. Fees for the installation and use of the water system shall be established by resolution of the Township Board to recover the costs of construction of said system as necessary to preserve the same in good working order, operation and replacement of the system, and to provide for the payment of any debt service obligations of the Township as the same becomes due. Such fees shall be made in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth and shall be made against all premises which use the system. Fees shall be reviewed by the Township or LCWA at least annually. Any fee changes will be by Township Board resolution. 
(2)  Establishment of rates. The rates for water service are to be established by resolution of the Township Board for systems other than those hooked up to the system operated by LCWA and may be established separately from time-to-time as necessary to ensure sufficiency of revenues in meeting the expenses of the water system. Rates for water service for systems hooked up to LCWA are to be established by resolution of the LCWA Board and may be established separately from time-to-time as necessary to ensure sufficiency of revenues in meeting the expenses of the water system. The Township Board or LCWA Board may classify the users of water according to the quantities and types of water supplied, and charge such rates to users in each class as it may deem reasonable. Rates need not be uniform for separate water supply districts. Rates for LCWA shall be calculated on a cost of service basis in accordance with the method given in the water rate study prepared by Tetra Tech in 2004. Rates shall be reviewed by the Township or LCWA at least annually. Any rate changes will be by Township or LCWA resolution. 
(3)  Publication. Following approval by the Township Board or LCWA of the rates and fees to be charged for the water service under this article, the rate schedule shall be published. Said notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township within 30 days following approval by the Township Board or LCWA Board. 
(b)  Types of water supply rates and fees. 
(1)  Commodity rate. All residential, commercial, and industrial water use, and other consumers connected to the system shall be measured by meter and the consumers shall be charged a commodity charge for water usage, except those unmetered premises included in the Saxony, Wilmore, Meadows and Centennial Farms subdivisions, which premises shall be measured by one or two master meter and the consumers shall be charged a commodity charge for water usage divided by the total number of unmetered consumers within the subdivisions. Should any unmetered consumers in these subdivisions become metered, they shall be charged a commodity charge for water usage based on their water meter readings. The sum of these individual water meter readings will be deducted from the master meter readings to determine the commodity charge for the remaining unmetered consumers. 
(2)  Service fee. Consumers of the water system shall be charged a readiness-to-service charge. All consumers of the water system, whether residential or nonresidential, shall be charged a flat rate based upon anticipated water supply and demand. Commercial and industrial facilities with fire suppression systems shall be charged a flat rate depending upon the size of the fire service line. 
(3)  Connection fee. The Township shall charge and the consumer shall pay, as a precondition to connecting to the water mains of the system, a connection fee. The connection fee shall include the cost of a meter and pressure reducing valve, if necessary, acquired by the Township and the cost of the cross connection inspection. Said fee shall be paid at the time an application for permission to connect to the water mains of the system is requested. 
(4)  Construction fees. The property owner shall be responsible for the actual cost of construction of all lines from the water main to the premises to be served. The Township shall maintain ownership and maintenance responsibility from the main up to and including the curbstop. 
(5)  Special service fees. The Township may charge its customers a fee for special services. The customers shall pay for the special services, for which a rate shall be established. 
(6)  Turn on/off fees. The Township may establish a charge to the customer, and the customer shall pay the charge whenever the Township is requested to turn water services on or off; provided, however, that whenever the Township is requested to provide turn on or off service at times other than the regular business hours of the Township, the charge shall be determined on a time and material basis. The turn off fee shall be charged to a customer whose service has been disconnected because of nonpayment of charges or fees due the Township. 
(7)  Benefit fees. Those persons owning lands in direct proximity to a Township water main whose lands have not been subjected to a special assessment to pay for the construction of said main, and who make connection to said main shall pay a benefit fee for the privilege of each connection to said main in addition to all other fees above provided, which benefit fee shall be established from time-to-time by resolution of the Township Board. Such benefit fee shall be paid in cash or in installments, with interest and penalties, all as shall be established and provided from time-to-time by resolution of the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 9, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-41. - Payment for use of the system. 
(a)  Responsibility for payment. 
(1)  The owner of the premises served by the water system shall be liable to the Township for any charges and fees authorized to be charged by this article. 
(2)  When a single water service pipe serves two or more consumer units, the owner of the premises, shall be responsible for payment of water used on the premises. 
(3)  The owner of the premises, as well as any user of the water system at the premises, shall be responsible for reimbursing the Township for any and all administrative costs and fees incurred by the Township arising out of the use of "Miss Dig" services at the premises. 
(b)  Billing, collections, and customers' payment. 
(1)  Meter reading. Meters shall be read quarterly or as deemed necessary by the Township Board or LCWA Board. 
(2)  Bills. The Township or LCWA shall render bills for water service and all other charges in connection therewith. Bill for water service shall be sent to consumers by first class mail. 
(3)  Quarterly bills. Quarterly water bills for users of the system shall be based upon the charges established by resolution of the Township Board or LCWA for the system. 
(4)  Due date of charges. All bills shall be payable by the due date specified on the bills, and shall be paid at the office of the Township or LCWA in person or by mail. 
(5)  Collections. The Township or LCWA treasurer shall collect all moneys due for water service and all other charges in connection with the water system. 
(6)  Late charges. If any late charges for the services of the water, which has been billed to a customer of the water system, are not paid on or before the due date specified on the bill, a delayed payment charge of ten percent of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto and collected therewith. 
(7)  Unpaid bills. If any bills for the service of the system remain unpaid after 30 days following the due date specified on the bill therefor, the water supply for the lot, parcel of land, or premises affected may be cut off, and if cut off, shall not be turned on again except on payment in full of the delinquent charges therefor, and the fee charged for resumption of service. The Township or LCWA shall send a notice by registered certified mail to its customers of intent to terminate service. If the payment is not received, or satisfactory arrangements have not been made within seven days after the shut off notice is sent to the consumer, the water service may be shut off. No water service that has been discontinued because of nonpayment shall be restored until all past due bills are paid or satisfactory arrangements for such payments are made. 
(8)  Nonreceipt of bill. Failure of the consumer to receive any bill shall not relieve him of the liability for the charges incurred, and the consumer shall notify the Township Treasurer or LCWA treasurer if a bill has not been received by the 15th day after the end of a billing period. 
(9)  Charges to become a lien upon premises. The Township shall have, as security for the collection of water supply rates, assessments of fees due or to become due for the use and installation, repair, or maintenance to any house, building, or premises, a lien upon the building or premises, lot or lots, upon which the water system service was supplied. This lien shall become effective immediately upon the providing of the water service to the premises or property supplied. 
a.  The lien created by this article shall have priority over all other liens except taxes or special assessments. 
b.  Charges for water services which are under the provisions of section 21, Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended, shall be made a lien on all premises served thereby. The charges for water furnished to any premises are hereby recognized to constitute such lien and whenever any such charge against any piece of property or premise shall be delinquent for six months or more, that fact shall be certified on March 1 of each year to the Tax Assessing Officer of the Township. Such charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such piece of property or premises and the charges shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general Township taxes against such premises. 
(c)  Funds collected. 
(1)  Generally. All funds collected by the Township or LCWA for the use of the system shall be received by the Township Treasurer or LCWA treasurer and deposited in the water fund which is hereby established for this purpose. Moneys on deposit in the water fund where authorized by resolution of the Township Board or LCWA Board shall be expended for any lawful purpose related to the operation, maintenance, construction, acquisition or debt service due on account of construction, acquisition or equipping of the water system. 
(2)  Special assessments. Except where special assessments are pledged to the retirement of bonds or other obligations issued by the Township, all special assessments collected for any part of the water system shall be deposited in the water fund. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 10, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-42. - Meters. 
(a)  Meters required; use. 
(1)  All Livingston Community Water Authority water used on any premises must pass through a water meter. Any bypass between the meter and the main, for users or consumers required to have a meter, is prohibited. 
(2)  All premises using Township or LCWA water shall pay for water at the rates specified by resolution. 
(3)  Water meters, and, if needed, pressure reducing valves, shall be obtained from the LCWA. 
(4)  All water meters existing and installed before the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived and connected to the water system shall be owned and maintained by the Township. Property owners shall replace defective meters with a meter obtained from the Township before connection to the water system at the property owner's cost. 
(5)  Each water meter shall be served by its own water connection and water service pipe, unless another system incorporating exterior valves to control water flow to each meter is approved by the Township. 
(b)  Water meters; type, size determination. 
(1)  Unless otherwise authorized by the Township or LCWA, all meters shall be Sensus SR II water meters with a TouchRead system and a RadioRead MXU. 
(2)  All meters shall be under the control of the Township and shall be equipped with an instrument capable of being remotely connected and read away from the meter itself. Such instrument shall be installed on the exterior of the building as directed by the Township. 
(3)  All new inside meters will require remote touch pads and a remote radio frequency transceiver unit as the Township or LCWA may specify. 
(4)  When requesting connection to the water system, the consumer shall furnish information about the amount of contemplated water supply demand and the Township shall determine the size and type of meter to be installed. 
a.  For a new single-family domestic use and consumption of water a one-inch meter shall be installed by the consumer. 
b.  For a multiple dwelling the meter size shall be one inch for two to four dwellings and 1½ inches for five to ten dwellings. 
c.  Except as stated in subsection (b)(4)b of this section, where an application is made for a meter larger than one inch, the Township shall determine whether a meter of such size is required or authorized. 
d.  The use of meters larger than 1½ inches will be permitted only upon specific written approval by the Township after due consideration of pertinent factors, such as the probable effect of their demand on the installed capacity of water mains and water supply and the means of sewage disposal. 
e.  For existing single-family domestic use and consumption of water, the department may make an exception and allow a three-quarter-inch meter to be installed by the consumer when it is determined that a one-inch meter is impractical. 
(c)  Water meters; installation, location regulations. 
(1)  Meters shall be installed in a readily accessible location and in a manner satisfactory to the Township. 
(2)  A meter shall not be installed in a place where it cannot be readily reached by the meter reader. 
(3)  All meters shall be installed horizontally in a dry, clean, sanitary location and in such places that small leaks and the spilling of water will do no damage. 
(4)  All meters shall be in a suitable location to prevent the pipes and meters from freezing in cold weather. 
(5)  The meter may be placed in a basement if a suitable and readily accessible location is provided in a dry basement sufficiently well heated to prevent freezing of the meter during the winter. 
(6)  Where the premises contain no basement or cellar, the meter shall be installed in a location which shall be approved by the director or Township's designee. 
a.  Where it is necessary to install the meter in a pit outside a building, such pit shall be built as directed by the Township. 
b.  With director or Township designee approval, and when a sump pump or drain is provided, meters may be installed below grade line in a first floor meter pit. 
c.  All meter pits shall be built in accordance with the specifications furnished by the Township, with cover openings directly over the meters. 
(d)  Failure to register; water usage; amount. 
(1)  If any meter or metering system fails to register properly or if a meter is inaccessible for reading, the department shall estimate consumption based upon former consumption. 
(2)  Should a meter become defective or fail to register correctly, the quantity of water used shall be determined by the amount used during the corresponding period of the preceding year, or at the option of the Township, by averaging the amount for the period immediately preceding and subsequent to the period wherein the meter registered quantities of water usage. 
(e)  Water meters; test, inspections. The accuracy of the meter at any premises will be tested by the Township upon written request of the owner and/or user who shall pay in advance a fee to cover the cost of the test. If on such test, the meter shall be found to register more than three percent more water than passes through it, another meter will be substituted therefor, the fee will be refunded, and the water bill will be adjusted from the immediately preceding and current billing periods if appropriate in the judgment of the Township Board or LCWA Board. 
(f)  Meter repairs. The expense of maintaining meters will be borne by the Township. 
(g)  Meters, seals; tampering, etc., prohibitions. Meters shall be sealed by the Township and no person except an authorized employee of the Township shall break such seals. No unauthorized person shall change the location of, alter or, interfere in any way, with any meter. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 11, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-43. - Connection. 
(a)  Water connections. Water connections shall not be made unless the water main extends across the frontage of a lot to be served or across the frontage of the lot facing one street in the case of a corner lot, except where approved by the Township Board. 
(b)  Tapping mains; applications, requisites. 
(1)  All taps shall be made after proper application for service, including the payment of charges and fees, by consumers or their authorized agents. 
(2)  All connections to the system shall be made by a licensed contractor with the proper tools and equipment for performing connections to the system's mains. All taps and connections to the water main shall be installed at the main by the Township or under direct supervision of the Township or its designee. 
(3)  Before an owner, user or contractor installs a water service pipe, he shall obtain from the Township the location for making the connection of the water service. The terminus of the water service pipe shall be located such that the water service pipe is installed to the water main in a straight line perpendicular to the main, and there are no obstruction such as driveways, manholes, trees, fire hydrants or any other obstacles. 
(4)  Single corporation stops or pipe saddles, will be used to supply services or private mains. 
a.  Connection of services up to 1¼ inches to the Township main shall be through a corporation stop with branch connections making an angle of 45 degrees to the water main service proper. 
b.  For 1½-inch and two-inch services, a saddle will be required. 
c.  On approved three-inch services, a four-inch connection at the main and four-inch valve shall be required. Approved services of four inches and over shall have the same size connection as the service. 
(5)  No permittee shall turn water off or on at the corporation or stopcock to any service pipe, except to make repairs and test work, after which he shall leave it off or on as he found it. No unauthorized person shall turn the water off or on at the corporation or stopcock. 
(6)  Pipe from the main to the curbstop shall be a minimum grade type K soft temper copper not less than three-quarter-inch in diameter. 
(7)  All holes or trenches dug in the public or private streets or roads shall be backfilled to a minimum of 95 percent density by thoroughly tamping dry sand in layers not to exceed six inches. All excavated material shall be entirely removed from the street or road. Excavated material that is wet, or otherwise unfit for backfill, shall be entirely removed and the backfilling done with suitable dry sand hauled in for that purpose. 
a.  Tunneling under streets or roads is prohibited, except by special permission of the Livingston County Road Commission and the director or his designee. Open cuts shall be allowed in graveled streets with prior road commission approval. 
b.  Connections under hard surfaced paving shall be made only by boring or jetting with the prior approval of the County Road Commission and the director or his designee. 
(c)  Service control valves and curb boxes. 
(1)  The customer will provide and install a shutoff valve in the form of a service cock and curb box one foot outside of the outer sidewalk line, or as near the road right-of-way line as may be convenient. 
(2)  Curbstops shall be: 
a.  Mueller B-25154; 
b.  Ford Meter Box Co. B22-444M (for 1 inch), B22-666M (for 1.5 inch) and B22-777M (for 2 inch); or 
c.  Approved by the Township or its designee. 
The curb box shall be installed at a point as near the road right-of-way line as practical and permissible. 
(3)  Valves of nonrising stem gate valves or plug type valves may be used for the larger size connections. They shall be of approved standard manufacture, and housed in an approved-type service or roadway valve box. 
(4)  A cast iron extension curb box of an approved pattern shall be centered over the curbstop so that it is readily accessible for turning on and off by Township representatives. Curbstop boxes shall be Mueller H10300 or Ford Meter Box Co. EM2 Series, with a stationary rod to be included. The top of the stopbox shall be so placed that it is never below the grade nor more than three inches above grade and must be set on a brick or concrete foundation to prevent settlement. 
(5)  No person is permitted to turn water on or off at the curbstop except for the testing of his work, in which event the curbstop shall be left in the same condition and position as he found it. 
(d)  Water service pipe; installation, requirements. 
(1)  Water service connections shall be installed in accordance with state and local building regulations. Water service connections shall also be installed in compliance with the specifications set forth in this section. 
(2)  The connection of the type K copper service pipe to the corporation stop shall be made by using an approved adapter fitting. 
(3)  The connections and water service pipes shall be installed in a separate trench from the sewer service. The water service pipe may not be placed in the same trench with the building drain. The water service pipe and the building sewer must be ten feet apart. 
(4)  All water service pipe on either private or public property shall be laid on a solid bottom not less than 5½ feet under ground or below the established grade. 
(5)  The consumer shall continue the water service pipe connection from the valve at the road right-of-way line to the riser's pipe and valve inside the building entirely at their own expense. 
(6)  The service line from the main to the premises shall have an inside diameter no smaller than one inch. All service pipes of two inches or less, in diameter shall be of U.S. Government specification type K copper tubing; other service pipe materials must be approved by AWWA. Those more than two inches in diameters may be of ductile iron. 
(7)  The water service pipe shall be laid to provide for earth settlement and for contraction and expansion through arching or bending to form an expansion loop in the form of a one-half S-bend, and shall contain at least six inches of excess material to provide for settlement and flexibility. 
(8)  There shall be no joints between the curbstop and the meter unless commercial lengths are not available to allow for this provision (i.e., because of excessive building setbacks). Only three-part flared unions shall be used for connections in copper pipes and all other types of flared unions are prohibited. 
(9)  Plugged tees, or other accessible outlets between the meter and the main are prohibited. No connections or outlets shall be made on this line other than for fire fittings. It shall be unlawful for the customer, or any employee or agent of the customer, to make any connections on or use said sprinkler system for any purpose or purposes other than for fire protection, and any other use thereof shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(10)  Any repairs to any water service pipe shall be made at the expense of the owner whose premises are served by the water service pipe. 
(e)  Completion to work; inspection required. 
(1)  Upon completion of any new service pipe installation or repairs, it shall be the duty of the permittee to obtain approval by the County Plumbing Inspector before covering same. 
(2)  The service trench shall not be covered, backfilled, or floored until the tap has been completed and the County Plumbing Inspector has approved the installation. Clean earth or sand shall be carefully tamped every two feet above the top of the service line. This material shall be carefully and solidly rammed with proper tools. The use of clay for such purpose is prohibited. 
(3)  If any building drainage or plumbing system or part thereof which is installed, altered or repaired is covered, it shall be uncovered for inspection after notice to the plumber, contractor, owner, or other person to uncover the work has been issued either by the Township or the County Plumbing Inspector. 
(4)  A separate gate valve or ball valve must be placed on the water service pipe just inside the building wall so that the water may be turned off and drained from the pipe in the event of accident or in order to make repairs. Such stop shall be equal in quality to the curbstop. 
(f)  Repair. 
(1)  Water service pipes from the curbstop and all water service pipes from the property line to the meter shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises. 
(2)  Any plumber called upon to shut off water and drain pipes in any premise shall do so inside the building only. 
(3)  Persons taking water must keep their service pipe and their meter protected from frost and hot water at their own expense. Where the service pipe or meter is damaged by frost or hot water, the service pipe shall be repaired by a licensed plumber, employed and paid by the customer. The water meter shall be repaired by the Township at the expense of the customer. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 12, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-44. - Hydrants and use. 
(a)  Installation of hydrant. All water mains on private property, six inches or larger with fire hydrants, shall be installed at the property owner's expense and shall be conveyed to the Township by the property owner, and at his expense, the property owner shall provide a recorded easement sufficient for maintenance and repair of the same. 
(b)  Opening of hydrant. No person shall open a Township-owned fire hydrant without the express permission of the director or his designee, excepting a municipal fire department, who may at any time open a fire hydrant for the purpose of obtaining water for extinguishment of fires. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 13, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-45. - Cross connection rules adopted. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the following definitions, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Approved means accepted by the director as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this section, and as suitable for the proposed use. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the Township's water system, including, but not limited to, water from another purveyor's public potable water supply, treated effluent, wastewaters or industrial fluids. 
Backflow means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either backpressure or backsiphoning. 
Backflow prevention assembly means an assembly or means designed to prevent the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either backpressure or backsiphonage. 
(1)  Air gap means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of said vessel. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the overflow rim of the vessel, and in no case less than one inch. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle assembly means an assembly of two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent differential pressure relief valve located between the check valves and, at the same time, below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly-closing shutoff valves at each end of the assembly. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a recognized laboratory and approved by the director or his designee for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved, these assemblies must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance. 
(3)  Double check valve assembly means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly-closing shutoff valves on each end of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a recognized laboratory and approved by the director or his designee for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved these assemblies must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance. 
(4)  Pressure vacuum breaker assembly means an assembly containing an independently operating loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly will be equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly-closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly. 
Backpressure means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than the intended source. 
Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than its intended source caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Contamination (high hazard) means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. This would include any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy section of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport tube. 
Pollution (low hazard) means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or biological) in the water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use. 
Tester certified means person who has completed a minimum of 40 hours of training and has passed a written and practical exam as part of a certification or recertification process. Each person certified to make competent tests or to repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow prevention assemblies shall be conversant with the applicable laws, rules and regulations and have had experience in plumbing or pipefitting or have other qualifications which are equivalent in the opinion of the director or his designee. 
Water, nonpotable, means water which is not safe for human consumption. 
Water, potable, means any water which, according to standards recognized by the Township, is safe for human consumption. 
Water, service connection means the terminal end of the service connection from the water system at its point of delivery to the consumer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. Unprotected takeoffs from the service line will not be permitted upstream of any meter or any backflow prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the consumer's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the water system. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the water system from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the consumer's water system such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the water system; and to provide for the monitoring and enforcement of a continuing program of backflow prevention which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the water system. Cross connections shall be prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, permit to be made, or permit to exist, any cross connection on any lot or parcel of land owned or occupied by him. The Township and LCWA Board adopts by reference the water supply cross connection rules of the Michigan Department of Public Health being R325.11401 to R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended. 
(c)  Responsibility. 
(1)  The director has the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this section and to prevent water from unapproved sources to enter the water system. No water service connection to premises of a type specified in this section shall be installed or maintained unless the water system is protected as required by this section. 
(2)  The consumer shall not allow any pollutants or contaminants to enter the water system from the point of delivery from the water system. The consumer shall, at his own expense, install, operate, test and maintain approved backflow prevention assemblies as directed by the director or his designee. 
(3)  The director is authorized to enforce the provisions of this section on all new buildings, additions with new services and changes of use of existing buildings. 
(d)  Approval. 
(1)  Backflow prevention assemblies required hereunder shall be approved by the director or his designee and shall be installed by and at the expense of the consumer. 
(2)  The director or his designee may approve backflow assemblies when such assemblies have met the criteria set forth in this section and provided the manufacturer has a local parts and service center. 
(3)  Assemblies shall be specified and located on the construction plans for all new buildings, additions with new services, and changes of use or occupancy of existing buildings where required by this section. Approval shall be obtained prior to issuance of the building permit. 
(e)  Installation of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(1)  Assemblies shall be installed at the service connection or near the property line but in all cases before the first branch line leading off of the service line, and in an accessible location approved by the director or his designee. 
(2)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall have at least the same cross sectional area as the water service and/or meter. In those instances where a continuous water supply is necessary, two sets of backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in parallel, if the water supply cannot be temporarily interrupted for the testing of assemblies. 
(3)  No bypass shall be installed around backflow prevention assemblies. 
(4)  Double check valve assemblies shall be installed as prescribed in the standard details approved by the director or his designee. Copies of the standard details shall be available from the director or his designee. Double check valve assemblies may be installed belowground in a vault, if approved in writing, on a case-by-case basis by the director or his designee. 
(5)  Reduced pressure principle assemblies shall be installed as prescribed in the standard details approved by the director or his designee. Copies of the standard details shall be available from the director or his designee. Reduced pressure principle assemblies shall be installed above ground. 
(6)  All pressure-type backflow prevention assemblies, which are designed for periodic field testing, shall be equipped with resilient seated shutoff valves on both the upstream and the downstream side of the assembly. In addition, resilient seated test cocks shall be provided and located so that test equipment may be connected to the assembly at such points that the pressure in each pressure zone may be detected and, in addition, a test cock shall be located upstream of the upstream shutoff valve as close as possible to the upstream shutoff valve. 
(f)  Premises or systems requiring approved backflow prevention assemblies. 
(1)  An approved backflow prevention assembly of the type specified in this section shall be the minimum installation of each service connection, whether from a fire hydrant, temporary regular or other water service connection, to the following type of premises or systems: 
Premises Requiring Approved Backflow Prevention 
Assemblies 	Type of Assembly Required 
	Double Check 	Reduced Pressure 	Air Gap 	Pressure Vacuum Breaker 
Aircraft and missile plants 		X 		
Animal clinics, animal grooming shops 		X 		
Automotive repair with steam and/or acid cleaning 
equipment or solvent facilities 		X 		
Auxiliary water systems (interconnected) 		X 		
Auxiliary water systems (unconnected) 	X 			
Beverage bottling plant 		X 		
Breweries 		X 		
Buildings greater than 3 stories or 34 feet in height 
(low hazard) 	X 			
Buildings greater than 3 stories or 34 feet in height 
(high hazard) 		X 		
Buildings with booster pumps or potable water storage (low hazard) 	X 			
Buildings with booster pumps or potable water storage (high hazard) 		X 		
Canneries, packinghouses, and reduction plants 		X 		
Carwash facilities 		X 		
Central heating and air conditioning plants 		X 		
Chemical plants 		X 		
Chemically treated potable or nonpotable water systems 		X 		
Civil works (government-owned or government-operated facilities not open for inspection by the director or his designee) 		X 		
Commercial laundries 		X 		
Dairies and cold storage plants 	X 			
Dye works 		X 		
Film processing labs 		X 		
High schools and colleges 		X 		
Holding tank disposal stations 		X 		
Hospitals and mortuaries 		X 		
Medical and dental buildings 		X 		
Sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes 		X 		
Irrigation systems with chemical injection 		X 		
Labs using contaminating materials 		X 		
Manufacturing, processing and fabricating plants using 
contaminating materials 		X 		
Mobile home parks 		X 		
Motion picture studios 		X 		
Oil and gas production facilities 		X 		
Plating plants 		X 		
Power plants 		X 		
Radioactive materials processing 		X 		
Restricted, classified or other closed facilities 		X 		
Rubber plants 		X 		
Sand and gravel plants 		X 		
Sewage and storm drainage facilities 		X 		
Shopping centers 		X 		
Water trucks, hydraulic sewer-cleaning equipment 		X 	X 	
Any other premises where a cross connection is 
maintained 		X 		
 
(2)  Fire protection systems will be required to have the following type of protection: 
Premises Requiring Approved Backflow Prevention 
Assemblies 	Type of Assembly Required 
	Double Check 	Reduced Pressure 	Air Gap 	Pressure Vacuum Breaker 
Direct connection from public water system 
(noncontaminating) 	X 			
Direct connection from public water system 
(contaminating) 		X 		
With pump and/or storage tank 		X 		
With auxiliary supply 		X 		
 
(3)  Any premises where water supplied by the Township is subject to deterioration in sanitary quality and there is potential for its entry into the water system shall be protected as required by the director or his designee. 
(g)  Approved backflow prevention assemblies. 
(1)  The standard installation at each service connection to premises or each system requiring an approved backflow prevention assembly shall be a model and size approved by the director or his designee. 
(2)  The term "approved backflow prevention assembly" means an assembly approved by the director or his designee and shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association-AWWA C506-78 most recent revised publication Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assemblies, and have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (FCCCHR) of the University of Southern California established by specifications of backflow prevention assemblies in the most current issue of the Manual of Cross Connection Control or another third party certifying entity approved by the director or his designee. 
(3)  Backflow prevention assemblies that may be subject to backpressure or backsiphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by FCCCHR may be listed on the current list of Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies, which will be made available upon written request to the director. 
(h)  Maintenance, testing and records. 
(1)  The consumer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies and provide the director or his designee with copies of such records. The records shall be on forms approved by the director or his designee and shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used. 
(2)  Testing, maintenance and repairs to such assemblies shall be made at the consumer's expense by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester that is approved by the director or his designee or any other agency designated by the director to prescribe test methods or to certify or approve persons to conduct such tests. It shall be the duty of the consumer to see that these tests are made at the time of the initial installation and at least once a year, on the anniversary date of the initial inspection. 
(3)  The consumer shall notify the director 15 days in advance when the annual tests are to be done, so that the director or his designee may witness the tests if so desired. 
(4)  Following the installation of any assembly required by this section, it shall be tested by a certified tester. The test results shall be submitted to the director with a request for inspection approval before the certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
(5)  Following the repair, repiping, overhaul or relocation of an assembly, the consumer shall have it inspected by the director or his designee and tested by a certified tester. 
(i)  Inspections. It shall be the duty of the Township to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the water system where a cross connection with the water system is deemed probable. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based upon potential health hazards involved shall be established by the director or his designee. The cost of the inspection as determined by the director or his designee shall be borne and paid by the property owner upon which the inspection takes place. All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially upon installation to be sure that the device is working properly. Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified by the director or his designee and in accordance with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals approved by the director or his designee shall be qualified to perform such testing. The individual shall certify the result of his testing. The consumer's water system must be open for inspection at all reasonable times, and in all emergencies to the director or his designee to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the director or his designee may deny or immediately discontinue water service to the premises by providing a physical break in the water service line until the consumer has corrected the condition in conformance with this section. 
(j)  Entry rights. The director or his designee shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the water system, for the purposes of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(k)  Existing assemblies and consumers. 
(1)  If the director or his designee determines that a consumer's backflow prevention assembly does not meet current standards, the consumer shall retrofit the assembly so that it will meet current standards. 
(2)  Whenever it is determined by the director or his designee that a water service poses an actual or potential threat to the physical properties or the potability of the water system, an assembly complying with this section shall be installed. 
(l)  Discontinuance of water service. Where contamination of any water main is an immediate possibility or where contamination of any main occurs and a cross contamination is found, the Township may order the water to be immediately shut off without giving notice to the owner or occupant of land as prescribed herein. Water service to any premises may be discontinued by the director or his designee if a backflow prevention assembly required by this section is not installed, tested and maintained, if it has been found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or bypassed, or if a cross connection exists on the premises. The Township may also terminate a consumer's water service upon 20 days' notice in writing in nonemergency. 
(m)  Correction required. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected and the cross connection have been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(n)  Protection and notification. The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the water system shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this article and by the state and County plumbing code as adopted by the County. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING. 
(o)  Supplemental. This section does not supersede any state or County plumbing code or ordinance, and it shall be supplementary to such other lawful regulations as may from time-to-time be adopted. 
(p)  Precautionary measures. The Township and LCWA is authorized and directed to take such other precautionary measures as may be deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the water system. Water service to the land in question shall not be restored until either the cross connection, has been eliminated, or evidence furnished and access permitted to enable the Township to determine that no cross connection prohibited by this section exists. 
(q)  Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties included in section 34-39. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 14, 2-16-2005)  
Sec. 34-46. - Coordination with designee. 
The Township may delegate administrative duties and functions, including but not limited to, inspections, meter readings and billing and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 15, 2-16-2005)  
Secs. 34-47—34-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER EMERGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 8. 
 
Sec. 34-61. - Declaration. 
A water emergency shall be declared in existence for when the water level in the ground storage tank decreases to five feet or less. The water emergency shall continue until the ground storage tank maintains a level of six feet or more for a 24-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 1, 10-14-1981)  
Sec. 34-62. - Imposition of watering schedule or ban. 
During the existence of the water emergency, as conditions warrant, either an odd/even watering schedule or a total ban in which no person shall use water from the central water well or ground storage tank to water any lawn, shrub, tree, garden or other vegetation, or to wash any car, van, motorcycle or other motor vehicle, or to fill or add water to any swimming pool, hot tub or jacuzzi, will be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 2, 10-14-1981; Ord. No. 26A, § 1, 8-3-1983)  
Sec. 34-63. - Violations; citations. 
Any person violating this division will first be given a verbal warning by the Township police to cease and desist from violating this division. Failure of any person so warned to conform to the prohibitions of this division shall result in a citation being issued for failure to obey the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 26, § 3, 10-14-1981)  
Secs. 34-64—34-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, effective March 15, 2013, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 34-81—34-86, 34-131—34-133, 34-151—34-160, 34-181, 34-182, 34-201—34-204, 34-221—34-226, 34-251—34-259, 34-261—34-265, 34-281—34-303, 34-371—34-378, 34-411—34-416, and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 05-2011, § 1, eff. 12-16-2011. 
State Law reference— Water and sewer systems, MCL 324.4301 et seq.; Township sewers, MCL 41.331 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 34-81—34-100. - Reserved.  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 34-101. - Authority, purpose, and objectives. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this Article to protect the public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of the disposal of wastewater and the quality and quantity of wastes admitted to be discharged into the wastewater collection system of the Township and the county. 
(b)  It is the further purpose of this article to enable the Township to provide a POTW system for properties within the Township and to comply with the requirements of all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-102. - Control authority and legal authority. 
The Green Oak Charter Township Board of Trustees is defined as the control and legal authority of the POTW. The POTW shall have the legal authority enforceable in federal or state courts that authorizes or enables the publicly owned treatment works to apply and to enforce the regulations of the Clean Water Act and any rules or regulations implementing those sections. The Township Board of Trustees shall have the authority to: 
(a)  Deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by nondomestic users where the contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where the contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Require compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by nondomestic users. 
(c)  Control, through permit, the contribution to the POTW by each significant industrial user to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. All industrial users are required to apply for and receive a permit from the Township prior to discharging into the Township's POTW or POTW. Permits shall be enforceable and contain, at a minimum, the following conditions: 
(1)  A statement of the duration of the permit, which shall not be for more than five years. 
(2)  A permit issued by Green Oak Charter Township shall not be transferred to any other user, including through the sale of property. 
(3)  Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards, local limits, state and local laws. 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements, including identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment standards, local limits, state and local laws. 
(d)  Require the development of a compliance schedule by each nondomestic user for the installation of technology required to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements and require the submission of all notices and self-monitoring reports from nondomestic users that are necessary to assess and assure compliance by nondomestic users with pretreatment standards and requirements, including the reports required in Part 23 of the Rules of the State of Michigan. 
(e)  Carry out all inspection, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to determine, independent of information supplied by nondomestic users, compliance or noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by nondomestic users. Representatives of the POTW shall be authorized to enter the premises of any nondomestic user in which a discharge source or treatment system is located or in which records are required to be kept under R323.2310 to assure compliance with pretreatment standards. The authority shall be at least as extensive as the authority provided in the Clean Water Act and Part 23 Rules of the State of Michigan. 
(f)  Obtain remedies for noncompliance by any nondomestic user with any pretreatment standard and requirement. The POTW shall seek injunction relief for noncompliance by nondomestic users and shall seek civil and criminal penalties as authorized by state law and local law for each violation by nondomestic users of pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(g)  The POTW and Township Board of Trustees shall have the authority, after informal notice to the property owner, to immediately and effectively halt or prevent any discharge to the POTW which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW. 
(h)  To require nondomestic users to comply with the pretreatment standards and local limits as set forth in this article. 
(i)  To require that nondomestic users prepare a slug control plan, if necessary, per Part 23 Rules of the State of Michigan. 
(j)  Enforcement of pretreatment violations will be in accordance with the current adopted Township's Enforcement Response Plan. However, the Township Board may take other action against any user when circumstances warrant. Further, the Township Board is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-103. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means Clean Water Act, which is defined in this article. 
Approval authority means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
Approved pretreatment program means an industrial pretreatment program administered by a publicly owned treatment works, in this case the Township, which meets the criteria established in R323.2306 and which has been approved by the approval authority in accordance with R323.2308. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means a: 
(a)  Principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(b)  General partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or 
(c)  Duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the direct discharge originates. 
Average daily flow means a reasonable measure of the average daily flow for a 30-day period. 
Benefited properties means all properties which will derive benefit from the construction of a sewer improvement. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
Board shall mean the Board of Trustees of Green Oak Charter Township, a Livingston County Municipality. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility needed for compliance with pretreatment standards. 
Categorical industrial user means all non-domestic users subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
Categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC §1317, which apply to specific category of non-domestic users and which appear in 40 CFR, parts 405-471. 
Cesspool means an underground pit into which household sewage or other untreated wastewater is discharged and from which the liquid seeps into the surrounding soil or is otherwise removed. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. COD is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Such term is also referred to as "oxygen consumed (OC)" and "dichromate oxygen consumed (DOC)," respectively. 
Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC §1251 et seq., as amended. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff (stormwater) and wastewater. 
Community wastewater utility systems means a facility which is owned by a non-governmental entity and is designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to transport, collect, process, and treat wastewater from more than one single-family residential dwelling. 
Compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment in the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) treatment plant, such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the Township's NPDES permit, if the POTW was designed to treat such pollutants to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, fats, and oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin. 
Composite sample means a series of representative samples taken over a specific time period, which are then combined into one sample for testing purposes. 
Control authority means the POTW and in this case means the Township Board of Trustees. 
Cooling water means the water discharged from any use, such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Debt service charge means the charges levied to customers of the wastewater system, which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the wastewater system. 
Department means the Township sewer department. 
Development documents means (a) for a condominium project, the master deed and bylaws provided by Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended; and (b) with regard to subdivisions or other developments, deed restrictions and/or restrictive covenants. 
Direct capital connection fee means the fee charged to a person who connects a premises directly to the POTW. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Director means the Township Supervisor or his/her authorized representative. 
Discharge means any direct or indirect discharge of any waste, waste effluent, wastewater, pollutant, or any combination into any of the waters of the State or upon the ground. 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Fats, oils, grease (FOG) means fats, wax, grease or oil concentrations of animal or vegetable origin (living sources). Garbage means the solid waste from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastewater stream on a one-time basis, with no regard to the flow in the wastewater stream and without consideration of time. 
Grease trap means a tank of suitable size and materials, located in a sanitary sewer line, and designed to contain grease and oily wastes from the wastewater. 
Health department means the Livingston County Department of Public Health. 
Holding tank wastewater means any wastewater from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants into the POTW, including holding tank wastewater discharged into the system. 
Industrial user means a user connected to the POTW that generates waste from an operation or process of the manufacturing and/or making goods including but not limited the industrial categories as listed in the industrial user permit application. 
Interference means a discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, to which both of the following provisions apply: 
(a)  The discharge inhibits or disrupts the Township's POTW treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal. 
(b)  Pursuant to paragraph (i) of this subdivision, the discharge is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder, or more stringent state or local regulations: 
(1)  Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; 
(2)  The Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC §6901 et seq., including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; 
i.  The Clean Air Act, 42 USC §7401 et seq. 
ii.  The Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 USC §2601 et seq. 
iii.  The Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, 33 USC §1401 et seq. 
Laboratory determination means the measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastewaters in accordance with the methods contained in the latest edition at the time of any such measurement, test or analysis of the Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Waste Water, a joint publication of the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or in accordance with any other method prescribed by the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to such latest edition. 
Lateral means a pipe or conduit, located within the public right-of-way or an easement granted or dedicated to the public, which receives wastewater from abutting properties. 
Local limit means a specific prohibition or limit set by a POTW on discharges by a nondomestic user. 
MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or any successor. 
Municipality means a county, city, village, township, district, association, or other public body created by or under state law, or an agency or instrumentality of any of them, having jurisdiction over the disposal of wastewater. 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard and pretreatment standard mean any federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA, which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC §1342). 
National Prohibitive Discharge Standard and prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA) means the State of Michigan 1994 Act 451, MCL 324.101 et seq. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
New source means any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge and for which construction commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act will be applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c), and if any of the following provisions apply: 
(a)  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located. 
(b)  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source. 
(c)  The production of wastewater-generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. The extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source and the extent of integration of the new facility with the existing plant should be considered in determining whether the process is substantially independent. 
Nondomestic user means an industry, commercial establishment, or other entity that discharges wastewater to a POTW other than, or in addition to, sanitary sewage. 
Normal domestic sewage (NDS) means wastewater which, when analyzed, shows a daily average concentration meeting the local limits. 
Nuisance means any condition or circumstance defined as a nuisance pursuant to state statute, at common law or in equity jurisprudence or Township ordinances, including this Article, as well as any condition or circumstance where wastewater or the effluent from any wastewater disposal facility or toilet device is exposed on the surface of the ground or is permitted to drain on or to the surface of the ground, into any ditch, storm sewer, lake or stream, or when the odor, appearance or presence of such material has an obnoxious or detrimental effect on or to the senses and/or health of persons, or when it shall obstruct the comfortable use, enjoyment or sale of adjacent and/or surrounding property. 
Off-site sewer mains means sewer mains constructed off the premises of the owner to be served, which are necessary to afford service to the premises from trunk sewers not adjacent to the premises. 
Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities and other efforts required to operate and maintain the wastewater transportation and treatment system consistent with ensuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement. 
Pass through means a discharge that exits a publicly owned treatment works into state waters or groundwater in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, cause a violation of any requirement of the Act. 
Permit means an authorization, license, or equivalent control document and includes any of the following: 
(a)  An industrial user permit, which is a control document issued by the POTW that controls the wastewater discharges from industrial users into the publicly owned treatment works. 
(b)  A national pollutant discharge elimination system, which is a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Clean Water Act to control wastewater discharges into the surface waters. 
(c)  A state permit, which is a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Clean Water Act to control wastewater discharges of POTW to the groundwaters. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions, expressed in moles per liter of solution. 
Pollutant means any of the following: 
(a)  Substances regulated by categorical standards; 
(b)  Substances discharged to POTW that are required to be monitored, are limited in the POTW's permit, this article, and/or identified in the industrial user permit. 
(c)  Substances for which control measures on nondomestic users are necessary to avoid restricting the POTW's approved residuals management program. 
(d)  Substances for which control measures on nondomestic users are necessary to avoid operational problems at the POTW. 
Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), in this case under the legal authority of the Township Board. The POTW includes the wastewater treatment plants, pump stations, sanitary sewer system, etc. that make up the Township's sanitary sewer system and appurtenances. 
Premises and property mean the lands included within a single description as set forth from time-to-time on the Township tax roll as a single tax parcel in the name of a taxpayer at one address, but, in the case of platted lots, shall be limited to a single platted lot unless an existing building or structure is so located on more than one lot so as to make it a single description for purposes of assessment or conveyance. 
Pretreatment and treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, the alteration of the nature of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes and other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
Pretreatment program means a nondomestic user waste control program which is required in a POTW's wastewater discharge permit or order of the State of Michigan. The pretreatment program shall include, but not limited to, the following: this article, the Industrial Pretreatment Program Procedures, Enforcement Response Plan, Permit Application and Permit for Industrial User Sewer Connections and standard inspection form as adopted by the Township Board. 
Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement for related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on a nondomestic user for treating of wastewater prior to its inclusion in the POTW. 
Pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated in accordance with the Clean Water Act. This term includes prohibited discharges and local limits as defined in R323.2303 and categorical standards. 
Private sewage disposal facility means a facility for the transportation, collection, processing or treatment of wastewater, owned by a nongovernmental entity. Such term shall include septic systems, community wastewater utility systems, or any other device used in the disposal of sewage or human excreta. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sanitary sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Property owner means the owner of record of the freehold or the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
Public sanitary sewer means the publicly-owned pipe or conduit that conveys wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC §1292), which is owned, in this instance, by the Township. Such term includes any sanitary sewer that conveys wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this Article, the term "POTW" shall also include any sanitary sewer that conveys wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the Township who are, by contract or agreement with the Township, users of the Township's POTW. 
Replacement means the replacement, in whole or in part, of any equipment, appurtenance and accessory in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous collection and treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations. 
Residential equivalent unit (R.E.U.) means the relationship between a single-family dwelling and other water or sewer customers as established by the unit factor tables adopted by the Township Board. A unit factor of one is considered to be a single-family household residence. Minimum charge is to be one unit for each connection. The total charge for each customer shall be calculated as the sum of the unit factors for the various usages at that location, times the current rates and charges for services. 
Restaurant means full service restaurants, fast food establishments, delis, cafeterias (including church and school facilities where commercial equipment is installed and the square footage and/or frequency of use indicates more than occasional use), meat distributors, food processing facilities, grocery stores with food preparation/service areas, bakeries, caterers, and/or other similar types of operations. 
Sanitary sewage means water-carried wastes from toilets, kitchen, laundry, bathing, or other facilities used for household purposes. 
Sanitary lead means the extension of the public sanitary sewer from the building in which wastewater originates to the public sanitary sewer or other place of disposal. The sanitary lead is the responsibility of the property owner. 
Seepage pit means a cistern or underground enclosure, constructed of concrete blocks, bricks or similar material loosely laid with open joints so as to allow the overflow or effluent to be absorbed directly into the surrounding soil. 
Septic system means the wastewater treatment or disposal device installed to service an individual home, business or industrial establishment that is not connected to the public sanitary sewer system. 
Septic tank means a watertight receptacle receiving wastewater and having an inlet and outlet designed to permit the separation of suspended solids from sewage and to permit such retained solids to undergo decomposition therein. 
Sewage means human excreta, and can, but not necessarily, be a component of wastewater. However, the terms "sewage" and "wastewater" are used interchangeably in this article. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit carrying wastewater and/or stormwater, surface water, and groundwater. 
Sewer service charge means the sum of the applicable user charges, surcharges and debt service charges 
Significant industrial user means either of the following: 
(a)  A nondomestic user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403 (1992) and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N (1990). 
(b)  A nondomestic user to which one of the following provisions applies: 
(1)  The user discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater. 
(2)  The user contributes waste from an industrial process that makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW. 
(3)  The user is designated as a significant industry user by the control authority on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(c)  Upon a finding that a nondomestic user meeting the criteria in paragraph (ii) of this subdivision has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may, at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a nondomestic user or POTW, determine that a nondomestic user is not a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance means any of the following: 
(a)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as results of analysis in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter. 
(b)  Technical review criteria violations, defined as results of analysis in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit of the average limit multiplied by the applicable technical review criteria. Technical review criteria equals 1.4 for conventional pollutants and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH. 
(c)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit, daily or maximum, or longer-term average that the control authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of publicly owned treatment works personnel, staff, or consultants or the general public. 
(d)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under R323.2306(a) (vi) to halt or prevent the discharge. 
(e)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(f)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(g)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(h)  Any other violation or group of violations that the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Slug discharge means any discharge of a nonrouting, episodic nature, including an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge. 
Slug load means any substance released in a discharge at a rate and/or concentration which causes interference to a POTW. 
Storm sewer and storm drain mean a pipe or conduit which carries stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters, but excludes any type of wastewater. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Structure in which wastewater originates and structure mean a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities which generate wastewater and are used for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes. 
Subsurface disposal field means a facility for the distribution of septic tank overflow or effluent below the ground surface through a line or a series of branch lines of drain tile laid with open joints to allow the overflow or effluent to be absorbed by the surrounding soil through the entire field. 
Surcharge means, as a part of the service charge, the additional charge to any customer discharging wastewater having a strength in excess of limits set forth herein, that may be required to be charged to cover the cost of treatment of such excess strength wastewater. 
Suspended solids means the solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids. 
Township means Green Oak Charter Township located in Livingston County, Michigan, which owns the POTW and is the control authority and legal authority. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant, or combination of pollutants, which is or can potentially be harmful to the public health or environment, including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA under the provisions of Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act or other Acts. 
Trade secret means the whole or any portion or phase of any manufacturing proprietary process or method which is not patented, which is secret, which is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and the secrecy of which the owner has taken reasonable measure to prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited purposes. Trade secret shall not be construed, for purposed of these rules, to include any information regarding the quantum or character of waste products or their constituents discharged, or sought to be discharged, into the POTW. 
Uncontaminated industrial process water means water which does not come into contact with any substance used in, or incidental to, industrial processing operations and to which no chemical or other substance has been added. 
Upset means an exceptional incident in which a user unintentionally and temporarily is in a state of noncompliance with the requirements of this Article due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the user, excluding noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation thereof. 
User means the owner of a property from which wastewater is generated and/or any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW. 
User charge means a charge levied on users of a POTW for the costs including, but not limited to, operation and maintenance of POTW, the cost of replacement and depreciation of the POTW facilities pursuant to the Clean Water Act; and shall also include other fees, fines, penalties referenced in this Ordinance. 
User class means the kind of users connected to sanitary sewers, including, but not limited to, residential, industrial, commercial, institutional and governmental. 
(a)  Commercial user means an establishment listed in the office of the management and budget's Standard Industrial Classification Manual (SICM), involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by the Township, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastewaters or wastewaters from sanitary conveniences and which is not a residential user or an industrial user. 
(b)  Governmental user means any federal, state or local government user of the wastewater treatment works. 
(c)  Industrial user means a user of the treatment works which discharges wastewater from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, or from any structure with such characteristics, or distinct from their employee's domestic wastewaters or wastewaters from sanitary conveniences. 
(d)  Institutional user means any establishment listed in the SICM and involved in a social, charitable, religious or educational function, which, based on a determination by the Township, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastewaters from sanitary conveniences. 
(e)  Residential user means a user of a treatment works whose premises or buildings are used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons, including dwelling units, such as detached, semi-detached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments or permanent multifamily dwellings. Transit lodging is not included in this definition and is considered to be commercial. 
Wastewater means the wastewaters from industrial processes or domestic wastewaters from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into, or permitted to enter, the POTW. Wastewater can, but does not necessarily, contain sewage or human excreta. However, the terms "sewage" and "wastewater" are used interchangeably in this article. 
Watercourse means a channel, natural or artificial, in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state, or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, §1-2.  
Sec. 34-104. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations are used in this Article: 
BOD 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	Chemical oxygen demand 
DOC 	Dichromate oxygen consumed 
EPA 	United States Environmental Protection Agency 
FOG 	Fats, Oils and Greases 
MDEQ 	Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 
NPDES 	National Pollution Discharge Elimination System 
OC 	Oxygen consumed 
PL 	Public Law 
POTW 	Publicly owned treatment works 
REU 	Residential equivalent unit 
USC 	United States Code 
 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Secs. 34-105—34-124. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Sewer Department 
 
Sec. 34-125. - Establishment. 
A sewer department for the Township may be established by resolution of the Township board. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-126. - Director. 
The construction, operation, management, maintenance, repair and control of the POTW, whether owned by the Township or operated under contract, may be under the control of a sewer director. The director shall be appointed by the Township Board and shall report to the Township Board. In the absence of an appointed Director, the Township Supervisor shall act as the Director. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, §2-61 et seq.  
Secs. 34-127—34-144. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Sewer Service Rates, Charges and Fees 
 
Sec. 34-145. - Rates, charges and fees established; applicability; basis. 
The rates for total sewer service charges and fees for recovery of costs from users of the POTW are to be established by resolution of the Township Board, which may be enacted apart from the published ordinances, as necessary, to ensure sufficiency of revenues in meeting operation, maintenance and replacement costs, as well as debt service. Such charges, fees and rates shall be made against each lot, parcel of land or premises which may have any sewer connection with the POTW, or which may otherwise discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into such system, or any part thereof. Such charges shall be based upon the quantity of water used thereon or therein, service provided, user charges, surcharge or connection fee based on adopted R.E.U Unit Factor Table. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-146. - Rates, billing and collection. 
(a)  The rates, fees and charges for POTW service shall be charged to each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having any sewer connection to the POTW, on the basis of Residential Equivalent Units as calculated by the Township, except in cases where the character of the wastewater from a manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises is such that unreasonable additional burden is placed upon the system, greater than that imposed by the normal domestic sewage delivered to the system plant, the additional cost of treatment created thereby shall be an additional charge over the regular rates set forth in this section, or the Township may, if it deems it advisable, compel such manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises to pretreat and/or pretreat such wastewater in such a manner as shall be specified by the Township before discharging such wastewater into the POTW system. 
(b)  Billing for user charges shall be the Township's responsibility. All user charges shall be billed quarterly; however, the Township may bill and require payment on a monthly basis of any user with a residential equivalent unit factor of ten or greater or any user with a history of nonpayment or late payment. Bills shall be considered due as of the date billed and delinquent 30 days after the due date. 
All unpaid sewer charges which, upon September 30 of each year, have remained unpaid for 30 days shall be reported by the Township Treasurer's Department to the Township Board. The Township Board may authorize the placement of delinquent sewer charges on the property tax roll by Resolution. 
(c)  Unless otherwise adopted by resolution of the Township Board, the fees are: 
(1)  User charges: 
a.  Commodity charge/Quarterly Fee for Operations and Maintenance of POTW: $90.00 per R.E.U. 
b.  Connection Fee/Capital Charge: $4,500.00 per R.E.U 
(2)  An additional charge for laboratory testing of wastewater samples. The laboratory charge shall be for the cost thereof and will be determined for each user. 
(3)  Other fees as described herein. 
(d)  User charges shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment program; 
(2)  Monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Filing appeals; 
(5)  Consistent removal by the POTW of pollutants subject to federal pretreatment standards; 
(6)  Other charges as the POTW may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this article; 
(7)  Additional charges may be made to compensate for the cost of treatment of pollutant loadings not normally treated at or in excess of those treated by the POTW; 
(8)  Additional charges for laboratory testing of wastewater. The laboratory charge shall be for the cost thereof and will be determined for each industrial user. 
(9)  Or any other costs not part of the normal operation of the POTW. 
(e)  Review. Users having a REU factor of more than one may be reviewed by the Township at least once each year. In the event of a change in use, the new REU factor may be applied retroactively to the date such use changed and shall apply to all charges to which such REU factor is applicable including, but not limited to, connection capacity (capital) charges and usage fees. Failure to specifically review, as provided in this Section, shall not cause such REU factor to be omitted and shall not be considered grounds for the discontinuance of such factor. 
(f)  Review of nondomestic users. For review of nondomestic users with meters or where the user has been required to install a meter to register flow or water usage, the REU unit factor for purposes of determining the rates and charges of such user may be reviewed and adjusted annually to assure the REU factor assigned to such user is compatible with use. The formula for determining the flow per REU for such users for purposes of determining the user charges for the next fiscal year shall be as follows: Average monthly flow during previous year divided by 260 gpd = flow per REU. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-147. - Nonpayment of bills, delinquencies, shutoff notice, late penalty. 
(a)  If payment is not received, or satisfactory arrangements have not been made, within 30 days of the due date on the bill, a shutoff notice will be sent by first class mail to inform the user that failure to make payment will result in termination of sewer service. If payment is not received or satisfactory arrangements have not been made within seven days after the shutoff notice is sent to the user, the sewer service shall be shut off. No sewer service that has been discontinued due to nonpayment shall be restored until all delinquent bills are paid or satisfactory arrangements for such payment are made. 
(b)  A late penalty fee of ten percent of all delinquent amounts due shall be applied to bills not paid within 30 days of the due date. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-148. - Collection of delinquent accounts. 
Charges for POTW service furnished to any premises within the Township shall also be a lien against the premises. Enforcement of such lien shall be made pursuant to the applicable statute. The lien remedy does not preclude any other remedy provided by law or allowed under this Article or this Ordinance. Premises outside the Township that are served by the Township's wastewater system that have delinquent bills will be certified to their governmental unit for collection as provided in the contract between the Township and governmental unit. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-149. - Annual audit. 
The rates and charges fixed in this Article are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the expenses of operation, maintenance and replacement of the POTW as are necessary to preserve the POTW in good repair and working order. Such rates and charges shall be fixed and revised from time-to-time as may be necessary to produce such amounts. The Township may review rates and charges annually. Based on such review, rates and charges may be revised as necessary to meet system expenses and to ensure that all users pay their proportionate share of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement costs. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-150. - Free service. 
No free service shall be allowed for any user of the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Secs. 34-151—34-171. - Reserved.  
DIVISION II. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS  
Subdivision I. - Discharge of Sewage Wastewater 
 
Sec. 34-172. - Restrictions and regulations. 
The discharge or depositing of wastewater shall be restricted and regulated as follows: 
(a)  No person shall discharge any wastewater upon any public or private property in the Township unless: 
(1)  The wastewater has been treated by a POTW treatment facility; and 
(2)  The placing or depositing of such wastewater has been specifically permitted and approved by the MDEQ. 
(b)  All users of the POTW system are prohibited from using sodium chloride-based agents in water softeners. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-173. - Private sewage disposal systems. 
No person shall construct, maintain or use any septic tank, seepage pit, toilet device, subsurface disposal field, privy, private vault, private sewage disposal facility, community wastewater utility system, or any other facility or device intended or used for the disposal of wastewater unless it is not dangerous to public health and is specifically permitted and approved by the health department, and, where appropriate, the MDEQ, drain commissioner, and/or Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-174. - Connection to sanitary sewer required. 
Any structure in which wastewater originates shall be connected to the available sanitary sewer within six months, or other time frames set forth by the Township Board, after publication by the Township of a legal notice of availability of a sanitary sewer in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. For purposes of this section, a sanitary sewer shall be considered to be available by the Township, and when it is located in a right-of-way, easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts upon the property in question and passes not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from the structure in which the wastewater originates. For purposes of this section, the term "structure in which wastewater originates" means a building in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities that generate wastewater are used, or are available for use, for household, commercial, industrial or other purposes. If the structure in which wastewater originates has not been connected to an available sanitary sewer within such six-month period, then the Township shall require the connection to be made in accordance with Section 12754 of the Michigan Public Health Code (MCL 333.12754), or any similar successor statutory provision. In so proceeding, the Township shall have the rights and remedies provided in such Section 12754, as well as all rights and remedies provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-175. - Industrial wastewater. 
If an industry makes adequate provision for the disposal of its industrial wastewaters other than by discharging such wastewaters into the POTW, and if such disposal is approved by the MDEQ and all other governmental agencies having jurisdiction, then the Township Board may by resolution excuse such industry from depositing its industrial wastewaters into the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Secs. 34-176—34-195. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Sanitary Leads and Connections 
 
Sec. 34-196. - Permit required; inspection; responsibility for costs; liability for injury, loss or damage. 
(a)  No sanitary lead shall be covered until the Township has inspected and approved it as being of adequate and acceptable construction, size and location. 
(b)  The owner of a building or premises, or his/her authorized representative, shall be responsible, at his/her own cost, for the installation, connection and maintenance of the sanitary lead for such building or premises up to and including its connection with the POTW. 
(c)  The owner and, where appropriate, his/her authorized representative, shall indemnify and hold the Township and its employees, agents and representatives free and harmless from any and all liability or responsibility for all injury, loss or damage that may result, directly or indirectly, from the installation, connection or maintenance of the sanitary lead. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-197. - Permit application; permit and inspection fees; refusal to grant permit. 
(a)  Application for a permit to connect to the public sewer shall be made on appropriate forms provided by the Township. The application shall be supplemented by such plans, specifications or other information. 
(b)  The Township Board shall establish permit and inspection fees by resolution. Such permit and inspection fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  The Township may refuse to grant a permit to connect if the Township shall determine the POTW does not have adequate capacity or capability to accommodate the proposed connection. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-198. - Sanitary leads. 
Sanitary leads from all buildings or dwellings shall be privately owned, operated and maintained to the connection point of the public sewer system. Grinder pumps and pressurized sanitary leads shall be owned, operated and maintained by the Township. By utilizing the public sewer system, owners of property utilizing grinder pumps and pressurized sanitary leads shall be deemed to have granted the Township an irrevocable license for the duration of such use for the purpose of entering onto the property serviced so as to operate and maintain the grinder pump and pressurized sanitary leads. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-199. - Separate sanitary leads required; exception waiver. 
A separate and independent sanitary lead shall be provided for each building or premises, and connected to the POTW. The Township may grant a waiver of such requirement, where one building or premises stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building or premises through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the sanitary lead from the front building or premises may be extended to the rear building or premises. The sewer department shall have the sole discretion as to whether a waiver from such requirement is justified. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-200. - Existing sanitary leads. 
An existing sanitary lead may be used in connection with a new building and premises only where it is found, on inspection by the Township, to be of adequate construction, size and location. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-201. - Separation from water lines. 
All sanitary leads shall be laid a minimum of ten feet from any existing and parallel water service lines. All necessary crossovers shall have the water main above the sewer main and at least 18 inches apart, unless otherwise approved by the Township engineers. All sanitary leads and grinder pumps shall meet with minimum isolation distance to water wells as specified in Part 127- Act 368 PA of 1978, as amended or as otherwise approved by the MDEQ or Livingston County Department of Public Health. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-202. - Size, slope and construction specifications. 
The size and slope of the sanitary lead shall be subject to approval by the Township, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-quarter inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted. The slope of the pipe, the diameter of which is six inches or more, shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted. The sanitary lead shall be constructed of materials as approved by the Township. The Township reserves the right to specify and require the encasement of any sewer pipe with concrete, or the installation of sewer pipe in a concrete cradle, if the foundation and construction are such as to warrant such protection, in the opinion of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-203. - Elevation. 
Whenever possible, the sanitary lead shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, wastewater carried by such drain shall be lifted by artificial means approved by the Township, and the drain shall discharge to the sanitary lead. No sanitary lead shall be laid parallel to, or within three feet of, any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth of the sanitary lead shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The sanitary lead shall be laid at uniform grade. The line shall be straight or laid with properly curved pipe and fittings. Changes in direction greater than 45 degrees shall be provided with cleanouts accessible for cleaning. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-204. - New construction. 
The basement floor level of all new structures from which it is anticipated that any type of wastewaters may emanate shall be at such level that such wastewaters can flow by gravity to any sanitary sewer or by grinder pump to a pressure collection system. In the alternative, a pump or other suitable device shall be installed and maintained to lift the wastewaters to a level from which they can flow by gravity to such sanitary sewer. An acceptable wastewater outlet facing the street where a sanitary sewer is available, or is proposed to be made available, shall be provided in all new structures. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-205. - Connections. 
Every connection of a sanitary lead into a sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Township building and plumbing ordinances, as amended, and all other applicable rules and regulations of the Township, the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials and the Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, as amended, as well as, as may be applicable, all requirements of the state, county and/or any governmental agency operating and maintaining public sewers on behalf of the Township. All such connections shall be gastight and watertight. Any deviation from procedures and materials prescribed in this section must be approved in writing by the Township before installation. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-206. - Bonding or insurance for contractors. 
All contractors or owners making connections to the POTW shall be bonded or insured in accordance with the requirements of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-207. - Extensions on nonresidential properties. 
Where nonresidential property is to be connected to the POTW, and the POTW does not extend the full width of the owner's property, the property owner shall be responsible for extending the POTW, at the owner's cost, across the entire width of such owner's property, so as to allow further extension of the POTW to adjoining properties. In the event of a corner parcel, the property owner shall be responsible for extending the POTW along both the width and length of the property, along both roads upon which the property is located. The size of the sewer shall be determined by the Township engineer. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-208. - Inspection and approval. 
The applicant for a sewer connection permit shall notify the Township when the sanitary lead is ready for installation and connection to the sanitary sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Township or its authorized representative. No backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved by the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-209. - Barricading and lighting of excavations; restoration of disturbed property. 
(a)  All excavations for sanitary lead installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard per Michigan Occupation Safety and Health Administration 
(b)  Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to a manner satisfactory to the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Secs. 34-210—34-228. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Use of Public Sewers 
 
Sec. 34-229. - Stormwater and unpolluted drainage. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, to the POTW, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, unpolluted air conditioning water or uncontaminated industrial process water. No footing drain, sump pump, roof downspout, areaway drain or other source of surface water or groundwater shall be connected to the POTW. All footing drain water shall be discharged to storm sewers or dry wells. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to sewers specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the MDEQ. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-230. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, to the POTW, any wastewater which contains the substances or possess the characteristics described in subsection (b) of this section; which prevent effective operation of the POTW facilities; which will pass through the POTW treatment plant or be incompatible with or harm the POTW facilities; which are prohibited by any federal or state law, rule, regulation, ordinance, permit requirement or standard which is applicable to the POTW facilities; or which the Township shall have concluded will have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger the health, safety and welfare of the public or public property, or constitute a nuisance. Before making such determination, the Township shall consider, to the extent appropriate, such factors as the quantities of the subject wastewater in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers; the material with which the sewers are constructed, the nature of the treatment process at the POTW; the capacity of the POTW; the degree of treatability of the wastewaters in the POTW; and other pertinent factors. The Township shall have the option to take action as described herein. 
(b)  A user may not contribute the following substances to the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature and quantity, are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion, or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or the operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides. Including waste streams that have a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 
(2)  Solid or viscous pollutants which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or interfere in the operations of the POTW , such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes, either alone or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW or exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. This prohibition of toxic pollutants will conform to applicable law. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW, resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(10)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the POTW. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Township in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(13)  Any unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, stormwater, groundwater, roof water or noncontact cooling water. 
(14)  Any wastewater containing suspended solids or any constituent of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such material at the POTW treatment plant. 
(15)  Any sludge, precipitate or congealed substance resulting from an industrial or commercial process, or resulting from the pretreatment of wastewater or air pollutants. 
(16)  Any sodium chloride discharged from a water softener located in a residential, commercial, industrial or other building. 
(17)  Any water or wastewater that exceeds any of the local limits set forth in Discharge Limits of this Ordinance. 
(18)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through. 
(19)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW, but only when trucked or hauled in compliance with the state and federal hazardous waste and liquid industrial waste laws. 
(20)  Any waste or wastewater defined as categorical or subject to a categorical standard. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-231. - Determination of wastewater flow. 
(a)  To determine the wastewater flow from any establishment, the Township may use one of the following methods: 
(1)  The amount of water supplied to the premises by the Township or a private water company, as shown upon the water meter if the premises are metered; 
(2)  If the premises are supplied with river water or water from private wells, the amount of water supplied from such sources, as estimated by the Township from the water, gas or electric supply; 
(3)  If such premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose of such a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be entirely discharged into the sewer system, the estimate of the amount of wastewater discharged into the sewer system, as estimated by the Township from the water, gas or electric supply; 
(4)  The number of gallons of wastewater discharged into the sewer system as determined by measurements and samples taken at a manhole installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer system, at his/her own expense, in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit issued by the Township; or 
(5)  A figure determined by the Township by any combination of the methods set forth in subsection (c)(1)—(4) of this section or by any other equitable method. 
(b)  Wastewater discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this Division and all other applicable regulations, charges and fees established by the Township. The Township may: 
(1)  Set unit charges or a schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the POTW; 
(2)  Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Establish specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Establish compliance schedules; 
(7)  Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(8)  Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Township and affording Township access thereto and copying thereof; 
(9)  Require notification of the Township for any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Require notification of slug discharges; 
(11)  Require other conditions, as deemed appropriate by the Township, to ensure compliance with this division; 
(12)  Require wastewater treatment facilities, process facilities, wastewater streams or other potential wastewater problems to be placed under the specific supervision and control of persons who have been certified by an appropriate state agency as properly qualified to supervise such facilities; 
(13)  Require records and file reports to be maintained on the final disposal of specific liquids, solids, sludges, oils, radioactive materials, solvents or other wastes. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-232. - Discharge limits. 
(a)  All users of the POTW shall maintain discharge limits below the local limits as set forth on the table below. Users shall not be permitted to exceed the local limits. 
TABLE INSET: 
Substance 	Local Limits (mg/l) 
Arsenic 	0.34 
BOD5 	195 
Cadmium 	2.07 
Chemical Oxygen Demand 	350 
Chloride 	250 
Chromium 	2.41 
Copper 	2.19 
Cyanide 	0.24 
Lead 	4.09 
Mercury 	0.20 
Nickel 	2.05 
Nitrogen (TIN) 	14.45 
pH 	Allowable range is from 6.5 to 9.0 
Phosphorus 	1.31 
Silver 	0.55 
Sodium 	150 
Zinc 	0.60 
Total suspended solids 	306 
FOG 	750 
 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-233. - Dilution. 
No user shall in any way use or increase the use of potable or process water, nor mix separate waste streams, for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the requirements set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-234. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Township, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewaters containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. Notwithstanding the foregoing, interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Township and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. Such interceptors shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained in continuously efficient operation at all times by the owner of the building or premises from which such wastewaters emanate, or his/her authorized representative, at the expense of the owner or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-235. - Fats, oils, grease (FOG) regulations. 
(a)  Compliance and FOG interceptor permit approval. 
(1)  FOG interceptors to be installed shall be in conformance with the most recent Township POTW policies, the state plumbing code, the Livingston County Sanitary Sewer Codes, and any other applicable federal, state or local regulation. The required interceptor shall be designed according to the most stringent of the above current standards and shall be based upon the aforementioned regulations and the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(2)  In order to obtain approval and be issued a FOG interceptor permit, information must be submitted to the Township regarding: (a) the proposed interceptor location; (b) the proposed size of the FOG interceptor; (c) a detailed drawing of the interceptor and piping; and (d) the number and type of fixtures proposed to be attached. After approval, the facility will be issued a FOG interceptor permit and the FOG interceptor can be installed. Green Oak Township will inspect the FOG interceptor after installation is complete, and the FOG interceptor permit must be kept on file at the subject facility. 
(b)  FOG interceptor regulations. 
(1)  In order to perform correctly, FOG interceptors must be adequately sized. Green Oak Township requires that all FOG interceptors provide a minimum of 12 minutes retention time at theoretical peak flow rate. The following chart can be used to calculate the theoretical peak flow rate based on fixtures connected to the interceptor. 
Peak flow rate values by fixture type 
TABLE INSET: 
Fixture unit 	Peak flow rate (gallons/minute) 
Hand sink 	7.5 
Restaurant kitchen sink 	15 
Single compartment scullery sink 	20 
Double compartment scullery sink 	25 
Triple compartment sink 	30 
Two single compartment sinks 	25 
Two double compartment sinks 	30 
Floor drain 	5 
Dishwasher 	Manufacturer's peak discharge rate 
 
(2)  FOG interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. The interceptor shall contain a baffle system, which adequately diverts and slows the flow to avoid short-circuiting and to ensure cooling of the waste before entering the POTW system to 100 degrees Fahrenheit. Interceptors located in roadways or parking lots should be traffic rated. 
(3)  Each user shall provide protection against the accidental discharge of FOG. Features that prevent accidental discharge of these materials shall be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Information regarding the facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to Green Oak Township for review and approval prior to construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by Green Oak Township shall not relieve the user of the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
(4)  All new restaurants and commercial and industrial facilities, which have the potential to discharge FOG into the POTW, shall install a FOG interceptor at a minimum of 750 gallons, or similar FOG removal system, necessary to achieve and maintain compliance with the limit stated herein. 
(5)  Upon six months notification from the Township, or in conjunction with any significant alteration to the structure or use of any existing restaurant or commercial and industrial facility which has the potential to discharge FOG into the POTW system, such restaurant or commercial and industrial facility shall install a FOG interceptor at a minimum of 750 gallons, or similar FOG removal system, necessary to achieve and maintain compliance with the limit stated herein. 
(6)  A restaurant or other commercial or industrial facility that demonstrates that the discharge from its service and/or activities contains less than 100 mg/l of FOG, may receive an exemption from minimum sizing requirements or installation and maintenance requirements. Sampling and testing to demonstrate the concentration of grease in the discharge must be conducted, at the facility's expense, by an independent testing organization and measured in accordance with the analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136 as amended from time-to-time. 
(7)  No domestic wastewater or restroom wastewater should enter the FOG interceptor. 
(8)  FOG interceptors shall not be required for single-family homes or multifamily dwelling units, unless problems occur at particular locations more than two times in a 12-month period. 
(9)  All FOG interceptors shall be cleaned on a regular basis by a properly licensed FOG hauler (not a septic hauler), and not less than one time within a three-month period. The necessary frequency of cleaning will vary greatly depending on the nature of the establishment. Factors such as types of food, cooking methods and cleaning techniques will help determine volume of FOG discharged. Facilities with high FOG loadings may have to clean their interceptors as often as monthly. Approved internal or under-counter interceptors shall be cleaned at least once per week, and may be cleaned by in-house staff according to the manufacturers cleaning procedures. In general, FOG interceptors shall be pumped when the FOG concentration exceeds 12 inches in thickness or is within two inches of the discharge pipe in the first chamber. "Jetting out" the FOG removal system is not permitted. Cleaning shall consist of removal of the entire contents of the device, including grease cap and sludge pocket, and inspection of the empty device for defects and/or obstructions which would prevent proper function. 
(10)  All FOG interceptors, or similar FOG removal systems, shall be placed in a location that is readily accessible for cleaning, removal of grease, and acceptable for sampling. The location of the grease interceptor shall meet the approval of the Township for sampling and inspection purposes. The sampling box and manhole shall connect directly to the interceptor prior to any domestic wastewater connections. Sampling stations may be used to monitor the efficiency of any interceptor maintenance program. Upon approval from the Township, the location of each interceptor shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Furthermore, each restaurant or other commercial or industrial facility for which an interceptor is required shall have an interceptor that shall serve only that establishment. 
(11)  The owner of a FOG interceptor irrevocably grants to the Township and its agents the right to enter the subject premises at all reasonable times for the purposes of inspection. The owner, lessee or occupant of any property shall retainany pertinent information regarding cleaning and maintenance of the FOG removal system or the FOG interceptor on-site. The refusal of such information or of access to the property, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of a violation of these provisions. 
(12)  Township sampling and inspections of FOG removal systems that result in noncompliance with these aforementioned standards shall receive written notification that the facility has seven days to pump out the FOG removal system and will be reinspected. If, after reinspection, the FOG removal system is still in noncompliance, the discharger must clean out the FOG removal system immediately. The Township will reinspect the FOG removal system; if the removal system is still in noncompliance, the Township can have the removal system cleaned at the discharger's expense and bill them any associated noncompliance fees. If a discharger's FOG removal system is in noncompliance three times after the initial seven-day reinspection in a consecutive 24-month period, the Township shall take immediate injunctive, equitable or legal action against the discharger. All cost associated with reinspections including testing, injunctive, equitable, and legal fees including attorney fees shall be paid by the property owner. 
(13)  The use of biological or non-biological additives as a FOG degradation, eliminating agent, or an odor control agent is conditionally permissible only upon approval by the Township. Furthermore, if it is determined that the agents being used are not effective or are relocating FOG from the FOG trap to the sewer main or pump station, then the additive shall immediately stop being used and the responsible party shall pay for the necessary maintenance costs to either clean or restore the effected portions of the sewer system as highlighted herein. 
(c)  Recordkeeping. Written records shall be maintained by the user indicating operation, maintenance and cleaning events. Receipts or manifests from FOG haulers should indicate destination of hauled waste. The records shall be made available to the Township inspectors upon request. Maintenance records shall contain: (1) the date of maintenance; (2) the name of the person performing maintenance; (3) the estimated volume of grease removed; (4) the disposal location; and (5) the manager's signature or initials for verification. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-236. - Sampling facilities, structures and equipment. 
When required by the Township to assure adequate monitoring and control of wastewater discharge, the user of any building or premises served by a sanitary lead shall install a suitable sampling structure (e.g., control vault or station) in the sanitary lead prior to connection to the public sanitary sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastewater being discharged. Such sampling structure shall be equipped by the user with a suitable composite sampler and continuous flow recorder. Such sampling structure and equipment shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Township in writing. Such sampling structure shall be installed by the user at his/her cost and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The person operating and maintaining such sampling facilities shall, at the request of the Township, submit to Township records, or true copies thereof, of the wastewater discharged and such other reports and information as shall be necessary to assess and assure compliance with this Division and the user's discharge permit, if any. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Secs. 34-237—34-266. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Pretreatment 
 
Sec. 34-267. - Pretreatment standards. 
(a)  All nondomestic users connected to the POTW shall comply with the discharge limits contained in this division. 
(b)  Upon the promulgation of any final federal or state pretreatment standards or discharge limits for a particular industrial category or subcategory, such standards or limits, if more stringent than the requirements set forth in this article, shall: 
(1)  Be automatically incorporated as part of this division; 
(2)  Be considered to supersede the requirements of this article; and 
(3)  Become effective when specified by the promulgating agency. 
(c)  The Township shall notify all affected users of the applicable standards or limits. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where such requirements and limitations are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division. The Township reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system, if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this division. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-268. - Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. 
Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, such facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at no expense to the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-269. - Pretreatment compliance reporting. 
(a)  Compliance data report. Within 30 days following the date for final compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or discharge limit referenced in this article, or, in the case of a new source of wastewater, following commencement of introduction of the new wastewater into the POTW facilities, any user subject to pretreatment requirements pursuant to this division shall submit to the Township a written report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards or discharge limits and the average and maximum daily flow for the process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or discharge limits. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or discharge limits are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or discharge limits. The report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by a qualified representative. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. Any user or new source subject to pretreatment standards or discharge limits shall submit to the Township during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently by the applicable pretreatment standard or discharge limit, or by the Township, a report indicating the nature and concentration of the pollutants in the effluent which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standard or discharge limit. The report shall include all information required in the user's permit but shall include a record of all daily flows. In the discretion of the Township, and after considering such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the Township may alter the months during which the reports are to be submitted. The Township may also impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the compliance data report required by subsection (a) of this section shall also indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in effluent of the user. 
(c)  Progress reports. In instances where a schedule of additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities has been submitted, not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the Township, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with the increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-270. - Disclosure. 
All industrial users proposing to connect, or contribute wastewater, to the POTW facilities shall submit such information as the Township shall reasonably request regarding their processes and wastewater before connecting, or contributing, to the facilities POTW. All existing industrial users connected, or contributing, to the POTW facilities shall promptly submit such information regarding their processes and wastewater as the Township shall reasonably request. The information submitted shall be sufficient for the Township to determine the impact of the user's discharge on the POTW facilities and the need for a discharge permit and/or pretreatment, and shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user. The user proposing to connect and/or contribute wastewater shall be required to complete the current version of the discharge permit application which has been approved by Township Board Resolution. Without limiting the generality of such disclosure requirements, the information which may be required pursuant to this section may include any or all of the following: 
(a)  Disclosure of the name, address and location of the user, and if not an individual, the names of its owners, shareholders, members, managers, directors, and officers; 
(b)  Disclosure of standard industrial classification (SIC) number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Federal Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(c)  Disclosure of wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those mentioned in this division, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures and methods detailed in the: 
(1)  Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, American Public Health Association, current edition. 
(2)  Manual of Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, United States Environmental Protection Agency, current edition. 
(3)  Annual Book of Standards, part 131, Water, Atmospheric Analysis, American Society of Testing Materials, current edition. 
(d)  Disclosure of the time and duration of discharges; 
(e)  Disclosure of average daily and instantaneous peak wastewater flow rates, in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. All flows shall be measured, unless other verifiable techniques are approved by the Township due to cost of non-feasibility; 
(f)  Disclosure of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, including noncontact water cooling systems, and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances, by size, location and elevation; 
(g)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are, or may be, discharged to the POTW facilities; 
(h)  Disclosure of the nature and concentration of any pollutants or materials prohibited by this subdivision in the discharge, together with a statement regarding whether or not compliance is being achieved with this Division, on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance activities and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to comply with this Division; 
(i)  Disclosure of each product produced, by type, amount or process, and the rate of production; 
(j)  Disclosure of the type and amount of raw materials utilized, average and maximum per day; 
(k)  Any other information required by 40 CFR 403.12, as amended, or any similar successor federal regulation; 
(l)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in the schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress, in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standard. No increment referred to in this subsection shall exceed nine months. 
(2)  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the Township, including, as a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which the user expects to comply with the increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the Township. 
(3)  Within nine months of the promulgation or revision of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, all affected users must submit to the Township the information required by subsections (h) and (i) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-271. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
(a)  Where wastewater is required to be pretreated by the provisions of this division, a user shall provide, at his/her expense, such preliminary treatment as shall be necessary to reduce the objectionable characteristics or constituents of the wastewater, or control the quantities and rates of discharge of the wastewater so that the POTW can operate effectively and in conformance with all federal and/or state laws, rules, regulations, permit requirements, ordinances, or standards which are applicable to the POTW facilities. Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to the proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be prepared and submitted by a registered engineer for approval by the Township, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval is given by the Township in writing. Review of the submitted plans, specifications and other information shall be completed within a reasonable time. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the Township under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported, and acceptable, to the Township prior to the user's initiation of the changes. Where preliminary treatment is required by this division, and the user is already discharging wastewater into the POTW facilities, then the user, at the request of the Township, may agree to a compliance schedule which shall specify, by date, the items which are to be accomplished by the user to complete all necessary preliminary treatment facilities and to bring the wastewater being discharged into compliance with all requirements of this division. 
(b)  Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any wastewater, such facilities shall be operated by an operator licensed by the State of Michigan and continuously maintained in satisfactory and effective operation by the user at his/her cost. The person operating and maintaining such facilities shall, at the request of the Township, submit to the requesting party records or true copies thereof of the samplings taken from wastewater discharged and such other reports and information as shall be necessary to assess and assure compliance with this division and the user's discharge permit, if any. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or MDEQ, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-272. - Categorical industrial users prohibited. 
Industrial users that are considered categorical users are prohibited from connecting to and/or discharging to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-273. - Containment facilities; accidental spills; emergency notification procedure; special agreements. 
(a)  When required by the Township to assure adequate protection of the POTW facilities from accidental spills of critical or hazardous materials, the user shall develop and submit to the Township an adequate spill prevention plan. The adequacy of such plan shall be determined by the Township. The Township may require, as part of such plan, that the user provide, at his/her expense, suitable containment facilities commonly referred to as secondary containment within a time period specified by the Township. Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to the proposed containment facilities shall be prepared and submitted for approval by the Township, and no construction of such facilities shall commence until approval by the Township is given in writing. Such containment facilities shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory condition by the user at his/her cost. All required users shall complete such a plan within the required time-frame as specified by the Township. If required by the Township, a user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the Township. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility, as necessary, to meet the requirements of this division. 
(b)  In the case of an accidental spill, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the Township and the POTW treatment plant of the incident. Such notification shall include the location of the spill, the type of wastewater, concentration and volume, and corrective action. The notice shall be followed up, within five days of the accidental spill, with a detailed written report from the user to the Township describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. The notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss or damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of the damage to the POTW facilities or any other damage to person or property resulting from the accidental spill. In addition, such notification shall not relieve the user of any fine, civil penalty or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article or other applicable ordinance, law, rule or regulation. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees of whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Township and any person whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the Township, subject to payment by the person, provided such wastewater will not damage the sanitary sewer, storm sewer, POTW treatment plant or receiving waters. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-274. - Annual publications. 
The Township shall annually publish in the Township paper of record or on the Township website: 
(a)  a list of the users which were significantly violating any National Categorical Pretreatment Standard promulgated by the EPA during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against those users during the same 12-month period. 
(b)  a list of all industrial users which were the subject of enforcement proceedings pursuant to this division during the 12 previous months for significant noncompliance that remained uncorrected for a period of 45 or more days after notification of noncompliance, or which have exhibited a pattern of noncompliance over that 12-month period, or which involve failure to accurately report noncompliance. The list shall provide a summary of the enforcement action taken against each such user listed. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Subdivision V. - Discharge Permits 
 
Sec. 34-275. - When required. 
The Township may, at its discretion, require that an existing industrial user or other nondomestic user procure and maintain in effect a discharge permit, issued by the Township, as a condition precedent to making any discharge to the POTW facilities. The Township may require an existing or potential industrial or other nondomestic user to obtain a discharge permit whenever it shall reasonably determine that the user's discharge or potential discharge may adversely impact the POTW facilities or if the user's discharges do not or may not comply with the local limits or other provisions in this division. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-276. - Application. 
Every existing or potential user required to procure a discharge permit pursuant to this subdivision shall make application for such permit in the form and manner prescribed by the Township. The application shall include all facts and information necessary for the Township to reasonably consider and evaluate the granting or denial of the discharge permit application. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-277. - Approval or denial. 
Upon receipt of a completed permit application, the Township shall, within a reasonable time, grant or deny the requested discharge permit. During the pendency of an application, an existing user may continue to discharge to the POTW facilities subject, however, to compliance with this division and all other applicable provisions of local, state or federal law. A discharge permit may be granted with such conditions and restrictions as the Township shall reasonably determine to be necessary or appropriate to achieve compliance with this division. The conditions and restrictions may be amended from time-to-time during the term of the permit, on 30 days' written notice to the permit holder, as the Township shall determine to be reasonably necessary or appropriate to comply with all applicable provisions of this article, local, state or federal law, or as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate for the POTW treatment plant to which the permittee is a contributor to meet the requirements of all permits applicable to its operation. A violation of any condition or restriction in a user's discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-278. - Fee. 
The Township shall establish by resolution the fee to be paid to the Township for a discharge permit application, review and permit. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-279. - Expiration and renewal. 
All discharge permits issued by the Township shall be valid for five years from the date issued unless otherwise specified in the permit. An application for renewal of a permit shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-280. - Transferability. 
No permit shall be transferred to a different user or premises, or to a new or changed operation, without the prior written consent of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-281. - Denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A discharge permit may be revoked or suspended by the Township at any time for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any material false statement in the application for the permit; 
(2)  Any violation of the conditions and restrictions included as part of the permit; or 
(3)  Any violation of this division or this article. 
(b)  Written notice of suspension or revocation, stating the cause therefore, shall be delivered to the permit holder personally or mailed by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the permit holder's address as shown in the application for the permit. 
(c)  Any user whose permit is revoked or suspended, any user or potential user whose application for a permit is denied or any user or potential user whose permit is conditioned or restricted in a manner which is unacceptable to the applicant shall have the right to a hearing before the Township Board, provided, a written request for such hearing is filed with the Township within 15 days following the delivery or mailing of the notice of revocation or suspension, or within 15 days following the denial of the application for a permit or the granting of a permit with unacceptable conditions or restrictions. 
(d)  Following receipt of a written request for a such a hearing, the Township Board shall fix a reasonable date and time for the hearing of the request. 
(e)  Following a hearing, the Township Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the challenged action and impose conditions or restrictions, and it may direct that a permit be reinstated, issued or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-282. - Delegation. 
The Township Board may, by resolution, which shall be amendable and revocable at any time, delegate all or any part of the permit functions and responsibilities specified in this subdivision to the POTW industrial surveillance personnel. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Secs. 34-283—34-302. - Reserved.  
DIVISION III. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
Subdivision I. - Private Sewage Disposal 
 
Sec. 34-303. - Use of private sewage disposal system. 
If a house, building or other premises used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes is not connected to a sanitary sewer, then the sanitary lead shall be connected to private sewage disposal facilities permitted and approved by the health department and, where appropriate, the MDEQ and the Township, and constructed in accordance to the current adopted standards of the MDEQ and Livingston County. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-304. - Prohibited private sewage disposal systems. 
No new private sewage disposal system shall be constructed utilizing an open lagoon system, cesspool, or a spray irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-305. - As-built drawings. 
Electronic files (signed and sealed PDF plans and copies in either ESRI format for shapefile), signed and sealed by a professional engineer of the as-built certification for the private sewage disposal system will be submitted by the applicant or his/her engineer to the Township building department upon completion of system construction. This information will be coordinated with issuance of building permits for construction of the other elements of the project, based on the approved phases. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-306. - Disconnection and abandonment of facilities. 
At such time as a connection is made to a sanitary sewer, all private sewage disposal facilities shall be disconnected and abandoned. All abandoned private sewage disposal systems shall be closed in accordance with the Township, County and/or MDEQ standards and procedures. The property owner shall file proof of abandonment with the Township within 30 days of the abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-307. - Operation and maintenance of facilities. 
All persons owning or maintaining private sewage disposal facilities shall operate and maintain such facilities in a safe and sanitary manner and in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, without the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. All costs associated with the operation, maintenance and replacement of a private sewage disposal system shall be borne by the property owners served by such systems and at no cost to the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-308. - Additional requirements. 
The provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed to preclude additional requirements that may be imposed by the MDEQ, the health department, or the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Secs. 34-309—34-328. - Reserved.  
DIVISION IV. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES  
Subdivision I. - Regulations. 
 
Sec. 34-329. - Violation of regulations. 
A violation of the regulations detailed in all divisions of this article shall be deemed to be a municipal civil infraction unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-330. - Fines. 
(a)  The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine and/or penalty is otherwise specified: 
(1)  The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in an amount of $250.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense. 
(2)  The civil fine for any second offense shall be in an amount of $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense. 
(3)  The civil fine for any third offense shall be in the amount of $750.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense. 
(4)  The civil fine for any fourth and subsequent offense shall be in the amount of $1,000.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense. 
(b)  In addition to ordering a person to pay the municipal civil infractions set forth above, other equitable or legal remedies, civil fines, costs, damages, attorney fees and expenses may also be pursued or assessed, and any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this article shall be executed. Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the Township for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the Township by reason of such violation. Said person shall also be liable for repairing or restoring any sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and natural outlet damaged, obstructed, or impaired by such violation to its pre-existing condition. 
(c)  Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-331. - Recover of costs. 
Any user violating any of the provisions of this article or who causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to, or impairs, the POTW facilities, shall be liable to the Township for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The Township may bill the user for the costs incurred by the Township for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay such billed costs shall constitute a violation of this article, enforceable as provided in this division and by appropriate legal action. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Secs. 34-332—34-351. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Administrative Remedies 
 
Sec. 34-352. - Administrative remedies. 
(a)  The Township may suspend sanitary sewer wastewater treatment services to any user when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Township, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, causes or may cause pass through or interference to the POTW, or causes or may cause the POTW to violate any condition of its groundwater discharge or NPDES permit. The Township may also suspend, revoke, or terminate the wastewater discharge permit of any user that: 
(1)  Fails to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(2)  Fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics; 
(3)  Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises by representatives of the Township for the purpose of inspection or surveillance; or 
(4)  Violates any conditions of its wastewater discharge permit, this Article, or administrative order issued hereunder. 
(b)  Administrative notices and orders. 
(1)  Notice of violation. When it is determined that a user has violated any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Township may issue a notice of violation to formally document the noncompliance. This document will specify the nature of the violation, establish a date by which the violation shall be corrected, and notify the affected user that failure to correct the violation will constitute a further violation that may result in additional enforcement action. The notice of violation shall be sent via first-class mail or personally served on an authorized representative of the industrial user. Receipt, or non-receipt, of a notice of violation shall in no way relieve the affected user of any and all liability associated with the violation. Issuance of a notice of violation shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(2)  Order to show cause. When it is determined that a user has violated any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Township may issue an administrative order to show cause to require the affected user to appear at a hearing to demonstrate why escalated enforcement action should not be pursued. This document shall specify the nature of the violation, establish the time and place for the hearing, and notify the affected user that failure to comply would constitute a further violation of this article that may result in additional enforcement action. The order to show cause shall be issued at least ten days prior to the hearing, and shall be sent via certified mail/return receipt requested or personally served on an authorized representative of the industrial user. Receipt, or non-receipt, of an order to show cause shall in no way relieve the affected user of any liability associated with the violation. Issuance of an order to show cause or conducting of the show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(3)  Order of consent. When the Township and an affected user agree to a violation and to the remedial solution, the Township may issue an order of consent to formally establish such agreement. The order of consent shall specify the nature of the violation and required actions such as compliance schedules, stipulated fines, additional self-monitoring, and improvements to treatment facilities or management practices designed to control the user's discharge to the sewer. The order of consent shall be sent via certified mail/return receipt requested or personally served on an authorized representative of the industrial user, and shall require signatures of representatives from both the Township and the affected user. The order of consent shall have the same force and effect as other administrative orders issued by the Township pursuant to this article, shall be judicially enforceable, and shall not modify the requirements or extend the deadline for compliance established by a pretreatment standard or requirement. Receipt, or non-receipt, of an order of consent shall in no way relieve the affected user of any liability associated with the violation. Issuance of an order of consent shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(4)  Order to achieve compliance. When the Township and affected user do not agree to the violation or to the remedial solution, the Township may issue an order to achieve compliance. The order to achieve compliance shall specify the nature of the violation and establish required actions such as compliance schedules, stipulated fines, additional self-monitoring, and improvements to treatment facilities or management practices designed to control the user's discharge to the sewer. The order to achieve compliance shall be issued unilaterally in that terms need not be agreed to by the affected user, and shall be sent via certified mail/return receipt requested or personally served on an authorized representative of the industrial user. The order to achieve compliance shall have the same force and effect as other administrative orders issued by the Township pursuant to this article, shall be judicially enforceable, and shall not modify the requirements or extend the deadline for compliance established by a pretreatment standard or requirement. Receipt, or non-receipt, of an order to achieve compliance shall in no way relieve the affected user of any liability associated with the violation. Issuance of an order to achieve compliance shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(5)  Cease and desist order. When it is determined that a user has violated and continues to violate any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Township may issue a cease and desist order requiring the affected user to eliminate the violation within 24 hours or face suspension of sewer service. This document shall specify the nature of the violation and require that the violation cease. If the violation has not been corrected within the ordered time period, the Township may suspend sewer service without further notice until such time as the affected user is able to demonstrate that it can comply with discharge standards and requirements. The cease and desist order shall be personally served on an authorized representative of the industrial user. Receipt, or non-receipt, of a cease and desist order shall in no way relieve the affected user of any liability associated with the violation. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(6)  Emergency cease and desist order/suspension of service. Whenever it is determined that a user has violated any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement, and that the violation creates or threatens to create an emergency situation including but not limited to pass-through or interference at the POTW, damage to the POTW, hazard to the environment, endangerment to the public health and safety, or violation of any condition of the Township's NPDES permit, the Township may issue an emergency cease and desist order. The emergency cease and desist order shall specify the nature of the violation, notify the affected user to eliminate the violating discharge immediately or face service severance via a temporary plug in its sewer connection at any time and without further warning, require that the user not recommence discharges until such time as the affected user is able to demonstrate that it can comply with the discharge requirements, and notify the affected user of its liability for any costs incurred by the Township to conduct this enforcement action. This document shall also establish the time and place for a hearing where the affected user shall present a written statement regarding the causes of the violation and measures taken to prevent future occurrences. The emergency cease and desist order will be personally served to an authorized representative of the industrial user, or may be delivered verbally via telephone to an authorized representative of the industrial user and then served personally. Receipt, or non-receipt, of an emergency cease and desist order shall in no way relieve the affected user of any liability associated with the violation. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(7)  Notice of termination. Except for emergency situations covered under this subdivision, whenever it is determined that a user's continuing violation of any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement warrants revocation of its privilege to discharge to the POTW, the Township may issue a notice of termination to warn of the impending suspension of the sewer service up to and including suspension severance via temporary plug in the affected user's sewer connection. The notice of termination shall specify the date and the time of scheduled service suspension in order to allow the affected user to either voluntarily cease the violating discharge or arrange appropriate actions such as production shut-down or alternative means of wastewater disposal, and notify the affected user of its liability for any costs incurred by the Township to conduct this enforcement action. This document shall also establish the time and place for a hearing where the affected user shall present a written statement regarding the causes of the violation and measures taken to prevent future occurrences. The notice of termination will be personally served on the user at least ten days before the scheduled service suspension. Receipt, or non-receipt, of a notice of termination shall in no way relieve the affected user of any liability associated with the violation. Issuance of a notice of termination shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(8)  Liable for fines, penalties, costs. In addition to the prescribed herein, the affected user shall be liable for all fines, penalties, and associated legal and other costs incurred by the Township as the result of a violation of its groundwater discharge or NPDES discharge permit that is attributable, in whole or in part, to the user's violation of any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(9)  When the Township finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement, an administrative fine may be assessed against the affected user in an amount up to $500.00 per violation. Administrative fines may be assessed in addition to municipal civil infraction fines. Each day during which the violation occurred or continues to occur may be deemed a separate violation and, in the case of a violation of monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, each day during the period of averaging may be deemed a separate violation. Receipt, or non-receipt, of an administrative fine shall in no way relieve the affected user of any liability associated with the violation. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other enforcement actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(10)  Except for emergency situations covered under this subdivision, any user desiring to dispute a Township-issued notice of violation or order, including but not limited to fines, may present a formal request for reconsideration. Such a request shall be submitted in writing to the Township to the attention of the Township Clerk and the Township Supervisor within ten days of first being notified of the corresponding order for all but a notice of termination, where such a request shall be submitted within five days of notification. Following receipt of a request for reconsideration, the Township Board shall fix a reasonable date and time for Board consideration of the request. Following consideration of the request, the Township Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the challenged notice of violation, order, and/or fine and/or impose other conditions or restrictions. Submittal of a request for reconsideration shall not stay the corresponding limit, notice of violation, order, fine, or any other enforcement proceedings by the Township against the affected user. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-353. - Public nuisance declared. 
Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se. Accordingly, the court shall, by injunction, order such nuisance abated and the user shall be adjudged guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Secs. 34-354—34-373. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Judicial Remedies 
 
Sec. 34-374. - Injunctive relief. 
(a)  When it is determined that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Township may petition the Circuit Court of Livingston County or other court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief. 
(b)  A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to issuance of a preliminary injunction or a permanent injunction or both as may be appropriate. This action shall be sought to restrain or compel activities on the part of the affected user. A petition for injunctive relief shall in no way relieve the affected user of any liability associated with the violation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-375. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable for a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 per violation as provided supra. Civil penalties may be sought and awarded in addition municipal civil infraction fines and administrative fines. Each day during which the violation occurred or continues to occur may be deemed a separate distinct violation and, in the case of a violation of monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, each day during the period of averaging may be deemed a separate violation. The affected user will also be liable for any and all costs incurred by the Township for associated enforcement action such as reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, additional sampling and monitoring expenses, costs of any environmental damage, any fines imposed upon the Township for groundwater discharge permit or NPDES permit violations that result, in whole or in part, from the user's violation, as well as expenses associated with remediation of sites thereby affected or contaminated. The Township may petition the court to impose, assess, and recover sums up to this limit of liability. 
(b)  In determining the appropriate amount of civil penalty to seek, the Township may take into account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained by the affected user as a result of the violation, corrective actions implemented or proposed to be implemented by the affected user, and history of compliance or noncompliance by the affected user. 
(c)  A suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-376. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who has willfully or negligently violated or continues to willfully or negligently violate any provision of its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to criminal prosecution. If convicted, the affected user will be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a monetary penalty of up to $500.00 per violation, imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both. Each day during which the violation occurred or continues to occur may be deemed a separate distinct violation and, in the case of a violation of monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, each day during the period of averaging may be deemed a separate violation. Criminal prosecution will not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(b)  Falsifying information. A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, report, record, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to criminal prosecution. If convicted, the affected user shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a monetary penalty of up to $500.00 per violation, imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both. Each day during which the violation occurred or continues to occur may be deemed a separate distinct violation and, in the case of a violation of monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, each day during the period of averaging may be deemed a separate violation. 
(c)  Tampering. A user who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any data device or test method used to monitor a discharge pursuant to this its wastewater discharge permit, this article, administrative order issued hereunder, or other pretreatment standard or requirement will be liable to criminal prosecution. If convicted, the affected user shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a monetary penalty of up to $500.00 per violation, imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both. Each day during which the violation occurred or continues to occur may be deemed a separate distinct violation and, in the case of a violation of monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, each day during the period of averaging may be deemed a separate violation. 
(d)  A criminal prosecution shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, any other actions by the Township against the affected user. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Secs. 34-377—34-396. - Reserved.  
DIVISION V. - MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Sec. 34-397. - Administrative liability. 
No officer, agent or employee of the Township or its authorized representative or member of the Township Board shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to any person as a result of any act, decision or other consequence or occurrence arising out of the discharge of their duties and responsibilities pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-398. - Rules and regulations. 
The Township may from time-to-time by resolution adopt rules and regulations governing operational, maintenance and technical matters relating to the POTW. Violation of any such rule or regulation shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-399. - Authority to inspect. 
The Township and its employees and agents, when bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted, with or without advance notice, to enter in and upon buildings and premises as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, surveillance, measurement, sampling and testing to determine compliance with this article. Any person who has applied for, and is receiving, sewer service shall be deemed to have consented to the inspection authorized by this section. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-400. - Injury to facilities. 
No person shall enter or maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, equipment or other part of the POTW. Cost associated with damage to POTW, including repair costs, labor, materials, of the Township by unauthorized alteration shall be invoiced and or assessed to the property owner including court cost and attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-401. - Unauthorized use or alteration. 
No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb the POTW, or appurtenance thereto, without first obtaining a written permit, which specifically allows such alteration, from the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-402. - Delegation of authority. 
The Township Board may, by resolution that shall be amendable and revocable at any time, delegate all or any part of the permit, inspection and other Township functions or responsibilities specified in this subdivision to any other governmental or private agency operating and maintaining public sewers on behalf of the Township. Such resolution shall be effective only for such portion of the Township public sewers as are operated and maintained by such agency. Regardless of any delegation authorized by this section, the Township Board only shall have the authority to refuse a permit to connect as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-403. - Delegation. 
The Township Board may, by resolution, which shall be amendable and revocable at any time, delegate all or any part of the functions, responsibilities and enforcement duties specified in this subdivision to the POTW treatment plant industrial surveillance personnel and/or any other governmental or private agency operating and maintaining public sewers on behalf of the Township. Such delegation may be exclusive or, alternatively, on a coequal basis between the Township and the POTW treatment plant industrial surveillance personnel and/or any other governmental or private agency. However, the establishment of any industrial surveillance fee or cost reimbursement to be charged, all surcharges, and all cost recovery shall be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-404. - Measurements, tests and analyses. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Sewage, a joint publication of the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or similar successor publication. All analytical and sampling procedures and methods shall meet the requirements in 40 CFR Part 136). All determinations shall be made based on samples taken at a control vault or station. If no vault or station has been required, then such determination shall be made at the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the sanitary lead is connected to the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-405. - Industrial surveillance. 
(a)  With respect to all users that are required to maintain preliminary treatment facilities or sampling facilities pursuant to this article, the Township shall institute a program pursuant to which Township personnel periodically check and assess, through samplings, the accuracy and completeness of the sampling records and other reports and information provided to the Township by the user pursuant to this article. The cost and expense incurred by the Township in conducting the program of periodic review shall be based on actual costs to implement industrial surveillance for each sewer customer or class of sewer customers to which the fee applies and shall be billed by the Township as part of each affected sewer customer's periodic sewer billing. 
(b)  If, based upon such review, the Township determines that the sampling records or other reports and information provided pursuant to this Ordinance are not substantially accurate, the Township may institute such sampling, laboratory analysis and other procedures, as necessary, to accurately sample and measure the wastewater being discharged. All expenses and charges incurred by the Township for such sampling, review and analysis shall be charged to the affected sewer customer. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-406. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data concerning a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public and other governmental agencies, without restriction, unless the user specifically requests that such information and data not be divulged because it is information, processes or methods of production which are entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portion of a report which might disclose trade secrets shall not, to the extent permitted by law, be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the POTW treatment plant; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall not be considered as confidential information. 
(c)  To the extent permitted by law, information accepted by the Township as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or the general public by the Township unless authorized by the user. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-407. - Records retention. 
Any user subject to reporting requirements imposed under this article shall maintain records of all information resulting from all sampling activities. Such records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling, the names of the persons taking the samples, the dates the analyses were performed, who performed the analyses, the analytical technique/method used for the analyses and the results of such analyses. Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of five years from the date on which the samplings took place. Such records shall be made available for inspection at the request of the Township. The period of retention shall be extended during the course of any litigation between the Township and the user. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-408. - Operating upsets. 
(a)  Any user which experiences an upset in operations, which places the user in a temporary state of noncompliance with this division, shall immediately telephone and notify the Township and the POTW treatment plant to which he is a contributor. A written follow up report thereof shall be filed by the user with the Township and the POTW treatment plant within five days. The report shall specify the following: 
(1)  Description of the upset, the cause thereof and the upset's impact on the user's compliance status. 
(2)  Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance and, if the noncompliance continues, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur. 
(3)  All steps taken, or to be taken, to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset or other conditions of noncompliance. 
(b)  A documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be in affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the Township against a user for any noncompliance with this division which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the period of the upset. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
Sec. 34-409. - Conflicts. 
Where provisions of any state law, rule or regulation, or other Township ordinance impose greater restrictions or higher standards than contained in this division, then the provisions of such law, rule, regulation or other Township ordinance shall control. 
(Ord. No. 01-2013, § 2, eff. 3-15-2013)  
DIVISION VI. - COMMUNITY WASTEWATER UTILITY SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, effective July 26, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 34-417—34-424. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Div. VI, §§ 34-410—34-410.7. 
 
Sec. 34-410. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Pursuant to Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality ("MDEQ") is authorized to issue permits for on-site sewage disposal systems that service more than one property (referred to herein as a "community wastewater utility system"). The Township recognizes that a community wastewater utility system may be in the best interests of the health, safety, and welfare of the Township and the residents in some very limited circumstances. However, the Township requires assurance that, any community wastewater utility system will be designed, constructed, operated, maintained, repaired and/or replaced in a manner that best serves and protects the health, safety, and welfare of the Township and its residents. Furthermore, the Township requires that it shall be indemnified by the owner and operator of the community wastewater system from any costs or liability in connection with the design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair and/or replacement of that system. 
(b)  The Township also recognizes that, should the operation of a community wastewater system fail or otherwise not properly function or if the owner or operator of the community wastewater utility system fails or is unable to continue to operate the system, the Township may be required to take over the operation of the community wastewater utility system in order to protect the health, welfare, and safety of residents of the Township. To this effect, this division is intended to regulate community wastewater utility systems to provide those assurances, including the authority of the Township to defray any costs of repairing/maintaining the system by establishing a special assessment district against any property benefited by the community wastewater utility system in accordance with the provisions of Act 188 of Public Acts of 1954, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 34-410.1. - Authority. 
This article is enacted under the authority of the Township's general police powers to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its residents and under the authority of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 34-410.2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below: 
(a)  Act 451 means Act. No. 451 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1994, as amended. 
(b)  Association , for a condominium development, shall have the same meaning as "association of co-owners" found in Act No. 59 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1978, as amended. For a subdivision or other development, it shall mean an association of homeowners or property owners organized pursuant to deed restrictions and/or restrictive covenants or through their own volition in a particular development. 
(c)  Community wastewater utility system , system and CWUS are used synonymously in this chapter and mean a facility that is owned by a non-governmental entity and is designed, constructed, operated, and maintained to transport, collect, process, and treat sanitary sewage from more than one structure or from more than one parcel of property. 
(d)  CWUS operator means a legal entity of perpetual duration that is responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the community wastewater utility system. 
(e)  CWUS owner means the single non-governmental entity that owns and controls, or is proposed to own and control, the CWUS facilities. 
(f)  Development means and includes a subdivision as defined by Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, a condominium pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended, and applicable Township ordinance or any group of dwellings, buildings or structures on one or more parcels of land that are proposed to be serviced by a community wastewater utility system. 
(g)  Development documents means: 
(1)  For a condominium project, the master deed and bylaws provided by Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended; 
(2)  With regard to subdivisions or other developments, deed restrictions and/or restrictive covenants, including deed restrictions required by this article; and 
(3)  The articles of incorporation and bylaws of the association. 
(h)  Expansion means any activity whereby additional structures or users shall be added to an existing system. 
(i)  Public sanitary sewer system means a publicly-owned sanitary sewer system. 
(j)  MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and its successors. 
(k)  Owner means the owner of property which is serviced or is proposed to be serviced by a community wastewater utility system. Ownership may include fee simple interest, land contract purchase, or other form of ownership of a unit in a condominium, a lot in a subdivision, or a parcel of land in other types of developments. 
(Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 34-410.3. - Regulations. 
(a)  Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct, install, or operate a community wastewater utility system within the Township. 
(b)  Community wastewater utility systems shall require a special use permit from the planning commission in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in section 38-44, special approval use of the Zoning Ordinance. A community wastewater utility system shall be designed, constructed and operated solely for the development it is intended to serve, but may be approved with additional capacity to serve future or additional properties. 
(c)  No new community wastewater utility system or an expansion of an existing system shall be constructed, installed, or operated within the Township unless the Township Board has issued a permit approving the plans for the design, construction, installation, maintenance and operation of the system pursuant to this chapter. The Township Board shall review an application for a permit under this Chapter after a special approval use permit has been conditionally approved and may approve the permit application only after the Township Board determines that the applicant has met all the standards and requirements for approval contained in this chapter. 
(d)  There shall at all times be a single entity that owns and controls the CWUS facility, who is the CWUS owner. The CWUS owner shall be the owner and developer of the development, subject only to a transfer of ownership and control to an association or other third party that has been approved by the Township Board based on financial ability and viability and a vested interest in the proper operation and maintenance of the system. 
(e)  In addition to complying with this chapter, community wastewater utility systems must comply with all other sections of this code applicable to the design, construction and installation of sewer and wastewater systems for developments in the Township. 
(Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 34-410.4. - Standards and specifications; requirements for approval. 
(a)  The design, construction, and operation of the proposed community wastewater utility system shall comply with the terms of this chapter, other applicable sections of this Code, and the applicable laws. 
(b)  No permit for a new community wastewater utility system or an expansion of an existing system shall be approved unless the plans for the design, construction, installation and operation of the system have been approved by all governmental authorities having jurisdiction over the construction and maintenance of community wastewater utility systems, including but not limited to the state department of public health, the MDEQ, and the state public service commission. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide the following to the Township before approval of a permit for a community wastewater utility system may be granted: 
(1)  The plans for the design, construction, installation and operation of the system. 
(2)  The proposed specifications, standards and guidelines for operation, inspection, monitoring, maintenance, repair and replacement of the system. 
(3)  An original signed written certification from the system design engineer, including the identification of the engineer's professional seal and license number accompanied by an unconditional statement certifying that the system as designed and constructed will adequately process wastewater as required by applicable laws and regulations of the state, the county and the Township. The Township engineer shall review and make a recommendation regarding the adequacy of such certification. 
(4)  An executed agreement between the CWUS owner and the applicable department of the county or another properly certified CWUS operator possessing the required ability to operate and manage the system. The agreement shall contain provisions for: 
a.  The operation, monitoring, inspection, maintenance, repair, and replacement of the system, as designed and approved; 
b.  The collection of charges for connection to, and use, operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement of the system; 
c.  Compliance with all applicable governmental laws, ordinances, regulations, and agreements regarding the system; 
(5)  At the time of application, the applicant shall establish an escrow account for the purposes of paying the costs of all building, engineering, and legal reviews incurred in reviewing all required information and documentation with respect to the application. 
(6)  Any other provisions deemed necessary by the Township to ensure consistency and compliance with this article and the development agreement described in section 34-421(e) below. The agreement shall reference this chapter and any permit that may be issued hereunder, and it shall provide that it may not be terminated without advance written notice to the Township and approval by the Township of a suitable substitute as a condition of continuing compliance with this chapter, and that the agreement shall not be amended without the advance written consent of the Township and any amendments without such consent shall be invalid and of no force or effect. The Township attorney and Township engineer shall review and make recommendations regarding the adequacy of such an agreement and any amendments thereto. 
a.  An executed development agreement between the CWUS owner and the Township in a form acceptable to the Township. At a minimum, the agreement shall: 
1.  Provide that the CWUS owner is responsible for operation, monitoring, inspection, maintenance, repair and replacement of the system. 
2.  Identify the CWUS operator who is responsible for such operation, maintenance, monitoring, inspection, repair and replacement on behalf of the CWUS owner. 
3.  Specify minimum standards for inspection, monitoring, operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the system in accordance with the specifications, standards and guidelines recommended by the system manufacturer, system design engineer and the certified CWUS operator, and the requirements of the Township, state and the county. 
4.  State the CWUS's agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the Township and its officers, employees, agents, representatives and contractors from any and all damages, injuries, liability, claims, actions, losses, demands and/or law suits, including attorney fees and costs that in any way arise out of or relate to the community wastewater treatment utility system, including but not limited to the operation, inspection, monitoring, maintenance, repair and replacement of the system and the failure to do so. 
5.  Require the CWUS owner to provide and maintain at all times a policy of insurance, including casualty insurance for the replacement value of the insurable components of the system, comprehensive general liability insurance, sewage back-up, overflow and flooding liability insurance, and pollution legal liability insurance with limits acceptable to the Township. The Township and its officers, employees, agents, contractors and representatives shall be named as additional insureds on the insurance policies. All insurance policies shall be issued by an insurer registered/licensed in the state and with an A.M. Best Rating acceptable to the Township. No policy of such insurance shall be cancelled or permitted to lapse without 30 days advance written notice to the Township and without securing similar coverage. 
6.  Grant the Township the right and authority that may be exercised at its sole discretion, to require that the community sewer system be abandoned and all properties in the development be connected to any publicly-owned community sewer system that is constructed and available in the future to serve the development, and obligate the CWUS owner, at its expense, to comply with such requirements if exercised by the Township. 
7.  Include a provision agreeing that the Township shall have the option, but not the obligation, to purchase for the sum of $1.00: 
i.  Marketable title to any lands required to be titled in the name of the Township by governmental or regulatory requirements; or 
ii.  Easements reasonably deemed by the Township to be necessary, required in the event the Township assumes responsibility for the community wastewater utility system or any future publicly-owned community sewer system. 
8.  The development agreement shall include a provision that the applicant and owner has agreed to the establishment of a special assessment district for the development, without further notice, the purpose of which shall be to provide for the assessment of the units, lots or parcels in each development by the Township for the costs of inspection, monitoring, maintenance, repair, operation or replacement of the community wastewater utility system in the event the CWUS owner shall fail to properly perform such work or in the event the Township takes control of the community wastewater utility system. Said special assessment district may be established by agreement with the Township. After approval, the development agreement shall be recorded against the subject property, with the cost for recording paid by the applicant. 
9.  Grant the Township the right, but not the obligation, to take over ownership and operation of the CWUS in the event that the CWUS owner: 
i.  Becomes insolvent or goes into bankruptcy or receivership; 
ii.  Fails to maintain the required operating, maintenance, and capital reserves required by this chapter within six months after written notice from the Township that the reserves do not meet the requirements of this chapter; or 
iii.  Is unable, unwilling or fails for any reason to operate, maintain, inspect, monitor, repair or replace the CWUS, or any part thereof, in full compliance with this article where failure to meet such requirements in six successive months or in more than eight months in a 12-month period shall be conclusively determined to be an inability to comply with. In the event that the Township assumes ownership of the CWUS, the Township shall hold and operate the CWUS for the benefit of the association and owners. The Township may transfer the facilities, assets, and reserves of the CWUS to a new CWUS owner on the condition that such facilities, assets, or reserves be used solely for providing sewer services to the owners, in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
10.  Provide that, in the event the Township takes over ownership and operation of the CWUS, the costs and expenses incurred by the Township in doing so, plus an administrative fee in an amount no less than 25 percent of such costs and expenses, shall constitute a debt that shall be paid to the Township from the following sources: from the funds in the system maintenance and replacement funds required under this chapter; if the foregoing funding sources are insufficient or unavailable for any reason, then from the proceeds of assessments to the properties within the special assessment district established pursuant to this chapter; and if the foregoing funding sources are insufficient or unavailable for any reason, then the Township shall have a lien for the total amount of such costs incurred by the Township the amount of which may be placed upon the delinquent tax roll relative to all lots, units and parcels within the development, on a pro rata basis, to accrue interest and penalties, and to be treated and collected as and in the manner provided by law for the collection of delinquent real property taxes. 
11.  Grant the Township the right to enter onto the property and to inspect any part of the community wastewater utility system for compliance with this chapter, the development agreement and all applicable laws. 
12.  Consent to personal jurisdiction and venue in the county circuit court, agree that money damages are not an adequate remedy at law and cannot make the Township whole for damages arising out of the breach of the development agreement, and agree to injunctive remedies in any action brought by the Township to enforce the development agreement or enforce compliance with applicable ordinances and laws. 
13.  Contain a provision mandating that, in the event the Livingston County Road Commission requires the use of any of the right-of-way used by facilities that are a part of the CWUS, the facilities shall be moved as requested by the Livingston County Road Commission at the sole cost and expense of the CWUS. 
14.  Include any other provisions related to the proposed system and deemed necessary by the Township. 
15.  The provisions of the development agreement shall also be included in a separate document, in a form approved by the Township attorney, shall be recorded against the applicable properties, and included within the development documents that run with the land and in disclosure documents delivered to prospective purchasers prior to the execution of a purchase agreement for property proposed to be serviced by a community wastewater utility system. 
(7)  A permanent and irrevocable easement, in recordable form, shall be signed by the CWUS owner and any other necessary property owners granting the Township and its employees, agents, and assigns access to and the right to enter on the development and all property upon which the system is located for the purpose of inspections and any and all other activities permitted under this chapter and the development agreement. The property on which the system is located shall be maintained so it is accessible at all times, prohibiting any structures or landscaping within such area that would unreasonably interfere with such access. 
(8)  The community wastewater utility system shall be a general common element of a condominium in which it is located, or part of common areas of any other development. The system shall be inspected, monitored, operated, maintained, repaired and replaced by the CWUS owner with the right of the CWUS owner to assess the owners for all such costs. 
(9)  The CWUS owner shall establish and at all times maintain an adequate operating and maintenance reserve sufficient for five years of monitoring, inspection, operation, maintenance and repair of the system, and an adequate equipment replacement reserve sufficient to fund replacement of the CWUS and equipment after the end of its anticipated useful life. The amounts for these reserves shall be provided by the system design engineer and shall be subject to the review and approval of the Township engineer. The development documents shall provide user fees and assessments of owners to ensure perpetual funding of the reserves at the designated level, including reasonable increases to account for inflation and other factors. The reserve funds shall be established and held under an escrow agreement, which shall be submitted to the Township for review and approval prior to issuance of the CWUS permit. The Township may require escrowed reserve funds over and above those required by other applicable agencies should the Township find that escrows required by other agencies are insufficient to cover obligations. In the event of non-performance by the CWUS owner or the CWUS operator of proper maintenance and operation of the CWUS, the association or the owners shall have the right and obligation to thaw on such escrow reserve fund for the purpose of undertaking proper maintenance, inspection, operation and replacement of the CWTJS, and payment of fees, costs and expenses of same. 
(10)  A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the association and a copy of the form of the restrictive covenant/deed restrictions/or master deed imposing upon owners the obligation to pay for all capital and operating costs and reserves associated with the community wastewater utility systems. 
(11)  Evidence satisfactory to the Township board that the CWUS operator employs one or more individuals who have all qualifications and certifications required under applicable laws to operate the system. 
(d)  No building permit shall be issued for any structure or development proposed to be serviced by a community sewer system until the Township Board has approved such system in accordance with the terms and provision of this chapter and until the system complies with all otherwise applicable laws and ordinances. 
(e)  Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the Township shall not be responsible or obligated to perform any needed or desired operation, monitoring, inspection, repairs, maintenance, improvement, and/or replacement of the system or any portion thereof. 
(f)  The CWUS operator and/or CWUS owner shall furnish periodic operating and maintenance reports to the Township building department and department of public works in accordance with the maintenance requirements and schedule. Any such requirements shall be made a part of the development documents. 
(g)  After the Township's approval, the development documents referenced in section 34-421(e) and development agreement referenced in section 34-421(e) shall be recorded at the office of the county register of deeds. After approval by the Township, the development documents, as they pertain to the system, shall not be changed without the written consent and approval of the Township. The documents shall display language to that effect. 
(h)  The CWUS owner, association, owners and/or users of the system shall be jointly and severally responsible for all costs involved in the installation, operation, monitoring, inspection, maintenance, repair, replacement and liability associated with the system. The Township may, at its option, elect to collect all costs it may incur in connection with the system pursuant to this article, or by direct court action against the CWUS owner, CWUS operator, association, owners, and/or users of the system. 
(i)  Pursuant to the easements and grants of access rights required under this chapter, or as otherwise permitted by law, Township enforcement officers, inspectors, employees, contractors and consultants shall have authority and be permitted by the CWUS owner, association and owners to enter upon privately-owned land for the purpose of enforcing this article and taking or causing to be made such examinations, surveys or samplings as are deemed necessary in the discretion of the Township. 
(Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 34-410.5. - Application review and approval. 
(a)  Application submission. Permits required under this chapter shall be reviewed and acted upon following the submission of an application to the Township building department using a form prepared by said department for such purposes, which shall include all information, plans, materials, agreements, certifications, documents, fees and charges required under this chapter. The applicant shall supply an original and 12 copies of its complete application submission. The applicant shall also supply a copy of said application submission to the Township engineer. 
(b)  Review of application submission. Following receipt of an application, the building department and Township engineer, with the assistance of the Township attorney and consultants, shall review the submission. The building official shall forward the application, together with any review comments, to the Township Board after verifying that the application is complete and contains the information, plans, materials, documents, fees and charges required under this chapter. 
(c)  Board review. The Township Board shall consider the application following receipt of the building official's verification and at least five days' written notice to the applicant and owner, at which time the Township Board shall provide an opportunity for the applicant and interested persons to address the Township Board. Within a reasonable time following the completion of its consideration, the Township Board shall make a determination by motion or resolution to issue the permit, issue the permit with specific conditions, or deny issuance of the permit. If the permit is issued with conditions, conditions imposed shall be for the purpose of insuring compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws, or to insure that public health, safety and welfare concerns relating to the CWUS are adequately addressed. The permit shall also specify a time period for commencement and completion of all construction and installation activities. Additionally, the permit may require the posting of a cash bond or automatically renewing irrevocable letter of credit in a reasonable amount to insure compliance with the permit. A denial of a permit shall be accompanied by a stated reason for denial. 
(Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 34-410.6. - Fees. 
Applications for community wastewater utility systems approval under this chapter shall be accompanied by a non-refundable administrative application fee in an amount specified from time to time by resolution of the Township Board. In addition, an applicant shall pay an additional escrow fee in an amount determined by resolution of the Township Board for the estimated administrative costs, legal costs, and costs of outside consultant(s), who may be retained by the Township, in connection with the review of the application. In the event the actual cost of the review is less than the escrow fee, the applicant shall be refunded the balance. In the event the actual cost of the review exceeds the amount of the escrow fee, the applicant shall pay the deficiency to the Township prior to the final decision of the Township Board concerning issuance of a permit. A denial of an application for a permit shall not affect the applicant's obligation to pay the escrow fee provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
Sec. 34-410.7. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Permit revocation and stop work orders. Independent of Township enforcement under other subsections of this section, in the event of a violation of this chapter, the Township may at any time take the following actions: 
(1)  The Township Board may issue an order revoking any permit issued under this chapter following a hearing before the Township Board at which the holder of the permit shall be given an opportunity to be heard; 
(2)  The Township building official, or his/her respective designee, may issue a stop-work order or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, permits or inspections until the provisions of this chapter, including any conditions attached to a permit, have been fully met. Failure to obey a revocation order or a stop-work order shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter; and 
(3)  Exercise any or all of its rights relative to the CWUS as set forth in this chapter or the development agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Civil remedies. In addition to enforcement under other subsections of this section, the provisions of this chapter may be enforceable through any and all remedies at law or in equity in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any activity conducted in violation of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance per se, and the Township may commence a civil suit for an order abating or enjoining the violation, and/or requiring restoration of the property as nearly as possible to its condition before the violation. 
(c)  Civil infractions. Except for the criminal violations set forth in section 34-424(d) below, a violation of this chapter shall be a civil infraction to which the remedies set forth in chapter 20 of this Code and the following specifically designated fines shall apply: 
(1)  First violation: The civil fine for a first offense violation of this chapter within any 36-month period shall be $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense. 
(2)  Second violation: The civil fine for a second offense violation of this chapter within any 36-month period shall be $1,000.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense. 
(3)  Third violation: The civil fine for a third offense violation of this chapter within any 36 month period shall be $2,500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense. 
(4)  Fourth or subsequent violation: The civil fine for a fourth offense violation of this chapter and all subsequent offenses within any 36-month period shall be $5,000.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense. 
(d)  Misdemeanors. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any application, records, report, plan or other document, filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court, together with costs of prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 04-2015, § 1, eff. 7-26-2015)  
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY SERVICES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Regulate municipal owned utility, MCL 460.6. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-411. - Acquisition request. 
A request may be made to the Township Board by a developer of land or the owner of any street lighting, sewer or water supply system for the Township to acquire such system. Consideration shall be given to such request by the Township Board, which may, in its discretion and under such reasonable conditions as it may prescribe, accept such system. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 2.1, 9-1-1993)  
Sec. 34-412. - Construction, specifications, plans, engineering and inspections. 
All construction, specifications, plans, engineering and inspections of such street lighting, sewer or water system shall be done in accordance with accepted engineering standards and as provided by Township ordinance. Before accepting any system, the Township Board may require such system to be approved by the Township Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 2.2, 9-1-1993)  
Sec. 34-413. - Payment of costs. 
The Township may pay part or all of the cost of acquiring, constructing and installing a street lighting, sewer or water supply system, and additions, extensions and improvements thereto, including administrative, engineering, legal and financial fees. The Township shall establish charges so that all such payments are reimbursed to the Township and each system is self-supporting. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 2.3, 9-1-1993)  
Sec. 34-414. - Supervision and control. 
The construction, alteration, repair and management of the street lighting, sewer or water system shall be under the supervision and control of the Township Board, and the Township Treasurer shall be responsible for billing, collection of revenues and supervision of various funds of the system. The Township Board may employ such persons in such capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the system. The Township Board shall make such rules, orders and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the system. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 2.4, 9-1-1993)  
Sec. 34-415. - Revenues. 
Beginning on the first of the month after the date of acceptance by the Township Board, the revenues of the street lighting, sewer or water system shall be set aside, as collected and deposited, in a separate account, in a bank duly qualified to do business in the state, in an account to be designated as the "Green Oak Township Sewer, Water Supply and Street Lighting Operation and Maintenance Fund." Such deposited revenues are pledged for the purpose of the administration and operation of the system, and such current expenses for maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 4, 9-1-1993)  
Secs. 34-416—34-440. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Finance, § 2-171 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-441. - Establishment of charges. 
The Township Board shall, by resolution, establish charges on an individual system basis for each street lighting, sewer or water system, which charges may be changed from time-to-time and may vary from system-to-system. The charges, rates and fees shall be sufficient so that each system is self-sustaining, with sufficient reserves to offset depreciation and for replacement of equipment. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 3.1, 9-1-1993)  
Sec. 34-442. - Connection charges. 
The Township Board may establish a connection charge for each sewer, water or street lighting connection made to such system. Such charge shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a connection permit and the start of any work to accomplish the connection to the system. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 3.2, 9-1-1993)  
Sec. 34-443. - Deposits. 
A cash deposit equal to a sum of not less than the six months' rate, as security for payment of sewer, water or street lighting rates, may be required of each user in such cases as the Township Board or its agent shall deem such security to be advisable or in such cases where a deposit is required by law. The unearned portion of such deposit shall be returned to such user upon discontinuance of service. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 3.3, 9-1-1993)  
Sec. 34-444. - Service rates. 
Rates for service shall be fixed by resolution of the Township Board, which rates shall be sufficient to provide for the payment of expenses of administration, operation and maintenance of the systems as are necessary to preserve the systems in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of such other expenses as may come due and payable, the creation of the reserves and to provide for such other funds and expenditures of such systems as may be required by law or the prudent management and operation of each system. Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time-to-time by the Township Board as may be necessary to provide such amounts when needed. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 3.4, 9-1-1993)  
Sec. 34-445. - Billing. 
All bills shall be rendered to the users on a quarterly basis, and such bills shall show the amount due and the due date, which due date shall not be less than 15 days after the bill is sent to the user. A penalty, as determined by resolution of the Township Board, shall be charged to all users on all bills not paid by the due date. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 3.5, 9-1-1993)  
Sec. 34-446. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Charges for street lighting, sewer or water service shall constitute a lien on the property served. On or before September 1 of each year, the Township Treasurer shall deliver to the Township Supervisor a certified statement of all street lighting, sewer or water charges then past due and unpaid. The Township Supervisor shall then place such charges on the general tax roll and such charges shall be collected as a part of the general Township taxes. 
(b)  The Township shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises for the nonpayment of water rates and charges when due and unpaid for six months or more, and such water shall not be turned on until all sums then due and owing shall be paid in full and a turn-on fee is paid. Such turn-on fee shall be determined by resolution adopted by the Township Board. 
(c)  The Township shall have the right to discontinue the water service, sewage disposal service or street lighting service to any premises for the nonpayment of rates and charges when due and unpaid for a period of six months or more, and such service shall not be restored until all sums then due and owning shall be paid in full and a turn-on fee is paid. Such turn-on fee shall be determined by resolution adopted by the Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 3.6, 9-1-1993)  
Sec. 34-447. - Free service. 
No free service shall be furnished by any sewer, water or street lighting system to any person. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 3.7, 9-1-1993)  
Secs. 34-448—34-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 34-501. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "Green Oak Charter Township Stormwater Management Ordinance" and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-502. - Findings. 
(a)  Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds, resulting in increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes, increased flooding, increased stream channel erosion, increased sediment transport and deposition, and increased nonpoint source pollutant loading to the receiving water bodies and the Great Lakes. 
(b)  Because stormwater conveyance systems are connected to surface water features, such as streams, lakes and wetlands, illicit discharges into a stormwater system can introduce significant pollutants into water features, degrading the water quality for ecological and recreational uses. 
(c)  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized by the regulation of stormwater runoff from development, and by regulation of illicit connections and discharges into stormwater conveyance systems. 
(d)  The constitution and laws of Michigan authorize local units of government to provide stormwater management services and systems that will contribute to the protection and preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare and to protect natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-503. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to: 
(a)  Protect and enhance the water quality of local watercourses, water bodies, and groundwater pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act. 
(b)  Control non-stormwater discharges to stormwater conveyances and reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges. 
(c)  Provide design, construction, operation, and maintenance criteria for permanent and temporary on-site stormwater management facilities to control stormwater runoff volume to prevent flooding, protect stream channels from erosion, and preserve water quality. 
(d)  Encourage the recharge of groundwater by promoting the infiltration of stormwater as a supplement to normal conveyance systems, where appropriate, while preventing the degradation of groundwater quality. 
(e)  Where feasible and prudent, use low impact development (LID) stormwater management principals and techniques, as described in the Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan, in new development and redevelopment projects. 
(f)  Ensure that all stormwater facilities have an appropriate governmental unit overseeing private maintenance of such facilities to ensure their continued and effective functioning. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-504. - Definitions. 
The terms as used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
Authorized Enforcement Agent. The Supervisor, Zoning Administrator, Ordinance Enforcement Officer, and/or any individual designated by the Supervisor, Zoning Administrator, Ordinance Enforcement Officer, as an Authorized Enforcement Agent. 
Best management practices ("BMPs"). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices that comply with the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality's Guidebook of Best Management Practices for Michigan Watersheds, and the Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan, and/or, where appropriate, the standards of the Livingston County Drain Commissioner and Road Commission. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and structural and managerial practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
CFR. The Code of Federal Regulations. 
Clean Water Act (CWA). Federal Water Pollution Control Act enacted by Public Law 92-500 as amended by Public Laws 95-217, 95-576, 96-483, and 97-117; 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
County drain: A combination of swale, ditch or pipe drainage established for maintenance by the County Drain Commissioner whose maintenance is assessed against a drainage district, in accordance with the provisions of Act 40 of the public acts of 1956, as amended. 
Stormwater drainage criteria. The stormwater management design criteria as outlined in the Rules of Livingston County Drain Commissioner Livingston County Procedures and Design Criteria for Stormwater Management Systems and Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Program. 
Detention. A system which is designed to capture stormwater and release it over a given period of time through an outlet structure at a controlled rate. 
Developed or development. Any construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure within the jurisdiction of the Green Oak Charter Township, as well as any manmade change or alteration to the landscape, including, but not limited to, mining, drilling, dredging, grading, paving, excavating, and filling. 
Discharge. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, non-stormwater runoff, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into a stormwater conveyance system, waters of the state, groundwater, or into waters of the United States. 
Discharger. Any person, who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
Enforcement Official. Supervisor, Zoning Administrator, Ordinance Enforcement Officer. Those persons charged with enforcing this article. 
Fire fighting water. Any water, and any substance or materials contained therein, used in an emergency, to control or extinguish a fire. 
Grading. Any stripping, excavating, filling, and stockpiling of soil or any combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
Green Oak Charter Township Non-Stormwater Disposal Best Management Practices. Best management practices adopted by reference by this article for non-stormwater disposal. 
Illicit connection. Any physical connection to a stormwater conveyance system that allows the discharge of non-stormwater, sanitary sewers, or septic systems and which has not been permitted by the Township or other appropriate public agency. 
Illicit discharge. Any discharge to a stormwater conveyance that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges covered by and in compliance with an NPDES permit. 
Impervious surface. A surface which prevents or retards the penetration of water into the ground, including, but not limited to, roofs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, concrete and asphalt paving, gravel, compacted native surfaces and earthen materials, and oiled, macadam, or other surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of stormwater. 
Infiltration. The percolation of water into the ground, expressed in inches per hour. 
Maintenance agreement. A binding agreement that sets forth the terms, measures, and conditions for the maintenance of stormwater systems and facilities. 
Major modification. An alteration to an existing or planned stormwater drainage facility that does one or more of the following: changes the volume, surface area, depth, inflow rates, outflow rates or level of treatment by five percent or more; changes the treatment process; adds more than 1,000 square feet of impervious surface; or increases the tributary impervious drainage area to an individual drainage facility component by more than ten percent. 
MDNRE. Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit. A permit issued by the State of Michigan, as authorized by USEPA, Region 5, in compliance with the federal Clean Water Act for the discharge of pollutants into the waters of the state. 
Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge that is not entirely composed of stormwater. 
Offsite facility. All or part of a drainage system that is located partially or completely off the development site which it serves. 
Owner or operator. The owner or operator of any stormwater management system or activity subject to regulation under this article, including operational and day-to-day control over facility activities. 
Peak rate of discharge. The maximum rate of stormwater flow at a particular location following a storm event, as measured at a given point and time in cubic feet per second (CFS). 
Person. Any individual, firm, association, club, organization, corporation, partnership, business trust, company or other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. 
Pollutant. Sediment, non-point source pollutants in stormwater runoff, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, wastewater, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 USC 2011 et seq.)), heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water as otherwise defined in 40 CFR 122.2. 
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Redevelopment. A project for which a building permit is required that proposes to add, replace and/or alter impervious surfaces affecting the existing drainage system, other than routine maintenance, resurfacing, or repair. A project which meets the criteria of a major modification as defined in this section shall be considered a redevelopment. 
Retention. A holding system for stormwater, either natural or man-made, whose only outlet consists of an emergency spillway or high-water overflow to adjoining watercourses or wetlands. Water stored up to the emergency overflow elevation is removed through infiltration and/or evaporation processes. 
Runoff. That part of precipitation which flows over the land (i.e. is not infiltrated). 
Sediment. Mineral or organic particulate matter that has been removed from its site of origin by the processes of soil erosion, is in suspension in water, or is being transported. 
Stormwater. Water runoff and surface drainage associated with rain storm events and snow melt. 
Stormwater conveyance system. A conveyance or system of conveyances designed or used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff including, but not limited to, roads, catch basins, curbs, gutters, parking lots, ditches, conduits, pumping devices, swales, or man-made channels. 
Stormwater management. The process of infiltration, collection, conveyance, storage, treatment, and discharge of stormwater to ensure control of the magnitude and frequency of runoff and to minimize the hazards associated with flooding. Also includes implementing controls to reduce the discharge of pollutants including management practices, control techniques and systems, site design and engineering methods. 
Stormwater management plan. Information prepared by a registered civil engineer which describes the details of the drainage system, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques that will be used to control stormwater, including sealed drawings, written information, engineering calculations, computer analyses, maintenance and operations procedures, and all other supporting documentation, having as its purpose to ensure that the objectives of this article are met. 
Swale. Historically referred to as a ditch. A defined contour of land with gradual slopes that transport and direct the flow of stormwater. 
Township. Green Oak Charter Township, Livingston County, Michigan. MM. U.S. EPA. United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Variance. A modification of the requirements of the ordinance granted by the Township. 
Waters of the State. All the accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural and artificial, public and private, or parts thereof which are wholly or partially within, which flow through or border upon the state. 
Waters of the United States. Waters as defined in 40 CFR 122.2. 
Waterways or Watercourse. All lakes, streams, drains, wetlands, or Waters of the State. 
Watershed. An area in which there is a common outlet into which stormwater ultimately flows, otherwise known as a drainage area. 
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation or aquatic life typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, wet meadows, wooded wetlands, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-505. - Applicability. 
(a)  In General. Unless otherwise excluded, as described in section 34-505 (a)—(f), all permanent and temporary stormwater management controls and facilities, constructed as part of the requirements of this section as new construction, redevelopment, re-paving, infill, or site expansions in the Township, are subject to this article. This article also applies to any activities which may affect the quantity or quality of a private stormwater conveyance system or any waterway within the Township. 
(b)  In Particular. Unless otherwise excluded, as described in section 34-505 (a)—(f), information regarding stormwater management through submission of a stormwater management plan is required under this article in the following situations: 
(1)  For new or re-development projects that require a stormwater permit from the Livingston County Drain Commissioner, as outlined in the Livingston County Drain Commissioner Procedures and Design Criteria for Stormwater Management Systems. 
(2)  For new or re-development projects that require a soil erosion and sedimentation permit, and/or a grading permit from the Livingston County Drain Commissioner's office. 
(3)  For new or re-development projects that require site plan review or minor site plan administrative review. 
(4)  For new or re-development projects that require a building permit. (Note that projects that receive a waiver for or do not require a soil erosion and sedimentation permit from the Livingston County Drain Commissioner for such project are not subject to the requirements in this article.) 
(5)  For new or re-development projects that require a land use permit. (Note that projects that receive a waiver for or do not require a soil erosion and sedimentation permit from the Livingston County Drain Commissioner for such project are not subject to the requirements of this article.) 
(6)  For any new or re-development on property divided by land division where more than three parcels of less than one acre are created. 
(7)  For maintenance of a stormwater basin constructed prior to the effective date of the regulations of which this subsection is a part. (Note that projects that receive a waiver for or do not require a soil erosion and sedimentation permit from the Livingston County Drain Commissioner for such project are not subject to the requirements of this article.) 
(8)  For new or re-development projects and earth changes not listed above or specifically exempted in section 34-505(a)—(f), a stormwater management plan shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the requirements of section 34-507 unless otherwise determined by the Township, or its designee. 
The following activities do not require submission of a stormwater management plan to the Township: 
(a)  Activities protected by the Right to Farm Act 93 of 1981. 
(b)  Activities involving improvement of county drains by the Drain Commissioner which are under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment. 
(c)  Routine single-family residential landscaping and/or gardening which conforms to the stormwater management plan previously approved by Green Oak Township, and which does not otherwise materially alter stormwater flow from the property in terms of rate and/or volume. 
(d)  Development on one single-family lot, parcel, or condominium unit where the Township Engineer, or his/her designee, concurs with the owner or applicants determination that, due to the size of the site, or due to other circumstances, the quantity, quality, and/or rate of stormwater leaving the site will not be meaningfully altered. 
(e)  The installation or removal of individual mobile homes within a mobile home park. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to the construction, expansion, or modification of a mobile home park. 
(f)  Plats that have received preliminary plat approval and other developments with final land use approval prior to the effective date of this article, where such approvals remain in effect. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-506. - Plan approval required. 
No development or preparation for development on a site shall occur unless and until an application has been submitted and approved for a stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-507. - Plan preparation and submission. 
(a)  All plans are to be prepared by a registered civil engineer. Other persons and professionals may assist in the preparation of the plan. The plan shall be drawn in a standard engineering scale not less than one inch equals 50 feet, and provided on a sheet of paper that does not exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. 
(b)  Fees. When plans are submitted to the Township, it shall be accompanied with a permit fee in an amount provided for in a fee schedule adopted by the Green Oak Charter Township Board. The fee schedule may be revised periodically by resolution. 
(c)  Plan submission. 
(1)  For developments subject to site plan review, the applicant shall submit the same number of copies of the stormwater management plan as required for site plan review at the time that the preliminary site plan, if applicable, is submitted. 
(2)  For minor site plans subject to administrative review, the applicant shall submit the stormwater management plan at the time that the minor site plan is submitted. 
(3)  For developments subject to subdivision plat review, the applicant shall submit the same number of copies of the stormwater management plan as required for plat review at the time that the tentative preliminary plan is submitted. 
(4)  For earth changes or other activities subject to administrative review and stormwater management plan requirements, the plan shall be submitted to the Building Department at the same time grading and/or building plans are submitted. 
(5)  Compliance with the requirements of this article does not eliminate the need for the proprietor to obtain required permits and approvals from county and state agencies, or for compliance with other applicable Township ordinances and regulations. 
(d)  Stormwater management plan contents. The plans shall include: 
(1)  Information required, if any, by the Livingston County Drain Commissioner, as outlined in the Livingston County Drain Commissioner Procedures and Design Criteria for Stormwater Management Systems. 
(2)  Location by means of a small location map, drawn to a scale no less than one inch equals 2,000 feet. 
(3)  Zoning classification of parcel and all abutting parcels. 
(4)  Location and description of all on-site features and all adjacent off-site features within 200 feet, and all other off-site features that may be impacted in determining the overall requirements for the development. 
This includes: 
a.  Existing site topography with contours at two-foot intervals or less based on the USGS datum. 
b.  Adjoining roads and developments. 
c.  Railroads. 
d.  High tension power lines or underground transmission lines. 
e.  Cemeteries. 
f.  Parks. 
g.  Natural and artificial watercourses, wetlands and wetland boundaries, environmental feature boundaries, floodplains, lakes, bays, existing stormwater storage facilities, conveyance swales (natural or artificial) with identification of permanent water elevations. 
h.  Location of woodlands. 
i.  Designated natural areas. 
j.  Any proposed environmental mitigation features. 
k.  Drains, sewers, and water mains. 
l.  Existing and proposed easements. 
m.  A map, at USGS scale, showing the drainage boundary of the proposed development and its relationship with existing drainage patterns. 
n.  Boundaries of any off-site drainage area contributing flow to the development. 
o.  Any watercourse passing through the development, along with the following: 
1.  Area of upstream watershed and current zoning 
2.  Preliminary calculations of runoff from the upstream area for both the 100-year and two-year 24-hour design storms, for fully developed conditions according to the current land use plan for the area to determine any necessary adjustments to the runoff coefficient for the upstream area, reflecting the adjusted peak flow at build out. 
p.  Soil borings may be required at various locations including the sites of proposed retention/detention and infiltration facilities, and as needed in areas where high groundwater tables exist. 
q.  Proposed site improvements including lot divisions and building footprints. 
r.  Preliminary stormwater BMP information including: 
1.  Location of all stormwater BMPs. 
2.  Identification of stormwater quality and quantity treatment facilities and method of stormwater conveyance. 
3.  Preliminary sizing calculations for stormwater quality and quantity, including preliminary estimates of runoff volume captured by BMPs, (e.g. infiltration losses) for treatment facilities. (See explanatory table in the Green Oak Township Stormwater Engineering Criteria.) 
4.  Preliminary tributary area map for all stormwater management facilities indicating total size and average runoff coefficient for each subarea using the Curve Method. (See explanatory table in the Green Oak Township Stormwater Engineering Criteria.) 
5.  Analysis of existing soil conditions and groundwater elevation and bedrock depth (including submission of soil boring logs) as required for proposed retention and infiltration facilities. 
s.  Preliminary landscaping plan for stormwater BMPs, as outlined in section 38-177 of the Zoning Ordinance, and using the standards in the Green Oak Township Stormwater Engineering Criteria. 
t.  Preliminary easements for stormwater management facilities. 
u.  Required natural feature setbacks. 
v.  Drinking water wells, public wellheads, wellhead protection areas (WHPAs), underground storage tanks, and Brownfields. 
w.  Any areas of unique geological formations. 
(e)  Stormwater management plan contents for administrative review: The plans for administrative review shall include: 
(1)  Information required, if any, by the Livingston County Drain Commissioner, as outlined in the Livingston County Drain Commissioner Procedures and Design Criteria for Stormwater Management Systems. 
(2)  Location by means of a small location map, drawn to a scale no less than one inch equals 2,000 feet. 
(3)  Zoning classification of parcel. 
(4)  Location and description of all on-site features. This includes: 
a.  Existing site topography with contours at two-foot intervals or less based on the USGS datum. 
b.  Natural and artificial watercourses, wetlands and wetland boundaries, environmental feature boundaries, floodplains, lakes, bays, existing stormwater storage facilities, conveyance swales (natural or artificial) with identification of permanent water elevations. 
c.  Location of woodlands. 
d.  Designated natural areas. 
e.  Any proposed environmental mitigation features. 
f.  Drains, sewers, and water mains. 
g.  Existing and proposed easements. 
h.  Proposed site improvements. 
i.  Preliminary stormwater BMP information including: 
1.  Location of all stormwater BMPs. 
2.  Identification of stormwater quality and quantity treatment facilities and method of stormwater conveyance. 
3.  Preliminary sizing calculations for stormwater quality and quantity, including preliminary estimates of runoff volume captured by BMPs, (e.g. infiltration losses) for treatment facilities. (See explanatory table in the Green Oak Township Stormwater Engineering Criteria.) 
4.  Preliminary tributary area map for all stormwater management facilities indicating total size and average runoff coefficient for each subarea using the Curve Method. (See explanatory table in the Green Oak Township Stormwater Engineering Criteria.) 
j.  Preliminary landscaping plan for stormwater BMPs, as outlined in section 38-177 of the Zoning Ordinance, and using the standards in the Green Oak Township Stormwater Engineering Criteria. 
k.  Preliminary easements for stormwater management facilities. 
l.  Required natural feature setbacks. 
m.  Drinking water wells, public wellheads, Wellhead Protection Areas (WHPAs), underground storage tanks, and Brownfields. 
n.  Any areas of unique geological formations. 
(f)  Stormwater management plan review. The stormwater management plan shall be developed in accordance with the Green Oak Township Stormwater Engineering Criteria, which is a supplement to this article. 
(1)  Developments subject to site plan review or subdivision plat review. Stormwater management plans shall be made part of the plan set submitted for site plan or subdivision plat review. The stormwater management plan shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer, as part of the site plan/subdivision plat review process, and comments provided to the applicant and the Township body responsible for review, as outlined in division 2, section 38-71(4) of the Zoning Ordinance, or article 3 of the Green Oak Township Subdivision Regulations 8A. The appropriate Township body shall consider the recommendations of the Township Engineer, and approve, approve with minor revisions, table or deny the stormwater management plan in conjunction with the submitted site plan or subdivision plat. 
(2)  Minor site plans. Projects that meet the criteria of section 38-71(7) in the Zoning Ordinance for minor site plans shall be reviewed using the administrative process outlined in this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  Earth changes or other activities subject to stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall be reviewed by the Green Oak Charter Township Engineer for compliance with the standards provided in this article, and outlined in the Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan. 
(g)  Stormwater BMP construction plans. After approval has been obtained for a stormwater management plan, the applicant will submit five copies of final construction plans for stormwater BMPs to the Township. Building permits shall not be issued until the construction plans have been approved. The construction plans shall be drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet, and on sheets no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. The scales used shall be standard engineering scales and shall be consistent throughout the plans. When plans have been completed with computer aided design technology, location shall be geo-referenced and a copy of the electronic file shall also be provided. 
(1)  The construction plans shall include: 
a.  Proposed stormwater management facilities (plan and profile). 
b.  Proposed storm drains including rim and invert elevations. 
c.  Proposed open channel facilities including slope, cross section detail, bottom elevations, and surface material. 
d.  Final sizing calculations for stormwater quality and quantity treatment facilities and stormwater conveyance facilities. 
e.  Storage provided by one foot elevation increments. 
f.  Tributary area map for all stormwater management facilities indicating total size and average runoff coefficient for each subarea. 
g.  Analysis of existing soil conditions and groundwater elevation (including submission of soil boring logs) as required for proposed retention and infiltration facilities. 
h.  Details of all stormwater BMPs including, but not limited to: 
1.  Outlet structures. 
2.  Overflow structures and spillways. 
3.  Riprap. 
4.  Manufactured treatment system. 
5.  Underground detention cross section and product details. 
6.  Cross section of infiltration and/or bioretention facilities. 
i.  Final landscape plan and details. 
j.  Final easements for stormwater management facilities. 
k.  Maintenance plan and agreement. 
(2)  Construction drawings and engineering specifications shall be subject to review and approval by the Township Engineer to ensure that they conform with the approved stormwater management plan and that adequate storm drainage will be provided and that the proposed stormwater management system provides adequately for water quantity and quality management to ensure protection of property owners and watercourses, both within the proposed development and downstream. 
(3)  A building permit shall not be issued unless the detailed engineering drawings and specifications meet the standards of this article, other applicable Green Oak Township ordinances, engineering standards and practices, and other applicable requirements of other governmental agencies. 
(4)  Conditions of approved construction plans. When construction plans are approved, the following information shall be submitted to the Township before a building permit is issued: 
a.  Copies of all necessary wetland, floodplain, inland lakes and streams, erosion control or other required state, federal or local permits relating to stormwater management. 
b.  An agreement satisfactory to the Township, and approved by the Township Board, that assures long-term maintenance of all drainage improvements. See section 34-511 for more information. 
c.  Cash or automatically renewing irrevocable letter of credit. See section 34-509 for more information. 
d.  Electronic files of the as-built certification for storm drains and stormwater BMPs, along with the final stormwater management plan. See section 34-507(i) for more information. 
e.  For developments that will result in disturbance of five (5) or more acres of land, a complete notice of coverage must be submitted to the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment, Water Bureau, to have the discharge deemed authorized under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. 
f.  The applicant will make arrangements acceptable to the Township for inspection during construction and for final verification of the construction by the Township Engineer prior to approving the certificate of occupancy or dedication of infrastructure to the homeowners association. 
g.  Approval of construction plans by the Township Engineer is valid for a period of one year. If the construction plans are associated with an approved site plan, the construction plans shall be valid for the same length of time as the site plan, including any extensions obtained for the site plan. If not associated with a site plan, and extension beyond this period can be obtained by the applicant if a request is submitted, in writing, to the Township Building Department before expiration of the original time frame. The Building Department Director may grant a one year extension of the approved construction plans, and may require updated or additional information if needed. 
(h)  Notification. The Township shall be notified of the commencement of any construction covered by a stormwater management plan and the owner or responsible person shall be required to provide engineering certification that the development is in conformity with the previously approved stormwater management plan. 
(i)  As-built certification of stormwater BMPs. Electronic files (signed and sealed PDF plans, and copies in either ESRI format or shapefiles), signed and sealed by a professional engineer or land surveyor of the as-built certification for storm drains and stormwater BMPs will be submitted by the applicant or his/her engineer to the Township Building Department along with the final stormwater management plan, or upon completion of system construction. This information must be provided to the Township before issuance of building permits for subdivision and site condominium projects can be granted, and before certificates of occupancy for industrial/commercial projects can be granted. The certification must include the following: 
(1)  A plan view of all detention basins, retention basins, and/or sediment forebays detailing the proposed and final as-built elevation contours. Sufficient spot elevations should be provided on each side of the basin, the bottom of the basin, and along the emergency spillway(s). 
(2)  Detention basin, retention basin, and/or sediment forebay calculations along with corresponding volumes associated with the as-built elevations. The proposed volume and final as-built volume should be indicated. 
(3)  Final as-built invert elevations for all inlet pipes and all associated outlet structure elevations, riser pipe hole sizes, and number of holes must be included. Invert elevations of the final outlet pipe to the receiving water or other jurisdiction and elevation of the final overflow structure should also be provided. 
(4)  Invert elevation and latitude/longitude coordinates (Michigan State Plane - South Zone, NAD 1983 HARN, International Feet) of the final outlet pipe to the receiving waters or other jurisdiction. 
(5)  The side slopes of all stormwater basins must be identified and must meet minimum safety requirements. 
(6)  The certification should be signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-508. - Variance approval procedure. 
Requests for variances to these requirements shall be submitted in writing and reviewed by the Township Engineer. The Township's decision to grant, deny, or modify the proposed variance shall be based on evidence that the variance request meets the following criteria: 
(a)  The applicant is subject to special circumstances which are peculiar to the applicant's facility or situation and not caused by the applicant's actions or inaction; and 
(b)  Substantial, undue hardship would result from requiring strict compliance with the requirements from which the variance is sought by depriving the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other persons similarly situated under the terms of the ordinance; and 
(c)  Any variance must prevent ground water and public water supply contamination and protect public health, safety, and welfare to an extent similar to the requirement(s) from which this variance is sought; and 
(d)  The change will achieve the intended result through a comparable, or even superior, design; and 
(e)  The change will not adversely affect maintainability. 
A written appeal of the Township Engineer's decision may be submitted to the Green Oak Charter Township Board within ten working days of receipt of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-509. - Performance guarantee. 
The applicant shall post cash or an automatically renewing irrevocable letter of credit in an amount not less than ten percent of the cost of the stormwater facilities for projects of less than $100,000 or five percent of the cost for projects over $100,000. This deposit will be held for one year after the date of completion of construction and final inspection of the stormwater facilities, or until construction on all phases in the development are completed, whichever time period is longer. This deposit will be returned to the applicant (in the case of cash) or allowed to expire (in the case of a letter of credit), as provided above, provided all stormwater facilities are clean, unobstructed, and in good working order, as determined by the Township Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-510. - Stormwater management easements. 
(a)  Necessity of easements. Stormwater management easements shall be provided in a form required by the applicable approving body of the Township, and recorded as directed as part of the approval of the applicable Township body to assure (1) access for inspections; (2) access to stormwater BMPs for maintenance purposes; and (3) preservation of primary and secondary drainage ways which are needed to serve stormwater management needs of other properties. 
(b)  Easements for off-site stormwater BMPs. The owner shall obtain easements assuring access to all areas used for off-site stormwater management, including undeveloped or undisturbed lands. 
(c)  Recording of easements. Easements shall be recorded with the Livingston County Register of Deeds according to county requirements. 
(d)  Recording prior to building permit issuance. The applicant must provide the Township Clerk with evidence of the recording of the easement prior to final subdivision plat or condominium approval or other applicable final construction approval. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-511. - Maintenance. 
(a)  The owner shall provide guarantees, in acceptable forms, to the Township for the following: 
(1)  BMP maintenance for a period of at least two years following final acceptance. The guarantee amount shall be determined as ten percent of the total cost of construction of each stormwater management practice and drainage facility listed. The Township reserves the right to periodically modify the guarantee amounts and requirements by resolution. 
(2)  BMP vegetation maintenance for a period of at least two years following final acceptance. This shall be equivalent to 25 percent of the vegetation and installation cost and will be collected to ensure sufficient establishment of the native plants. The owner or operator shall provide a written cost estimate or actual contract amount as a basis for the guarantee amount. A pre-installation meeting between the landscape contractor and the Township shall be held prior to commencement of BMP landscape work. 
(b)  The owner or other responsible party shall make annual inspections of the facilities and maintain records of such inspections for a period of five years. 
(c)  A long-term maintenance plan (example available from the Township) shall be submitted to the Township for approval. A maintenance agreement shall be signed by the owner or operator and shall be included as an obligation in the master deed, easement document, or in another recordable form and recorded with Livingston County. Recording of such document shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator and recorded within 30 days of approval. 
(d)  Stormwater facilities shall be maintained by the owner or other responsible party and shall be repaired and/or replaced by such person when such facilities are no longer functioning as designed. Disposal of waste from maintenance of facilities shall be conducted in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(e)  Records of installation and maintenance and repair shall be retained by the owner or other responsible party for a period of five years and shall be made available to the Authorized Enforcement Agent upon request. 
(f)  Any failure to maintain facilities or correct problems with facilities after receiving due notice from the Township may result in criminal or civil penalties and the Township may perform corrective or maintenance work which shall be at the owner's expense. 
(g)  Drainage facilities along public roads may not be filled in without prior approval by the regulating agency with jurisdiction over such roads. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-512. - Discharge regulations and requirements. 
An illicit discharge to any stormwater conveyance system, including both public and private systems, is a violation of this article. The discharges listed in sections 34-518 and 34-519 are not considered illicit discharges for the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-513. - General requirements and prohibitions. 
(a)  Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering a stormwater conveyance shall undertake reasonable measures to reduce such pollutants. Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Improper application, over use, and disposal of de-icing materials, herbicides, pesticides, and fertilizers by contractors or property owners. 
(2)  Landscaping contractors shall not allow topsoil or other landscaping materials to enter stormwater conveyances or waterways. 
(3)  Contractors shall not wash out concrete trucks or equipment into stormwater conveyances or waterways. 
(b)  Activities related to light industrial facilities or automobile businesses such as service stations, automobile dealerships, car washes, and body shops are often a source of pollutants. Reasonable actions shall be taken to reduce stormwater pollutant loadings from these sites. 
(c)  No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any public or private plot of land or stormwater conveyance system so that the same might become a pollutant. An exception applies where such materials are being temporarily stored in properly contained storage area, waste receptacles, or are part of a well-defined compost system outside of the floodplain. 
(d)  No person shall cause or permit any dumpster, solid waste bin, grease bin, or similar container to leak such that any pollutant is discharged into any street, alley, sidewalk, or stormwater conveyance system, business place, or upon any public or private plot of land in the Township. 
(e)  The occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real property in the Township where there is located a paved sidewalk or parking area shall maintain said paved surface free of dirt or litter to the extent reasonable and practicable and provide an adequate means or the disposal of refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other articles so as to prevent such matter from entering a stormwater conveyance system. Sweepings from said sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the stormwater conveyance system, gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on said real property. 
(f)  No person shall throw or deposit any pollutant in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Township, except as otherwise permitted under local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-514. - Illicit connections. 
It is prohibited to establish, use, maintain, or continue illicit drainage connections to a stormwater conveyance system, lake, pond, stream, river, or wetland, or to commence or continue any illicit discharges to a stormwater conveyance system, lake, pond, stream, river, or wetland. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-515. - Parking lots and similar structures. 
(a)  Persons owning or operating a paved parking lot, gas station pavement, paved private street or road, or similar structure or conducting routine building wash downs, shall clean and maintain those structures consistent with the 2006 Green Oak Charter Township Non- Stormwater Disposal Best Management Practices prior to discharging to a stormwater conveyance system. 
(b)  All water from non-stormwater sources or incidental stormwater sources (i.e. blown through openings and windows or transported on vehicles) that enter newly developed or significantly redeveloped covered parking garages are to be directed to the sanitary sewer disposal system unless that alternative is not reasonably feasible. Newly developed or significantly redeveloped covered permanent parking garages may drain into a stormwater conveyance system when no feasible alternative is available, with the consent of the owner and operator and in accordance to this and other Green Oak Charter Township Ordinances. The owner and operator of a stormwater conveyance system may impose requirements including the construction of control structures to ensure the pre-treatment of such discharges prior to entry into the stormwater conveyance system. All water from direct stormwater sources that enter uncovered parking garages is to go to a stormwater disposal system. 
(c)  For projects governed by other jurisdictions, e.g. the Livingston County Road Commission (LCRC), Livingston County Drain Commissioner (LCDC) or a drainage district, the applicant must comply with their standards and requirements and receive approval from those entities. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-516. - Outdoor storage areas—Commercial and industrial facilities. 
In outdoor areas, no person shall store de-icing materials, soil, landscaping materials, grease, oil or hazardous substances in a manner that will or may result in such substances entering a stormwater conveyance system. In outdoor areas, no person shall store motor vehicles, machine parts, or other objects in a manner that may leak grease, oil, or other hazardous substances to a stormwater conveyance system. 
To prevent the discharge of hazardous substances to waterways, the Township may require the installation of a spill containment system. Spill containment systems may consist of a system of dikes, walls, barriers, berms, oil/grit separators, or other devices as required. No person shall operate a spill containment system such that it allows incompatible liquids to mix and thereby create a hazardous condition. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-517. - Construction sites. 
Any person performing construction work in the Township shall comply with the provisions of this article and Green Oak Charter Township Code Title 8 Chapter 17 [sic] Construction Site Erosion. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-518. - Non-stormwater use of stormwater conveyance systems. 
Green Oak Charter Township Non-Stormwater Disposal Best Management Practices establishes minimum requirements for non-stormwater stormwater conveyance system uses within Green Oak Charter Township and is incorporated by reference and made part of this article. Discharges from the following activities will be allowed subject to application of the 2006 Green Oak Charter Township Non-Stormwater Disposal Best Management Practices: water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources; landscape irrigation and lawn watering; irrigation water; diverted stream flows; rising ground waters; uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to stormwater conveyance systems; uncontaminated pumped groundwater; foundation and footing drains; roof drains; water from crawl space pumps; residential air conditioning condensation; springs; individual residential and non-profit group car washes; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; de-chlorinated swimming pool discharges; or flows from fire fighting activities and training. Some of the activities listed above may require permits from other agencies. The discharger is expected to obtain any required permits prior to discharge. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-519. - Discharge pursuant to NPDES permit. 
The prohibition of discharges shall not apply to any discharge regulated under a NPDES point source permit issued and administered by the State, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations. Compliance with an applicable NPDES permit governing discharges into a stormwater conveyance system shall be considered compliance with this article. NPDES permitted stormwater discharges are still subject to the county design criteria. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-520. - Discharge in violation of permit. 
Any discharge that would cause a violation of an NPDES Permit and any amendments, revisions or re-issuance thereof, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge, and the township shall seek to have such persons defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Township in any administrative or judicial enforcement action against the permit holder relating to such discharge as provided by applicable rules of law. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-521. - Compliance with NPDES permits. 
Any industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger subject to any NPDES permit issued by the U.S. EPA or MDNRE, shall comply with all provisions of such permits, including notification to and cooperation with local entities as required by Federal regulations. Proof of compliance with said NPDES Permits may be required in a form acceptable to the Supervisor, Zoning Administrator, Ordinance Enforcement Officer, prior to issuance of any grading, building or occupancy permits. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-522. - Notification of spills. 
All persons in charge of a facility are to comply with applicable federal and state laws including facility personnel training, training record maintenance, training records, maintenance of notification procedures, and implementation of notification requirements for spill response to assure containment, clean up, and immediate notification to the owner and operator of the facility. 
Individuals responsible for spills are to comply with applicable state and federal notification requirements to assure containment, clean up, and immediate notification to the facility owner. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-523. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  Stormwater systems shall be inspected by the Green Oak Charter Township, or its designee, during and after construction to assure consistency with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(b)  All stormwater systems shall be subject to the authority of the on-site detention inspection program of the Green Oak Charter Township Authorized Enforcement Agent to ensure compliance with this article and may be inspected when deemed necessary. 
(c)  The owner or other responsible party shall make annual inspections of the facilities and maintain records of such inspections for a period of five years. 
(d)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever an Authorized Enforcement Agent has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which may constitute a violation of the provisions of this article, the agent may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the agent by this article; provided that (1) if such building or premises is occupied, he or she first shall present proper credentials and request entry; and (2) if such building or premises is unoccupied, he or she first shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. 
(e)  The property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry but, in the event such entry is refused, the agent is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry and performing such inspection. 
(f)  Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this article, including but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater pollution, illicit discharges, or similar factors. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-524. - Sampling. 
With the consent of the owner or occupant or with Court consent, any Authorized Enforcement Agent may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During all inspections as provided herein, the Agent may take any samples deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record the on-site activities, provided that owners or occupants shall be entitled to split samples. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-525. - Testing and monitoring. 
(a)  Whenever the Enforcement Officer, or his designee determines that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility may cause or contribute to an illicit discharge to the stormwater system, the Enforcement Officer, or his designee may, by written notice, order that such person undertake such monitoring activities and/or analyses and furnish such reports as the Enforcement Officer, or his designee may recommend. The written notice shall be served either in person or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, and shall set forth the basis for such order and shall particularly describe the monitoring activities and/or analyses and reports required. The burden to be borne by the owner or operator, including costs of these activities, analyses and reports, shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses and reports and the benefits to be obtained. The recipient of such order shall undertake and provide the monitoring, analyses and reports within the time frames set forth in the order. 
(b)  Within 20 days of the date of receipt of the order notice, the recipient shall respond personally or in writing advising the recipient's position with respect to the order's requirements. Thereafter, the recipient shall be given the opportunity to meet with the Authorized Enforcement Agent or his designee to review the order's requirements and revise the order as the Enforcement Official or his designee deem necessary. Within ten days of such meeting, Enforcement Official or his designee shall issue a final written order. Final orders of the Enforcement Official or his designee may be appealed to the Green Oak Charter Township Board by the filing of a written appeal with the Township Clerk within ten days of receipt of the final order. The appeal notice shall set forth the particular order requirements or issues being appealed. Township Board shall hear the appeal at its earliest practical date and may either affirm, revoke or modify the order. The decision of the Township Board shall be final. 
(c)  In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to conduct the monitoring and/or analyses and furnish the reports required by the order in the time frames set forth therein, the Township may cause such monitoring and/or analyses to occur and assess all costs incurred, including reasonable administrative costs and attorney's fees, to the facility owner or operator. The Township may pursue judicial action to enforce the order and recover all costs incurred. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-526. - Violations constituting municipal civil infractions. 
The knowing violation of any provision of this article, or knowing failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this article shall constitute a Municipal Civil Infraction. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-527. - Continuing violation. 
Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm, corporation or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be punishable accordingly, as herein provided 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-528. - Concealment. 
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a violation of such provision. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-529. - Acts resulting in violation of federal Clean Water Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this article, or who discharges pollutants, waste or wastewater so as to cause an illicit discharge into waterways or a stormwater conveyance system, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, may be in violation of the federal Clean Water Act and may be subject to the sanctions of that Act including civil and criminal penalties. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-530. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties herein provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a threat to the public health, safety, welfare and the environment, may be declared and deemed a nuisance by the Authorized Enforcement Agent, or his designee, and may be summarily abated and/or restored by the Township and/or civil action taken to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance. 
(b)  Where the Township determines that violations of this article represent an imminent threat to polluting a stormwater conveyance system or waters of the state, the Township may provide cleanup (such as catch basin cleaning or debris removal) and back-charge the property owner or responsible contractor. The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the contractor or owner of the property and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon and against the property and such lien shall continue in existence until the same shall be paid. 
(c)  If any violation of this article constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the Authorized Enforcement Agent, or his designee shall so declare. Thereafter such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year without the necessity of any further declaration. 
(d)  In any administrative or civil proceeding under this article in which the Township prevails, the Township may be awarded all costs of investigation, administrative overhead, out-of-pocket expenses, costs of administrative hearings, costs of suit and reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-531. - Civil actions. 
In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this section may be enforced by civil action brought by the Township. In any such action, the Township may seek, and the court shall grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
(a)  A temporary and/or permanent injunction. 
(b)  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection. 
(c)  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation. 
(d)  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Assessments under this subsection shall be paid to the Township to be used exclusively for costs associated with restoration, monitoring, and establishing stormwater discharge control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-532. - Administrative enforcement powers. 
In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this article, any Authorized Enforcement Agent has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies. 
(a)  Cease and desist orders. When an Authorized Enforcement Agent finds that a discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this article, the agent may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice, or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall: (a) comply with the requirement; (b) comply with a time schedule for compliance, and/or (c) take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring. 
(b)  Notice to clean. Whenever an Authorized Enforcement Agent finds any oil, stockpiled soil, road salt, yard waste, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds or in close proximity to any open drain or ditch channel, which may result in an increase in pollutants entering the stormwater conveyance system or a non-stormwater discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, he or she may give notice to remove and lawfully dispose of such material in any manner that he or she reasonably may provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice within the time frames set forth therein. 
(c)  In the event the owner or operator of a facility fails to conduct the activities as described in the notice, the Authorized Enforcement Agent, or his designee may cause such required activities as described in the notice to be performed, and the cost thereof shall be assessed and invoiced to the owner of the property. If the invoice is not paid within 60 days, a lien shall be placed upon and against the property. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-533. - Non-exclusivity of remedies. 
Remedies under this article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-534. - Appeal. 
Any person, firm, corporation or organization notified of non-compliance with this article or required to perform monitoring, analyses, reporting and/or corrective activities, who is aggrieved by the decision of the Township Engineer or Authorized Enforcement Agent, may appeal such decision in writing to the Green Oak Charter Township Board within ten days following the effective date of the decision. Upon receipt of such request, the Township Board shall request a report and recommendation from the Township Engineer or Authorized Enforcement Agent and shall set the matter for administrative hearing at the earliest practical date. At said hearing, the Township Board may hear additional evidence, and may revoke, affirm or modify the Township Engineer's or Authorized Enforcement Agent's decision. Such decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Sec. 34-535. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this article does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. This article shall not create liability on the part of the Township, any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 03-2010, § 1, eff. 8-13-2010)  
Secs. 34-536—34-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FRANCHISE ORDINANCES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, effective Aug. 24, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 34-501—34-512. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as a new Art. VI, §§ 34-601—34-612, to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 34-601—34-611, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 01-2016, § 1, eff. 2-18-2016. 
 
DIVISION I. - CONSUMERS ENERGY COMPANY 
 
Sec. 34-601. - Consumers energy company franchise ordinance. 
This article grants to Consumers Energy Company a 30-year franchise from the effective date of this article, in accordance with sections 34-502 through 34-512 below. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-602. - Grant, term. 
Green Oak Charter Township, Livingston County, Michigan, ("Township") hereby grants to the Consumers Energy Company, a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called the "grantee," the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, waterways, and other public places of, and to do a local gas business in the Township for a period of 30 years. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-603. - Consideration. 
In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, said Grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-604. - Conditions. 
(a)  No highway, street, alley, bridge, waterway or other public place used by said grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction, maintenance, or repair, and unless weather or other factors outside grantee's control prevent it shall be promptly restored within a reasonable time to the same order and condition as when said work was commenced. If grantee fails to complete required restoration within the time required, the Township may, after providing grantee with a five business day written notice of the Township's intention to do so, perform or secure performance of the required restoration, with the Township's actual and reasonable administrative costs and expenses in doing so to be paid by grantee to the Township within 30 days of the Township's billing or invoice. 
(b)  Except as necessary in an emergency or described by grantee and approved by the Township as necessary in an application for and issuance of a permit to perform work, all of grantee's pipes and mains shall be so placed in the highways and other public places as not to interfere with the use thereof for highway uses and purposes, and other public uses and purposes that are existing. 
(c)  Grantee shall construct and maintain grantee's pipes and mains in accordance with the Michigan Gas Safety Standards, as adopted by the Michigan Public Service Commission. 
(d)  Grantee shall comply with all current and future federal, state, and local laws applicable to the installations and business for which this franchise is granted, provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver by grantee of any of its existing or future rights under state or federal law. Except for emergency and service restoration work, grantee shall not perform work without first securing any applicable governmental permits and approvals required for that work. 
(e)  Grantee, at its own cost and expense, shall relocate or remove its installations in a public area for which this franchise is granted, whenever such relocation or removal is required by a Township Board Resolution as being necessary for use of the public area for a public improvement in furtherance of a public purpose of the Township. This provision is not a waiver of grantee's existing or future rights under state or federal law, and does not restrict or impair grantee's rights under any applicable laws regarding vacation or relocation of streets. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-605. - Hold harmless. 
Said grantee shall at all times keep and save the Township free and harmless from all claims, damages, loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent construction, repair, and/or maintenance of the structures and equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against the Township because the permission herein given, said grantee shall, upon notice, defend the Township and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction, repair, or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-606. - Extensions. 
Said grantee shall construct and extend its gas distribution system within the Township and shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-607. - Franchise not exclusive. 
The rights, power and authority herein granted, are not exclusive. Either manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-608. - Rates. 
Said grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of the Township for gas furnished therein, the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, for so long as said Commission or its successors has the authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas rates and rules regulating such service in the Township. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either the Township, acting by its Township Board, or by said grantee. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-609. - Revocation. 
The franchise granted by this article is subject to revocation upon 60 days' written notice by the party desiring such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-610. - Michigan Public Service Commission, jurisdiction. 
Said grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to gas service in the Township. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-611. - Compliance with ordinances. 
Grantee, its successors and assigns, shall, in the operation of this franchise, be subject to the Township's duly adopted ordinances; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be constructed as a waiver by grantee of any of its existing or future rights under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Sec. 34-612. - Sale, assignment, and transfer of franchise. 
Grantee shall not sell, assign, sublet, or transfer this franchise without the written consent of the Township, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. No. 01-2017, § 1, eff. 8-24-2017)  
Secs. 34-613—34-620. - Reserved.  
Chapter 35 - RESERVED  
Chapter 36 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6; environment, ch. 10; floods, ch. 14; land divisions and subdivisions, ch. 18; parks and recreation, ch. 26; discharge of sewage, § 34-251 et seq.; zoning, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Watercraft and marine safety, MCL 324.80101 et seq.; permission to dam or bridge a navigable waterway, Mich. Const. art. VII, § 12; wetlands protection, MCL 324.30301 et seq.; special watercraft control, Admin. Code R281.700.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 36-1—36-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ORE LAKE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The administrative rule governing this article is Admin. Code R281.747.1. 
 
Sec. 36-31. - Definitions. 
All words and phrases used in this article shall be construed and have the same meaning as defined in part 801 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.80101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 48, § 1, 2-12-1974) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 36-32. - Exceeding slow-no wake speed. 
On the waters of Ore Lake, Section 13, T1N, R5E of Hamburg Township, and Section 18, T1N, R6E of the Green Oak Charter Township, enclosed by a line from the easternmost point of land in Ore Lake View Subdivision and the bridge connecting E.J. Reive's Lakewood Subdivision to Ore Lake Little Farms Subdivision, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow-no wake speed. 
(Ord. No. 48, § 2, 2-12-1974)  
Secs. 36-33—36-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - KENT LAKE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— The administrative rule governing this article is Admin. Code R281.747.14. 
 
Sec. 36-61. - Controls. 
On the waters of Kent Lake, located in the Township, the following controls apply: 
(1)  No person shall operate a motorboat at a speed in excess of ten statue miles per hour, except an authorized patrol boat or emergency rescue craft. 
(2)  No person shall operate any watercraft so as to tow a water skier, surfboard or other apparatus, or permit himself to be so towed. 
(3)  Rubber rafts and all floating devices, other than boats, may be used only in swim areas or specially designated areas. 
(Ord. No. 4, § 1, 6-11-1963)  
Sec. 36-62. - Launching watercraft. 
The launching of watercraft on Kent Lake shall be restricted as follows: 
(1)  No person shall launch a watercraft without a permit issued by either the Huron-Clinton Metropolitan Authority, operating Kensington Metropolitan Park, or the state department of conservation, operating Island Lake State Recreation Area. 
(2)  No person shall put in the water or launch any watercraft, except at designated launching sites. 
(3)  No person shall leave a watercraft on Kent Lake, or the shoreline thereof, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except by written permission of the Huron-Clinton Metropolitan Authority or the State Department of Conservation. 
(Ord. No. 4, § 2, 6-11-1963)  
Sec. 36-63. - Airplanes. 
No person shall operate an airplane in such a manner as to land or take off from the water or ice surface of Kent Lake. 
(Ord. No. 4, § 3, 6-11-1963)  
Chapter 37 - RESERVED 

Green Oak Charter
Township
Zoning Ordinance
Adopted by the
Green Oak Charter Township Board
February 15, 2006
with amendments through February 2019
TABLE OF CONTENTS
i
Table of Contents
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 38-1 Definitions. I-1
Sec. 38-2 Title. I-39
Sec. 38-3 Purpose. I-39
Sec. 38-4 Construction. I-40
Sec. 38-5 Rules applying to text. I-40
Sec. 38-6 Validity. I-40
Sec. 38-7 Enabling authority. I-41
Secs. 38-8 to 38-40 Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Division 1 Generally.
Sec. 38-41 Zoning administration. II-1
Sec. 38-42 Duties of Zoning Administrator. II-1
Sec. 38-43 Building and land use permits. II-2
Sec. 38-44 Special approval use permits. II-3
Sec. 38-45 Certificates of use and occupancy. II-5
Sec. 38-46 Enforcement. II-5
Sec. 38-47 Performance guarantee. II-6
Sec. 38-48 Fees. II-7
Sec. 38-49 Furnishing records to interested persons. II-7
Sec. 38-50 Natural Rivers and Tributary Overlay permit. II-7
Sec. 38-51 Public notice. II-9
Secs. 38-52 to 38-70 Reserved.
Division 2 Site Plans.
Sec. 38-71 Review required in specific districts. II-9
Sec. 38-72 Site investigation report. II-15
Secs. 38-73 to 38-90 Reserved.
Division 3 Zoning Board of Appeals.
Sec. 38-91 Created. II-18
Sec. 38-92 Membership. II-18
Sec. 38-93 Meetings. II-18
Sec. 38-94 Appeals. II-19
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Sec. 38-95 Jurisdiction. II-20
Sec. 38-96 Determination and payment of fees. II-21
Sec. 38-97 Exercising powers. II-21
Sec. 38-98 Notice of hearing. II-22
Sec. 38-99 Validity of orders. II-22
Secs. 38-100 to 38-130 Reserved.
ARTICLE III. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sec. 38-131 District designations. III-1
Sec. 38-132 Zoning district map. III-1
Sec. 38-133 Application of regulations. III-2
Sec. 38-134 Intent and purpose of districts. III-3
Sec. 38-135 Schedule of use regulations. III-5
Sec. 38-136 Schedule of area, height, and setback regulations. III-12
Sec. 38-137 Miscellaneous regulations. III-13
Sec. 38-138 Village Mixed Use Districts. III-15
Secs. 38-139 to 38-170 Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Sec. 38-171 Accessory buildings, structures, and uses. IV-1
Sec. 38-172 Temporary dwellings. IV-3
Sec. 38-173 Temporary construction. IV-3
Sec. 38-174 Standards for single-family dwellings, mobile homes, and prefabricated housing. IV-4
Sec. 38-175 Essential services. IV-5
Sec. 38-176 Walls and screens. IV-5
Sec. 38-177 Landscaping and screening. IV-6
Sec. 38-178 Intersection visibility. IV-19
Sec. 38-179 Number of principal buildings per lot. IV-19
Sec. 38-180 Required street frontage. IV-19
Sec. 38-181 Building grades. IV-19
Sec. 38-182 Buildings to be moved or demolished. IV-20
Sec. 38-183 Dwellings in nonresidential districts. IV-20
Sec. 38-184 Yard encroachments. IV-20
Sec. 38-185 Exceptions to height regulations. IV-21
Sec. 38-186 Continued conformance with regulations. IV-21
Sec. 38-187 Garage sales, rummage sales, yard sales, moving sales, and similar activities. IV-21
Sec. 38-188 Seasonal sales. IV-22
Sec. 38-189 Unsafe buildings. IV-22
Sec. 38-190 Structural damage. IV-22
Sec. 38-191 Industrial building construction. IV-22
Sec. 38-192 Trash. IV-22
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
iii
Sec. 38-193 Street, alley, railroad right-of-way, and abandoned railroad right-of-way. IV-23
Sec. 38-194 Home occupations. IV-23
Sec. 38-195 Livestock and farm animals. IV-23
Sec. 38-196 Site design conditions. IV-23
Sec. 38-197 Adult regulated uses. IV-31
Sec. 38-198 Traffic impact studies. IV-36
Sec. 38-199 Wireless communication facilities. IV-42
Sec. 38-200 Wind Energy Conversion Systems IV-49
Sec. 38-201 Medical Marihuana Activities IV-51
Secs. 38-202 to 38-230 Reserved.
ARTICLE V. OPEN SPACE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 38-231 Intent. V-1
Sec. 38-232 Scope. V-1
Sec. 38-233 Eligibility criteria. V-2
Sec. 38-234 Project design standards. V-3
Sec. 38-235 Nonresidential project design standards (commercial and industrial). V-8
Sec. 38-236 Optional provisions for exemplary projects. V-10
Sec. 38-237 Project standards. V-11
Sec. 38-238 Review and approval procedures. V-12
Sec. 38-239 Permit conditions. V-15
Sec. 38-240 Phasing and commencement of construction. V-16
Sec. 38-241 Effect of approval. V-16
Sec. 38-242 Deviations from approved final site plan. V-16
Secs. 38-243 to 38-270 Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT OPTION
Sec. 38-271 Intent. VI-1
Sec. 38-272 Eligibility criteria. VI-1
Sec. 38-273 Project design standards. VI-2
Sec. 38-274 Project standards and requirements. VI-3
Sec. 38-275 General requirements. VI-4
Sec. 38-276 Revisions. VI-4
Sec. 38-277 Minor changes. VI-4
Secs. 38-278 to 38-310 Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Sec. 38-311 Parking requirements generally. VII-1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Sec. 38-312 Off-street parking space requirements. VII-2
Sec. 38-313 Parking lot construction and operation. VII-5
Sec. 38-314 Parking and storage of commercial and recreational vehicles. VII-7
Sec. 38-315 Parking and storage of personal recreational vehicles on unbuildable lots. VII-8
Sec. 38-316 Off-street loading requirements. VII-8
Secs. 38-317 to 38-350 Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Sec. 38-351 Purpose. VIII-1
Sec. 38-352 Smoke. VIII-1
Sec. 38-353 Dust, dirt, and fly ash. VIII-1
Sec. 38-354 Glare and electromagnetic radiation. VIII-2
Sec. 38-355 Fire and explosive hazards. VIII-2
Sec. 38-356 Regulation of discharges. VIII-2
Sec. 38-357 Noise. VIII-2
Sec. 38-358 Waste and rubbish dumping. VIII-2
Sec. 38-359 Mineral mining and extractive operations. VIII-2
Sec. 38-360 Sanitary landfills. VIII-5
Sec. 38-361 Natural River overlay zone. VIII-8
Sec. 38-362 Tributary overlay zone. VIII-13
Sec. 38-363 Woodlands protection and preservation. VIII-17
Sec. 38-364 Lighting regulations. VIII-20
Sec. 38-365 Common use riparian lot (keyhole) regulations. VIII-24
Sec. 38-366 Low Impact Development. VIII-26
Secs. 38-367 to 38-400 Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. SIGNS
Sec. 38-401 Purpose, authority, and findings. IX-1
Sec. 38-402 Prohibited signs. IX-1
Sec. 38-403 Authority to remove prohibited signs. IX-2
Sec. 38-404 Regulations and standards for signs exempt from permit requirements. IX-2
Sec. 38-405 Design standards. IX-4
Sec. 38-406 Nonresidential district signs. IX-7
Sec. 38-407 Shopping centers. IX-9
Sec. 38-408 Common signage plan. IX-9
Sec. 38-409 Billboards. IX-10
Sec. 38-410 Electronic message signs. IX-11
Sec. 38-411 Election signs / Free expression signs. IX-11
Sec. 38-412 Permits; applications; inspections and maintenance; abandoned signs; nonconforming signs; appeals. IX-13
Secs. 38-413 to 38-440 Reserved.
iv
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE X. PRIVATE ROADS
Sec. 38-441 Intent. X-1
Sec. 38-442 Authority. X-1
Sec. 38-443 Subdivisions and condominium projects. X-1
Sec. 38-444 Private roads serving more than two lots or resulting parcels. X-1
Sec. 38-445 Private driveways. X-1
Sec. 38-446 Permits required. X-2
Sec. 38-447 Permit application requirements and approval procedures. X-2
Sec. 38-448 Fees. X-3
Sec. 38-449 Standards. X-3
Sec. 38-450 Inspections. X-5
Sec. 38-451 Permit validity. X-5
Sec. 38-452 Recording of easements. X-5
Sec. 38-453 Certificates of occupancy. X-5
Sec. 38-454 Responsibility for maintenance. X-5
Sec. 38-455 Variances and appeals. X-5
Secs. 38-456 to 38-490 Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES OF LAND, STRUCTURES, AND USES OF STRUCTURES
AND PREMISES
Sec. 38-491 Intent and findings. XI-1
Sec. 38-492 Nonconforming lots. XI-1
Sec. 38-493 Nonconforming uses of land. XI-2
Sec. 38-494 Nonconforming structures. XI-2
Sec. 38-495 Nonconforming uses of structures and land. XI-5
Sec. 38-496 Repairs and maintenance. XI-6
Sec. 38-497 Uses allowed as general exception, conditional approval, or special approval uses. XI-6
Sec. 38-498 Change of tenancy or ownership. XI-6
Secs. 38-499 to 38-535 Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. AMENDMENT / CONDITIONAL REZONING
Sec. 38-536 Initiating amendments. XII-1
Sec. 38-537 Amendment procedure. XII-1
Sec. 38-538 Information required. XII-1
Sec. 38-539 Review. XII-2
Sec. 38-540 Conformance to court decree. XII-2
Sec. 38-541 Publication. XII-2
Sec. 38-542 Conditional rezoning. XII-2
v
TABLE OF CONTENTS
This page is left intentionally blank.
vi
ARTICLE I
I-1
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 38-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Accessory building or structure means a supplementary building or structure on the same lot or parcel of land as, and detached from,
the principal building or part thereof occupied by or devoted exclusively to any accessory use. Such building or structure shall not include
any building used for dwelling, residential, or lodging purposes, or sleeping quarters for human beings. Accessory buildings or structures
shall include, but are not limited to: storage sheds, swimming pools, hot tubs, gazebos, play structures, wind generators, air conditioning
units, electrical generators, and other similar structures.
Accessory use means a use normally and naturally incidental, subordinate and devoted exclusively to, and on the same lot as the main
use of the land or principal buildings.
Adult day care facility means a facility that, for compensation, provides supervision, personal care, protection, and meals to adults for a
period of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, five (5) or more days a week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks.
Adult foster care family home means a private residence with the approved capacity to receive not more than six (6) adults who shall
be provided foster care for five (5) or more days a week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks.
Adult foster care large group home means a facility with the approved capacity to receive at least thirteen (13) but not more than
twenty (20) adults, who shall be provided with foster care.
Adult foster care small group home means a facility with the approved capacity to receive not more than twelve (12) adults, who shall
be provided with foster care.
Aesthetic means the form, design, and/or quality of construction of a particular sign, building, site, or structure that presents a
judgmental statement concerning the level of beauty or artistic value.
Agriculture means the use of land for tilling of the soil, raising of tree and field crops or animal husbandry as a source of income, and as
defined in the Michigan Right to Farm Act, Public Act No. 93 of 1981 (MCL 286.471 et seq.).
Alley means a public way not more than thirty (30) feet wide, which affords only secondary means of access to abutting property and is
not intended for general traffic circulation.
Alter means any change in the location or use of a building or any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls,
columns, beams, joists, girders, and similar components, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls, or any change in the type
of occupancy. Such term also includes the terms “reconstructed” and “alteration.”
Animated sign means any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict or create a special effect or scene. (See the definition
of the term “Flashing sign.”)
ARTICLE I
Appeal means an entreaty or demand for a hearing and/or review of facts and/or action.
Applicant means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, or corporation, or combination thereof, that holds an ownership
interest in land, whether recorded or not.
Appurtenance shall have the meaning assigned to it in the definition of “Structure.”
Architectural features includes cornices, eaves, gutters, string courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative ornaments.
Authorized Factory Representative means an individual with technical training of a WECS who has received factory installation
instructions and is certified in writing by the manufacturer of the WECS.
Automobile repair means general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, and collision service, such as
body, frame, or fender straightening and repair, painting, and vehicle rustproofing.
Automobile service station means a building or structure designed or used for the retail sale of fuel (stored only in underground
tanks), lubricants, air, water, and other operating commodities for motor vehicles, aircraft, or boats, and includes the customary space
and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such vehicles, and may include space for facilities for the storage, minor
repair, or servicing of vehicles, but would not include, as the primary use of the premises, bumping, painting, refinishing, major repair and
overhauling, steam cleaning, rustproofing, or high-speed washing.
Automobile wash establishment means a building, or portion thereof, the primary purpose of which is washing vehicles.
Average day means, for most purposes, a Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday. The average day may be a Saturday for uses that have higher
peak-hour traffic volumes on a Saturday rather than midweek.
Awning sign means a sign which is printed or otherwise affixed to an awning, which may be rolled or folded up against the wall to which
it is attached. (See the definition of the term “Canopy sign.”)
Balloon sign means any air-filled or gas-filled object used as a temporary sign to direct attention to any business or profession, or a
commodity or service sold, offered or manufactured, or any festival or entertainment.
Banner sign means a temporary sign produced on cloth, paper, fabric or other combustible material of any other kind, with or without
frames. National, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business, shall not be considered as a banner.
Barrier means a natural or artificial separation, such as a lake, river, canal, railroad embankment, levee, or berm.
Basement means the portion of a building which is wholly or partly below grade when the vertical distance from finished grade to floor
is greater than the vertical distance from finished grade to ceiling. A basement shall not be included as a story for height measurement,
except as provided in the definition of the term “Story.” (See the illustration entitled “Basement and Story Definitions.”)
I-2
ARTICLE I
Figure I-1: Basement and Story Definitions
Bed and breakfast means an operation in which transient guests are provided with a sleeping room and meals in return for payment,
and which is located in a private single-family dwelling that is used principally as a family unit of the proprietor.
Bedroom means a dwelling room used, or intended to be used solely by human beings, for sleeping purposes.
Billboard means a surface whereon advertising matter is set conspicuously in view and which advertising does not apply to premises or
any use of premises wherein it is displayed or posted (an off-site sign) and is regulated in accordance with regulations governed by the
highway advertising act, Public Act No. 106 of 1972 (MCL 252.301 et seq.).
Bio-retention means a water quality practice that utilizes landscaping and soils to treat stormwater runoff by collecting it in shallow
depressions before filtering through a fabricated planting soil media.
Block means the property abutting one (1) side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets (crossing or
terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river, or live stream, or between
any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development.
Bluff means a steep bank rising sharply from the water’s edge.
Board means the legislative body, the Township Board, of Green Oak Township, Livingston County, Michigan.
Boardinghouse means a dwelling where lodging and meals are provided, for compensation, to three (3) or more persons, by
prearrangement, for definite periods of not less than one (1) week. A boardinghouse is to be distinguished from a hotel, motel,
convalescent home, or nursing home.
Boat lift/hoist means an unenclosed structure, with or without a roof, used to lift boats out of the water, allowing at least eighty percent
(80%) visibility through its area.
Boathouse means an enclosed building used for the storage of boats and boating equipment.
I-3
ARTICLE I
Body Art means physical body adornment using, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic
tattooing. This definition does not include practices that are considered part of a medical procedure performed by board certified medical
or dental personnel, such as, but not limited to, implants under the skin. Such medical procedures shall not be performed in a body art
establishment. This ordinance definition shall not include piercing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear using pre-sterilized single use
stud and clasp ear piercing system.
Body Art Establishment means any place or premise, whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the
practices of body art, whether or not for profit, are performed.
Buffer shall have the meaning assigned to it in the definition of the term, “Greenbelt.”
Buildable area means the space remaining after the minimum setbacks, natural rivers, open spaces, floodplain areas, wetlands, and
wetland buffer requirements of this chapter have been complied with.
Buildable site includes all lots to be created by split, condominium, or plat must have sufficient land area, exclusive of any wetlands or
wetland buffers as defined herein, to meet Livingston County Health Department standards as well as required buffers, floodplain areas,
and zoning district setbacks and off-street parking requirements as specified in this chapter. This provision shall not apply to previously
recorded lots of record upon which one (1) single-family house is proposed to be built.
Building means an independent structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls; “structures”
as defined in this section; and includes tents, sheds, garages, stables, greenhouses, ground signs or sign structures, and other accessory
structures. The term “detached building” means a building separated on all sides from adjacent buildings by open spaces from the ground
up. When any portion thereof is completely separated from every other part thereof by division walls from the ground up, and without
openings, each portion of such structure shall be deemed a separate building.
Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade at the building wall to:
A. The highest point of the coping of a flat roof;
B. To the deck line of a mansard roof;
C. To the average height between the highest ridge to that eave for a gable, hip studio, or gambrel roof; or
D. Seventy-five percent of the height of an A-frame.
Where established grade is on sloping terrain, the height shall be measured from the average ground level at the building wall on all four
sides. (See the illustration entitled “Building Height Requirements.”)
Figure I-2: Building Height
I-4
FIRST FLOOR / GRADE PLANE
HEIGHT
Average height of
highest roof surface
Building Height Examples
FIRST FLOOR
BASEMENT FLOOR
HEIGHT
AVERAGE
GRADE PLANE
Average height of
highest roof surface
MAX HEIGHT: 32’
MAX HEIGHT: 32’
HEIGHT
Deckline
MANSARD ROOF
HEIGHT
Highest Point
FLAT ROOF
ALTERNATE ROOF TYPES
BASEMENT FLOOR
FIRST FLOOR
MAX HEIGHT: 32’
FIRST FLOOR
MAX HEIGHT: 32’
AVERAGE
GRADE PLANE
AVERAGE
GRADE PLANE
FIRST FLOOR / GRADE PLANE
HEIGHT
Average height of
highest roof surface
Building Height Examples
FIRST FLOOR
BASEMENT FLOOR
HEIGHT
AVERAGE
GRADE PLANE
Average height of
highest roof surface
MAX HEIGHT: 32’
MAX HEIGHT: 32’
HEIGHT
Deckline
MANSARD ROOF
HEIGHT
Highest Point
FLAT ROOF
ALTERNATE ROOF TYPES
BASEMENT FLOOR
FIRST FLOOR
MAX HEIGHT: 32’
FIRST FLOOR
MAX HEIGHT: 32’
HEIGHT
Deckline
GABLE / HIP / GAMBREL ROOF
FIRST FLOOR
MAX HEIGHT: 32’
AVERAGE
GRADE PLANE
AVERAGE
GRADE PLANE
AVERAGE
GRADE PLANE
ARTICLE I
Building setback line means the line formed by the outer surface of a building or enclosure wall at the finish grade or surface of the
ground; pertaining to and defining the minimum (building) setback lines which are established, in general, parallel to the front street or
right-of-way, and within which setback area no part of a building shall project or be located, except as otherwise provided by this chapter.
Building sign means any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign. Such term includes awning/canopy
signs, identification signs, integral signs, marquee signs, projecting signs, roof and integral roof signs, and wall, window, and suspended
signs.
Business center means a grouping of two (2) or more business establishments on one or more parcels of property, which may share
parking and access and are linked architecturally or otherwise present the appearance of a unified grouping of businesses. A business
center shall be considered one (1) use for the purposes of determining the maximum number of freestanding or ground signs. A vehicle
dealership shall be considered a business center regardless of the number or type of models or makes available; however, used auto/truck
sales shall be considered a separate use in determining the maximum number of freestanding signs, provided that the used sales section
of the lot includes at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the available sales area.
Business sign means an accessory sign related to the business, activity, or service conducted on the premises upon which the sign is
placed.
Canopy sign means any sign that is a part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over
a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. (See the definition of the term “Awning sign.”)
Certificate of use and occupancy means an official certification that the intended use or structure, as-built, conforms to the provisions
and requirements of this chapter and all other pertinent Township ordinances, and also meets any special conditions of a variance or
special approval use permit and may be occupied or used in its intended manner. Unless such certificate is issued, a structure shall not be
occupied or used.
Changeable copy sign means a sign, or portion thereof, with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
without altering the structural integrity of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be
considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical
indication of time or temperature shall be considered a time and temperature portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign.
Child day care center and day care center mean a facility, other than a private residence, receiving one (1) or more preschool or school
age children for care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately
available to the child. A child care center or day care center includes a facility which provides care for not less than two (2) consecutive
weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day
nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, or drop-in center. Such terms do not include any of the following:
(1) A Sunday school, vacation Bible school or a religious instructional class that is conducted by a religious organization where
children are attending for not more than a period of three (3) hours per day for an indefinite period of time or for not more
than eight (8) hours per day for a period not to exceed four (4) weeks during a twelve (12) month period.
(2) A facility operated by a religious organization, where children are cared for not more than a period of three (3) hours while
persons responsible for the children are attending religious services.
(3) A facility or program for school age children that is operated at a school by a public school or by a person or entity with whom
a public school contracts for services, in accordance with section 1285a(2) of the revised school code, Public Act No. 451 of
1976 (MCL 380.1285a(2)), if that facility or program has been granted an exemption under Public Act No. 116 of 1973 (MCL
722.111(2)).
I-5
ARTICLE I
Clinic means a building or group of buildings where patients, whether human or animal, are admitted for professional examination and
treatment by a physician, dentist, veterinarian, etc., except that human patients will not be lodged therein overnight. Any clinic shall
operate in full compliance with all federal, state, and local law and regulations.
Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of agriculture, sports, arts, science, literature, politics,
etc., but not operating for profit. Any club shall operate in full compliance with all federal, state, and local law and regulations.
Collector street means a public right-of-way intended to provide vehicular access from local or residential streets onto primary
thoroughfares.
Commercial message means any sign wording, logo, or other representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
Commercial use means the use of property in connection with the purchase, sale, barter, display, or exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise, or personal services.
Common use riparian lot (keyhole) means any private site, platted lot, or other parcel held in common by a subdivision, condominium,
association, similar agency or group of individuals, or by virtue of the terms of a plat of record, and which provides common use riparian
access to nonriparian lots or landowners.
Compostable material means natural, organic material, free of hazardous materials (as defined in U.S. EPA 503 regulations), including
leaves, grass clippings, brush, wood or wood byproducts, Christmas trees, untreated lumber, wood pallets, vegetable prunings, garden
waste, yard waste and manure.
Composting, agricultural, means the biological decomposition of organic material under conditions created, maintained or controlled
by a person or entity, which exceeds over five hundred (500) cubic yards of nondecomposed material per year, with the intention of using
the compost for on-site agricultural uses or on-site soil enrichment.
Composting, commercial, means the biological decomposition of organic material under conditions created, maintained or controlled
by a person or entity, which exceeds over five hundred (500) cubic yards of nondecomposed material per year, with the intention that the
product be sold and used off-site.
Confined animal feedlot means any parcel of land or a premises on which the principal use is the concentrated feeding of livestock,
including beef and dairy cattle, goats, hogs, poultry or sheep, within a confined area. A commercial feedlot consists of more than ten (10)
farm animals that are on feed and may be owned by a person other than the owner of the feedlot.
Conservation easement means an easement granting a right or interest in real property that ensures that a parcel or tract is maintained
in its natural condition as defined in the conditions of the easement.
Construction sign means a temporary sign that bears the names and addresses of the project, contractors, architects, developers,
planners, financial institutions or engineers engaged in the construction project.
Contiguous means being in direct contact, touching, connected to, or adjoining. In the case of a wetland, lake, or stream, such
connection may be at the surface or by means of a subsurface hydrogeologic water flow.
I-6
ARTICLE I
Convalescent home and nursing home mean a home for the care of children, the aged, or the infirm, or a place of rest for persons
suffering serious bodily disorders, wherein three (3) or more persons reside. Such home shall conform to, and qualify for, a license under
applicable state laws (even though state law has different size regulations).
Convenience store means a retail establishment offering for sale a limited line of groceries and household items intended for the
convenience of the neighborhood.
County road commission means the road commission of Livingston County, Michigan.
Deck means a structure, with piers and/or joists, lacking a roof and walls with the exception of visual partitions, abutting a dwelling and
constructed on piers or a foundation above grade for uses as an outdoor living area.
Development means the construction of a new building or structure on a zone lot, the expansion or relocation of an existing building on
another zone lot or the utilization of open land for a new use, such as a mobile home park; or a site plan, subdivision tentative preliminary
plat, condominium project, mobile home park, redevelopment, reuse or expansion of a use or building.
Diameter breast height (dbh) means the diameter of a tree, given in inches, as measured at four and one-half (4 ½) feet above the
natural grade.
District means a portion of the Township within which certain uses of land and/or buildings are permitted and within which certain
regulations and requirements apply under the provisions of this chapter.
Dripline means an imaginary vertical line that extends downward to the ground from the outermost tips of the tree branches.
Drive-in, fast food, and carryout restaurant means any establishment where food, frozen desserts, and/or beverages are served to
customers. The customers are served either from a serving counter, from their motor vehicles or from a drive-through pickup window, and
the food, frozen desserts and/or beverages are served in disposable containers and wrappers. Such food or beverages may be consumed
inside the building, outside the building, on the premises at facilities provided, or carried out for consumption off the premises.
Dwelling means a building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters for one (1) or more families, but not including an
automobile chassis, tent, or portable building, or mobile homes outside of a mobile home park.
Dwelling, multiple, means a building used for, and designed as, a residence for three (3) or more families living independently of each
other and each having their own cooking facilities therein, including apartment houses, townhouses, and apartment hotels, but not
including mobile homes.
Dwelling, one-family, means a detached building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, one (1) family. Such term is also referred to as
a “single-family dwelling.”
Dwelling, two-family, means a detached building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, two (2) families living independently of each
other. Such term is also referred to as a “duplex dwelling.”
Dwelling unit means any building, or portion thereof, having cooking facilities, which is occupied wholly as the home, residence, or
sleeping place of one (1) family, either permanently or transiently, but in no case shall a travel trailer, motor home, mobile home, trailer
coach, automobile chassis, tent, or other portable building be considered a dwelling in single-family, multiple-family, or two-family
I-7
ARTICLE I
residential areas. In cases of mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the part so occupied shall be
deemed a dwelling unit, and shall comply with the provisions of this chapter relative to dwellings.
Easement means a right of use over the property of another. In the context of this chapter, private road easements shall be designated
for the purpose of vehicular access, ingress, and egress.
Efficiency unit means a dwelling unit consisting of one (1) room, exclusive of the bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining alcove
directly off the principal room, and providing not less than three hundred and fifty (350) square feet of floor area.
Elder Cottage Housing Opportunity means a residential dwelling unit occupied by a senior person, handicapped person, disabled
person, or individual related to the occupants of the main housing unit by blood, marriage, or adoption.
Erected includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises required for building.
Excavations, fill, drainage, etc. shall be considered a part of the erection.
Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities, municipal governments, departments,
commissions or boards, of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including public safety communication towers, structures and facilities, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, police call boxes, towers, poles and other similar
equipment or accessories reasonably in connection therewith for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities, municipal
governments, departments, commissions or boards for the public health or general welfare, and buildings which are primarily enclosures
or shelters of such essential service equipment. An essential service shall not include (i) buildings that are necessary for the furnishing
of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general public health, safety or welfare; (ii) utility poles and other
structures more than 40 feet in height above ground level in a public right-of-way; and (iii) wireless equipment extending more than five
(5) feet above the top of a utility pole or structure it is attached to in a public right-of-way.
Excavation means any pit or mining operation created for the purpose of searching for, moving of, or the removal from the premises,
any earth, rock, sand, gravel, clay, stone, slate, marble or other mineral in excess of fifty (50) cubic yards in any calendar year, but shall
not include an excavation preparatory to the construction of a structure or public highway, except common household gardening and
agricultural practices.
Facility Abandonment means out of production for a period of time not less than one (1) year.
Family means:
(1) One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption with their direct lineal descendants, and including the
domestic employees thereof, living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit; or
(2) A collective number of individuals living together in one (1) house under one (1) head, whose relationship is of a permanent
and distinct domestic character, and working as a single housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club,
fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, group, coterie or organization, which is not a recognized religious
order, nor a group of individuals whose association is temporary and resort-seasonal in character or nature.
Family day care home means a private home in which more than one(1) , but fewer than seven (7) minor children are received for care
and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year, unattended by
a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption.
I-8
ARTICLE I
Farm means all of the contiguous neighboring or associated land, operated as a single unit, on which “farming,” as defined by the
Michigan Right to Farm Act, Public Act No. 93 of 1981 (MCL 286.471 et seq.), is carried on directly by the owner-operator, manager,
or tenant-farmer, by his or her own labor or with the assistance of members of his or her household or hired employees. Land to be
considered a farm under this definition shall include a continuous parcel of not less than ten (10) acres in area. Farms may be considered
as including establishments operated as greenhouses, sod farms, nurseries, orchards, chicken hatcheries, livestock and poultry farms, and
apiaries, but establishments keeping fur-bearing animals, game or operating fish hatcheries, confined animal feedlots, stone quarries,
or gravel or sand pits shall not be considered farms under this definition unless combined with a farm operation on the same continuous
tract of land.
Farm operation means the operation and management of a farm, or a condition or activity that occurs at any time as necessary on a
farm in connection with the commercial production, harvesting, and storage of farm products, and includes operations defined by the
Right to Farm Act, MCL 286.471 et. seq. as amended, but is not limited to:
(1) Marketing produce at roadside stands or farm markets.
(2) The generation of noise, odors, dust, fumes, and other associated conditions.
(3) The operation of machinery and equipment necessary for a farm including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage
systems and pumps and on-farm grain dryers, and the movement of vehicles, machinery, equipment, and farm products and
associated inputs necessary for farm operations on the roadway as authorized by the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No.
300 of 1949 as amended, MCL sections 257.1 to 257.923.
(4) Field preparation and ground and aerial seeding and spraying.
(5) The application of chemical fertilizers or organic materials, conditioners, liming materials, or pesticides.
(6) Use of alternative pest management techniques.
(7) The fencing, feeding, watering, sheltering, transportation, treatment, use, handling and care of farm animals.
(8) The management, storage, transport, utilization, and application of farm by-products, including manure or agricultural
wastes.
(9) The conversion from a farm operation activity to other farm operation activities.
(10) The employment and use of labor.
Farm product means those plants and animals useful to human beings produced by agriculture and includes, but is not limited to,
forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, field crops, dairy and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, cervidae, livestock,
including breeding and grazing, equine, fish, and other aquacultural products, bee and bee products, berries, herbs, fruits, vegetables,
flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, trees and tree products, mushrooms, and other similar products, or any other product which
incorporates the use of food, feed, fiber, or fur, as determined by the Michigan Commission of Agriculture.
FHWA means Federal Highway Administration.
Fill means soil, rock, sand, other earthen material, waste of any kind or any other material which displaces soil or water, or reduces water
retention potential, except common household gardening.
Filling station means a building designed or used for the retail sale of fuel (stored only in underground tanks), lubricants, air, water, and
other operating commodities for motor vehicles, aircraft, or boats, and including the customary space and facilities for the installation of
such commodities on or in such vehicles.
Filtered view of the river means the maintenance or establishment of woody vegetation of sufficient density to screen development
from the river, provide for stream bank stabilization to prevent erosion from surface runoff and provide cover to shade the water. Such
vegetation prohibits clearcutting.
I-9
ARTICLE I
Final wetland determination means a formal, scientific inventory and analysis of a wetland undertaken by trained professionals to:
(1) Determine its boundaries;
(2) Describe its natural biological plant and animal communities or groupings and its hydrologic and geological setting; and
(3) Suggest plan revisions which the Township might require to minimize disruption to the wetland resulting from a proposed
development.
Flag means any fabric, banner, or bunting, containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision, or other entity.
Flashing sign means any sign, which, by method or manner of illumination, flashes on or off, winks or blinks with varying light intensity,
shows motion or creates the illusion of motion, or revolves in a manner to create the illusion of being on or off. (See the definition of the
term “Animated sign.”)
Flood hazard area means land, which, on the basis of available floodplain information as identified in the report entitled “Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) – Green Oak Charter Township, Michigan” prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), is
subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding an any given year (one hundred (100) year flood).
Floor area, gross (GFA), means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. The floor area of a building shall include the
basement floor area when more than one-half (½) of the basement height is above the established curb level or finished lot grade,
whichever is higher. Any space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be included in floor area, nor areas of dwelling
basements, unfinished attics, utility rooms, breezeways, porches (enclosed or unenclosed) or attached garages.
Floor area, usable (UFA), means the portion of floor area (measured from the interior face of the exterior walls) used, or intended to
be used, for services to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures or equipment used for
display or sale of goods or merchandise, but not including equipment rooms or sanitary facilities. In the case of a half story area, the
usable floor area shall be considered to be only that portion having a clear height above it of four (4) feet or more. (See illustrations
entitled “Basic Structural Terms” and “Floor Area Terminology.”) For residential uses in a planned unit development (Article II, Division 2),
the floor area includes all areas used for residential purposes or used as access thereto.
I-10
ARTICLE I
Figure I-3: Basic Structural Terms
Figure I-4: Floor Area Terminology
I-11
ARTICLE I
Foster care means the provision of supervision, personal care, and protection, in addition to room and board, for compensation, which
occurs twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) days a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks.
Foster family group home means a private home in which more than four (4), but less than seven (7), minor children, who are not
related by blood or marriage to an adult member of the household, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to the Michigan
Adoption Code, chapter X of the probate code of 1939, Public Act No. 288 of 1939 (MCL 710.21--710.70), are provided care for twenty-four
(24) hours a day, four (4) or more days a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
Foster family home means a private home in which at least one (1), but not more than four (4), minor children, who are not related
by blood or marriage to an adult member of the household, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to the Michigan Adoption
Code, chapter X of the probate code of 1939, Public Act No. 288 of 1939 (MCL 710.21--710.70), are given care and supervision for twentyfour
(24) hours a day, four (4) or more days a week, for two (2)or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
Framework means a structure, usually rigid, serving to hold the parts of something together or to support something constructed or
stretched over or around it.
Freestanding sign and ground sign mean a sign supported directly by the ground or with support provided by uprights, braces, pylons
or poles anchored in the ground that are independent from any building or other structure, including billboards, incidental signs, and
monolith, subdivision entranceway, and business signs.
Gap (critical gap) means the median time headway, in seconds, between vehicles in a major traffic system, which will permit side
street vehicles at a stop or yield controlled approach to cross through or merge with the major traffic stream under prevailing traffic and
roadway conditions.
Garage, commercial, means any premises, except those designated as a private, community, or storage garage, available to the public,
used principally for the storage of automobiles or motor-driven vehicles, for remuneration, hire, or sale, where any such vehicle or engine
may also be equipped for operation, repaired, rebuilt, or reconstructed, and where vehicles may be greased, washed, or serviced.
Garage, community, means a building used for the storage of vehicles of the residential dwelling units on the same or adjacent blocks,
and providing only incidental service to such vehicles as are stored therein.
Garage, private, means a building used primarily for the storage of self-propelled vehicles for the use of the occupants of a lot on which
such building is located and with a capacity of not more than three (3) motor-driven vehicles. Such definition shall be construed to permit
the storage on any one (1) lot, for the occupants thereof, of not more than one (1) commercial vehicle not exceeding a rate capacity of
three-quarter (¾) ton.
Garage, public, means the space or structure for the storage, care, sale, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles, including the retail sale or
supply of lubricants, air, water, and other operating commodities for motor vehicles.
Garage, storage, means any premises, except those defined as a “private garage,” used exclusively for the storage of self-propelled
vehicles, and where such vehicles are not repaired.
Greenbelt means the strip of land established to protect one (1) type of land use from another with which it is not compatible. Such strip
of land is planted and maintained with trees, shrubs, and groundcover, and is perpetually maintained as open space.
I-12
ARTICLE I
Groundcover means low-growing shrubs, woody vegetation, wildflowers, and other small herbaceous plants.
Group day care home means a private home in which more than six (6), but not more than twelve (12), minor children are given care
and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related by
blood, marriage, or adoption to an adult member of the family. Such term includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor
child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year.
Hazardous substances means a chemical or other material which is, or may be, injurious to the public health, safety, welfare or the
natural environment and as defined in part 201, natural resource and environmental protection act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL
324.20101 et seq.).
Historical sites and/or uses means the parcels and/or uses of land and/or structures whose basic purpose is to:
(1) Safeguard the heritage of the local unit by preserving or allowing a structure or use which reflects elements of the
community’s cultural, social, economic, political, or architectural history;
(2) Stabilize and improve property values in the area;
(3) Foster civic beauty;
(4) Strengthen the local economy; and
(5) Promote the use of such sites for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the local residents and the general public.
Home occupation means any use customarily conducted entirely within the dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, not
involving employees other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises, which use is clearly incidental and secondary
to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, does not change the character thereof and does not endanger the health, safety, and
welfare of any other person residing in that area by reason of noises, noxious odors, unsanitary or unsightly conditions, fire hazards, etc.,
involved in, or resulting from, such occupation, profession, or hobby; provided, further, that no article or service is sold or offered for
sale on the premises, except as such as is produced by such occupation, and that such occupation shall not require internal or external
alterations or construction features, equipment, machinery, outdoor storage, or signs not customarily in residential areas. Clinics,
hospitals, barbershops, nurseries, day care centers, beauty parlors, tearooms, veterinarians’ offices, tourist homes, animal hospitals,
kennels, real estate offices, millinery shops, etc. shall not be deemed home occupations.
Hospital means an institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured,
including, as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central
service facilities, and staff offices. Any hospital shall operate in full compliance with all federal, state, and local law and regulations.
Hotel means a building occupied or used as a more or less temporary abiding place of individuals or groups of individuals, with or
without means, and in which there are more than five (5) sleeping rooms, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual
room.
Identification sign means a sign which displays the name and/or address of a person or firm.
Illuminated sign means a sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source.
Impervious surface means any surface of land which has been compacted or covered with a layer of material that substantially reduces,
makes highly resistant to, or prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground, including graveled drives and parking lots, sidewalks,
streets, parking lots, roofs, structures, buildings, and other hard-surfaced paved areas.
I-13
ARTICLE I
Improvements means those features and actions associated with a project that are considered necessary by the Zoning Administrator or
designee to protect natural resources or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Township and future users or inhabitants of
the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, landscaping, and drainage.
Incidental sign means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such
as “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” and similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position
off the zone lot on which the sign is located shall be considered an incidental sign.
Integral sign means a sign that may contain the name of the building or date of erection, or take the form of a monumental citation
or commemorative tablet. Such sign is often carved into stone, concrete, or similar material, or made of bronze, aluminum, or other
permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure.
Junkyard means the use of any lot or parcel of land where junk, waste, discard, salvage, or similar materials, such as iron or other metal,
wood, lumber, glass, paper, rags, cloth, leather, rubber, bagging, cording, barrels, containers, etc., are bought, sold, exchanged, collected,
demolished, processed, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto salvaging, repair, or restoration, structural steel
materials and equipment, and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of salvaged machinery and the processing of used,
discarded, or salvaged materials for any period of thirty (30) consecutive days.
Kennel means any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs, cats, other household pets, or fur-bearing animals, six (6) months of
age or more, are confined, housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold.
Laboratory means a place devoted to experimental, routine, or basic study, such as testing and analytical operations, in which the
manufacturing of produce or products, except prototypes, is not performed.
Lake means a body of water having a surface area of five (5) acres or more as measured from the ordinary high-water mark.
Landfill means a disposal facility or part of a treatment facility at which any discarded solid or semi-solid materials, including
garbage, refuse, rubbish, ashes or construction debris, is placed in, or on, the land, and which is not a land treatment facility, a surface
impoundment or an injection well.
Landmark trees. (See Section 38-363(f).)
Landscaping means changing the natural features of a plot of ground so as to make it more attractive, as by adding lawns, shrubs, trees,
etc.
LCRC means Livingston County Road Commission.
Level of service means a qualitative measure describing operational conditions within a traffic stream, generally described in terms of
such factors as speed and travel time, delay, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort and convenience, and safety.
Living area means the sum total of the square footage of the habitable floor area as defined by the Zoning Administrator or designee;
the exterior dimensions or footprint of the residential dwelling, less any attached accessory structures or building area.
Loading space means an off-street space, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading and/or unloading merchandise or materials.
I-14
ARTICLE I
I-15
Local residential street means a public easement which has limited continuity and is used primarily to provide access to abutting
properties.
Lot means any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal
instrument of record that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership; or a place or parcel of land
occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a building, structure, or use, or by other activity permitted thereon, and including the yards and
open spaces required under this chapter.
Lot area, gross, means the net lot area, including wetland areas, plus one-half of the area of the right-of-way directly adjacent to, and
abutting, any side of an unplatted lot.
Lot area, net, means, for the purpose of computing the net maximum lot area, a figure determined by deducting from the gross lot area,
the area of the public right-of-way and private road easements.
Lot, corner, means a lot where the interior angle of two (2) adjacent sides at the intersection of two (2) streets is less than one hundred
and thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if the arc is of less radius than one
hundred and fifty (150) feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two (2) points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street
line extended, form an interior angle of less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees. (See the illustration entitled “Corner, Interior,
and Double Frontage.”)
Lot coverage means the part or percent of the lot occupied by the buildings or structures, including accessory buildings.
Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance from the front property line to the rear lot line; or in the case of a waterfront lot, from the
front property line to the ordinary high-water mark of the adjacent water body or stream; or in the case of an acreage lot, from the front
right-of-way line to the rear lot line.
Lot, double frontage, means a lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on two (2) more or less parallel streets. In the case of a row
of double frontage lots, one (1) street will be designated as the front street for all lots in a plat or in a request for a building and land use
permit. If there are existing structures in the same block fronting one (1) or both of the streets, the required front yard setback shall be
observed on the streets where structures presently front.
Lot, interior, means a lot, other than a corner lot, with only one (1) lot line fronting on a street.
ARTICLE I
Figure I-5: Lot – Corner, Interior, and Double Frontage
Lot line means any line dividing one (1) lot from another lot, or from a right-of-way, and constitutes the property lines bounding a lot.
Lot line, front, means, in the case of an interior lot, abutting upon one (1) public or private street, the front lot line shall mean the line
separating the lot from such street right-of-way. In the case of a waterfront lot, the front lot line shall mean the line separating the lot
from the adjacent street right-of-way. In the case of a double frontage lot, the front lot line shall be that line separating said lot from
that street which is designated as the front street in the plat and/or in the request for a building permit. In the case of a corner lot having
frontage on more than one (1) street, the corner lot shall be considered as having a front yard for each street front.
Lot line, rear, ordinarily means that lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular
or triangular shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front
lot line of the lot shall be considered to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining depth of rear yard. Waterfront lots shall be
considered to have a waterfront lot line instead of a rear lot line. In cases where none of these definitions are applicable, the Planning
Commission shall designate the rear lot line. (See “Double Frontage Lot” and “Waterfront Lot”)
Lot line, side, means any lot line that is not a front, rear, or waterfront lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street
lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.
Lot line, street or alley, means a lot line separating the lot from the right-of-way of a street or alley, respectively.
I-16
ARTICLE I
Figure I-6: Lot Lines
Lot line, waterfront, means, for zoning purposes, the ordinary high-water mark separating a lot from a lake or stream that it abuts,
adjoins, and is contiguous to.
Lot of record means a lot (the dimensions of which are shown on a map recorded with the office of the register of deeds for the county),
plot, or parcel, described by metes and bounds, the accuracy of which is attested to by a professional engineer or registered surveyor, so
designated by the state, and such description so recorded or on file with the county.
Lot, waterfront, means a lot which abuts, adjoins, or is contiguous to a lake, as defined herein, or stream governed by the Natural Rivers
Overlay or the Tributary Overlay, as provided herein.
Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, as measured between the two (2) points where the front yard
setback or building setback line intersects the side lot lines.
Lot, zoning, means a single tract of land, located within a single block which, at the time of applying for a building and land use permit,
is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control, and
which tract satisfies the applicable requirements of this chapter in every respect. A zoning lot may, therefore, not coincide with a lot of
record, but may include one (1) or more lots of record.
Low Impact Development (LID) means an ecologically-based stormwater management approach favoring innovative stormwater
engineering and management of rainfall on-site rather than traditional stormwater techniques of channeling or piping. The goal of
LID is to sustain the site’s pre-development hydrologic regime by using techniques that minimize, infiltrate, filter, store, and evaporate
stormwater runoff. LID remediates polluted runoff through a network of distributed treatment landscapes.
Manual and Automatic Controls give protection to power grids and limit rotation of WECS blades to below the designed limits of the
conversion system.
I-17
ARTICLE I
Marihuana or medical marihuana means that term as defined in Section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106,
as amended.
Marquee means any permanent rooflike structure, projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of
the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
Marquee sign means any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee.
Master Plan means the Plan adopted by the Township Planning Commission, which illustrates the intended future land use pattern and
may also describe roadway functional classifications and intended improvements to the transportation system (i.e., the comprehensive
plan, future land use plan, thoroughfare plan, etc.).
Material means soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, mud, debris, and refuse, or any other organic or inorganic substance.
MDEQ means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
MDOT means Michigan Department of Transportation.
Medical marihuana activities means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer or
transportation of medical marihuana by a qualifying patient or primary caregiver as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA
2008, Initiated Law No. 1.
Medical marihuana provisioning center means a commercial entity located in the Township that acquires, possesses, manufactures,
delivers, transfers, or transports medical marihuana and sells, supplies, or provides medical marihuana to registered qualifying patients,
directly or through their registered primary caregivers. The term shall include, but not be limited to, dispensaries, cooperatives, and
any other operation or facility similar in nature, and any commercial property where medical marihuana is sold to registered, qualifying
patients and registered primary caregivers, or any property used by more than one primary caregiver. The location used by a single
primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver through the medical marihuana registration process in
accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act is not a provisioning center for purposes of this ordinance.
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. Such term does not include a recreational vehicle.
Mobile home park means a parcel or tract of land, under the control of a person, upon which three (3) or more mobile homes are
located on a continuous nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose, regardless of whether a charge is
made therefore, together with a building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used, or intended for use, incidental to the
occupancy of a mobile home and which is not intended for use as a temporary trailer park.
Monolith sign means a three (3) dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted, freestanding sign, consisting of two (2) or more sides
extending up from the base, and upon which a message is painted or posted. A monolith sign may also consist of a base-mounted
cylindrical structure upon which a message is painted or posted.
Motel means a business comprised of a dwelling unit, or a group of dwelling units, arranged so as to furnish overnight lodging
accommodations for transient guests, and open to the traveling public for compensation.
I-18
ARTICLE I
Multi-tenant means a grouping of two (2) or more business establishments on one (1) or more parcels of property, which may share
parking and access and are linked architecturally or otherwise present the appearance of a unified grouping of businesses. A multi-tenant
site shall be considered one (1) use for the purposes of determining the maximum number of freestanding or ground signs. A vehicle
dealership shall be considered a multi-tenant site regardless of the number or type of models or makes available; however, used auto/
truck sales shall be considered a separate use in determining the maximum number of freestanding signs, provided that the used sales
section of the lot includes at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the available sales area.
MUTCD means Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. This manual establishes minimum standards of placement that a sign must
achieve to accomplish readability and conspicuity. The manual covers a range of traffic control devices; specifically signs, which it breaks
into three (3) categories – guide signs, warning signs, and directional signs. It is based on the principle that signage deficiencies cause
traffic accidents.
Neon sign means a sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with neon gas, which glows when electric current is sent through it.
Nonconforming sign means a sign which is prohibited under the terms of this chapter, but was in use and lawful at the date of
enactment of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
Nonconforming use means the lawful use of a dwelling, building, structure, or land at the effective date of the Ordinance from which
this chapter is derived, or any amendment thereof, and which may be continued although the use does not conform to the provisions of
this chapter in the zoning district in which it is located. (See the illustration entitled “Nonconforming Use.”)
Figure I-7: Nonconforming Use
I-19
ARTICLE I
Nonconforming use, illegal, means the use of a dwelling, structure, building, or land at the effective date of the Ordinance from which
this chapter is derived, or any amendment thereof, which did not before, and does not, conform to the provisions of this chapter in the
zoning district in which it is located, continues to be illegal and should not be continued.
Obsolete sign means a sign that advertise a product that is no longer made or that advertises a business that has closed.
Occupied includes arranged, designed, built, altered, converted to, rented, or leased, or intended to be inhabited, though not necessarily
for dwelling purposes.
Off-street parking lot means a facility providing vehicular parking spaces and adequate drives and aisles. Adequate maneuvering space
shall be provided which allows unrestricted ingress and egress, plus on-site parking space, for at least two (2) vehicles.
Open air business uses means business uses operated for profit, substantially in the open air, including the following:
(1) Bicycles, utility trucks or trailers, motor and recreational vehicles, boats, or home equipment sales, repairs, or rental services.
(2) Outdoor displays and sales of garages, motor homes, modular homes, mobile homes, snowmobiles, farm implements,
swimming pools and similar products.
(3) Retail sales of trees, fruits, vegetables, shrubbery, plants, seeds, topsoil, humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground
equipment and other home garden supplies and equipment.
(4) Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboards, horseshoe courts, rifle ranges, miniature golf, golf driving ranges, children’s
amusement parks, or similar recreation uses, transient or permanent.
Open storage means all outdoor storage of building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, equipment, and other supplies.
Ordinary high-water mark means the line between upland and bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels,
below which the presence and action of water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is markedly distinct from the
upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil and the vegetation.
Patio means a level surfaced area, without piers, joists, or permanent roof, intended for outdoor use.
Pawnbroker means any person, corporation, member of a limited liability company, member of a partnership, or firm who loans money
on deposit, or pledge personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities, or printed evidence of indebtedness or who deals
in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable things on condition of selling the same back at a stipulated price.
Pawn shop or collateral loanor exchange estblishments means any place where a pawnbroker regularly conducts the business of
being a pawnbroker.
Peak hour means a one (1) hour period representing the highest hourly volume of traffic flow on the adjacent street system during the
morning (a.m. peak hour) or during the afternoon or evening (p.m. peak hour), or representing the hour of highest volume of traffic
entering or exiting a site (peak hour of generator).
Pennant sign means a sign or display consisting of long, narrow, usually triangular flags of lightweight plastic, fabric or other materials,
that may or may not contain a message, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in a series, and designed to move in the wind.
Permit means the authorization for a use, building, structure, or sign, issued by the Building Department.
I-20
ARTICLE I
Permit, building and land use. Any change in the land requires a building and land use permit. The permit is a written authority issued
by the Zoning Administrator or designee permitting the construction, removal, moving, alteration, or use of a building, fence, or sign, in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The permit is also an official finding that the intended activities as described in the formal
permit application comply with the requirements of this chapter and meet the special conditions of a variance or special approval use
permit. A permit shall be required for the following activities: excavations, improvements to any building or structure, grading, leveling
or recontouring of land, removal of trees, change of use signage, construction of a parking lot, construction of a new building or structure,
the construction, erection, or moving of a temporary dwelling, the erection of any temporary construction building, the establishment of
a mobile home outside of a mobile home park, the moving of any building, garage sales, yard sales, or seasonal sales, landfill operations,
or any activity within a regulated wetland.
Pet means only such animals as may commonly be housed within domestic living quarters.
Planning Commission or Commission means the Green Oak Township Planning Commission.
Planning, zoning, and building administrator means the official designated by the Township Board to administer this chapter and
such other laws, codes, and ordinances which are applicable to land use and occupancy in the Township and shall be referred to as the
“Zoning Administrator.”
Political sign means a temporary sign relating to:
(1) The election of a person to public office;
(2) A political party; or
(3) A matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body.
Pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP) means a report filed with the Township fire chief and the county health department, which
shall list all hazardous substances manufactured, stored, or sold on the premises, the best management practice used to store such
substances, and a plan to manage the storage and proper containment of such substances to prevent leakage.
Porch, enclosed means a covered entrance to a building or structure, which is totally enclosed, and projects out from the main wall of the
building or structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal building or structure to which it is attached.
Porch, open means a covered entrance to a building or structure, which is unenclosed, except for columns supporting the porch roof,
and projects out from the main wall of the building or structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal building or
structure to which it is attached.
Portable sign means a temporary sign, which is not permanently affixed to a building face or a pole, pylon, or other support that is
permanently anchored in the ground. A portable sign is capable of being moved from one (1) location to another. Portable signs include,
but are not limited to:
(1) Signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
(2) Signs converted to A- or T-frames;
(3) Menu and sandwich board signs;
(4) Balloons used as signs; and
(5) Signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless such vehicle is used in the
normal day-to-day operations of the business.
I-21
ARTICLE I
Primary caregiver or caregiver means a person who is at least 21 years old and who has agreed to assist with a patient’s medical use
of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a felony within the past 10 years and has never been convicted of a felony involving
illegal drugs or a felony that is an assaultive crimes as defined in section 9a of chapter X of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175
(MCL 770.9a), as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law No. 1.
Primary thoroughfare means a main traffic artery designated as a primary thoroughfare on the Township Master Plan and the official
zoning map.
Principal building means the building in which is conducted the principal use of the zone lot on which it is located. Zone lots with
multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but detached storage buildings, detached garages, and other clearly
accessory detached uses shall not be considered as principal buildings.
Private road means an area of land which is privately owned and maintained and provides vehicular access to more than two (2) lots and
has not been dedicated to, or accepted for, public use other than access by emergency and public safety vehicles.
Professional Engineer means any licensed engineer registered in the State of Michigan.
Projecting sign means any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends beyond the surface of the
building or wall.
Protective barrier means a structure composed of wood, woven wire fence, or other suitable materials, limiting access to a protected
area.
Public right-of-way means the surface of, air space above, and area below the entire width of any road, highway, street, alley,
thoroughfare, easement, or other area that is dedicated, reserved, used, or open to use as a matter of right, for public travel, whether
owned or controlled by, or under the jurisdiction of, the city or county, state, or federal government.
Public street and right-of-way means a dedicated right-of-way which affords the principal means of vehicular access to abutting
property and which is under public ownership or control.
Public utility means any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board, or commission duly authorized to furnish and
furnishing, and under federal, state, or municipal regulations, to the public, electricity, gas, steam, communications, telegraph,
transportation, water, or sanitary sewer, etc. A public utility shall not, however, include cellular phone operations or commercial broadcast
television and radio facilities.
Qualifying patient or patient means a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition in
accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law No. 1.
Real estate development sign means a sign informing when a subdivision or other real estate development will commence
construction or will be available for occupancy or use on the premises upon which such sign is located.
Real estate sign means a temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of such
property.
Recreational vehicle storage yard, commercial, means a lot or parcel upon which recreational vehicles are stored in exchange for some
form of remuneration.
I-22
ARTICLE I
Regional traffic impact study means a traffic impact study for uses that are projected to generate over five hundred (500) peak-hour
directional trips, or will generate significant traffic volumes impacting the transportation network over a wide geographic area.
Registry identification card means a document issued by the State of Michigan that identifies a person as a registered qualifying
patient or a registered primary caregiver.
Restaurant means a building or structure containing a commercial business where food and/or beverages are provided for sale
or consumption, or where food is prepared and sold for consumption outside the building, including a cafe, coffeehouse, cafeteria,
lunchroom, tearoom, drive-in, carry-out or other similar establishment. When an establishment where the preparation of food products,
such as a grocery store, lunchroom, cafeteria, food market, or convenience store, is an accessory use to a primary use, such as the
operation of a hospital, nursing home, boardinghouse, church, school, private manufacturing, or bed and breakfast use, that use shall not
be considered a restaurant.
Resulting parcel means one (1) or more parcels which result from a land division.
Retaining wall means a wall designed and constructed to hold back a mass of earth.
Rezoning traffic impact study means a traffic impact study that may be required for rezonings or Master Plan amendment requests
when certain criteria are met, such as when a proposed amendment would generate higher traffic volumes.
Right-of-way means a strip of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or
gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or other special uses.
Riparian means located on, or adjacent to, a watercourse or water body.
Riverfront setback line means the minimum structure setback required from the river’s edge.
River’s edge means the ordinary high-water mark.
Roadside stand means a structure temporarily operated for the purpose of selling produce which is raised or produced primarily on the
premises where the structure is situated. The use of such structure shall not establish a commercial district, nor shall such use be deemed
a commercial activity.
Roof means a structural covering over any portion of a building or structure used for protection or shielding from the sun, rain, or other
elements.
Roof sign means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure and
extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
Roof sign, integral, means any sign erected or constructed as an integral, or essentially integral, part of a normal roof structure of any
design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated
from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six (6) inches.
Safety compliance facility means an entity that tests marihuana produced for medical use for contaminants.
I-23
ARTICLE I
Safety compliance facility agent or provisioning center agent means a principle officer, board member, employee, operator, or agent
of a safety compliance facility or provisioning center, as applicable.
Sandwich sign means a temporary, portable sign consisting of two (2) advertising boards laid back-to-back and at least partially
supported by each other.
Sanitary sewer means an artificial conduit to convey water and waste matter to a central treatment facility.
Separate ownership means ownership of a parcel of property wherein the owner does not own adjoining vacant property. The owner of
a property may include dual or multiple ownership by a partnership, corporation, or other group, provided that the owner of any number
of contiguous lots of record may have as many of such contiguous lots of record considered as a single lot of record as he or she so elects.
In such case, the outside perimeter of such group of lots of record shall constitute the front, rear, and side lot lines thereof.
Septic system means a structure constructed below grade, consisting of a tank and perforated drain tiles designed to treat sanitary
sewage.
Setback means the distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured
perpendicularly to the property line or right-of-way line.
Sexually Oriented Business For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall be classified as adult oriented uses, adult
entertainment use or an establishment including but not limited to the following:
1. Adult Arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
internet or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained
to show images and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of “sexually
explicit activities” or “specific anatomical areas.”
2. Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store. A commercial establishment which offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration,
as one of its principal business purposes, any one or more of the following:
a. Books, computer diskettes, tapes or hard drives, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video matter, digital media or photographs, cassettes or video reproductions slides or other visual representation
which depict or describe “sexually explicit activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” or
b. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “sexually explicit activities;” or
c. Items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia depicting, displaying, advertising or packaged as “sexually explicit activities” or
depict or describe “specified anatomical areas.”
d. For purposes of this Section, “principal business purpose” means:
(1) The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or interior floor space, meaning at least twentyfive
percent (25%) of the floor area; or
(2) The receipt of fifty percent (50%) of more of its revenues from the sale of the items listed above; or
I-24
ARTICLE I
(3) The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures to the promotion of the sale, rental
or viewing, of books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, film, motion pictures, video
cassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual representations, items, materials, gimmicks, or paraphernalia which are
characterized by the depiction, description display, advertising or packaging of “sexually explicit activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
e. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of
materials depicting or describing “sexually explicit activities” or “specified anatomical areas”, and still be characterized as an
adult book store, adult novelty or retail store or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt
such establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store, so long as the
establishment falls within the definition of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store as set forth above.
3. Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
a. Persons who appear in a state of restricted nudity; or
b. Live performance which are characterized by the partial exposure of “specified anatomical areas”; or
c. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, digital media or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “sexually explicit activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
4. Adult Motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
a. Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provide patrons with closed-circuit television
transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
regularly characterized by the depiction or description of “sexually explicit activities” or “specified anatomical areas” or which
advertises the availability of this adult type of material by means of a sign, visible from the public right-of-way, or by means
of any off-premises advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio, internet or
television; or
b. Permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing “sexually explicit activities” or displaying “specified anatomical
areas” for electronic transmission over the World Wide Web; or
c. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
d. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.
5. Adult Motion Picture Theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, compact discs, slides, electronic media or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “sexually explicit activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
6. Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by
the performance of “sexually explicit activities.” This definition does not include a theater which features occasional live nude
performances with serious literacy, artistic or political value and which has no adverse secondary effects.
I-25
ARTICLE I
7. Escort. A person who, for consideration in any form, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or
who agrees or offers to privately perform as an entertainer, including, but not limited to, the modeling of lingerie, the removal of
clothing and the performance of a dance or skit. Under this definition, “privately” shall mean a performance for an individual and/
or that individual’s guests.
8. Escort Agency. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
9. Nude Model Studio. Any place where a person appears in a state of nudity or displays “specific anatomical areas,” and is provided
money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by
other persons. This includes modeling studios that provide for nude modeling on an occasional basis, but it does not include
modeling studio whose primary function is to provide art classes as part of a college, university or educational institution and
which is certified by the State of Michigan.
10. Nudity or a State Of Nudity. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breasts.
11. Peep Booth. An adult motion picture theater with a viewing room or cubicle of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor space.
12. Private Room. A room in a hotel/motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed and a bath in the room or adjacent room, and is used
primarily for lodging.
13. Semi-Nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as
well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
14. Sexual Encounter Center. A business or commercial enterprise that as one (1) of its primary business purposes offers a place
where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of “sexually explicit activities,” or the exposure
of “specified anatomical areas” for any form of consideration including but not limited to:
a. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the same or opposite sex; or
b. Activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or
c. Permits patrons to display or be filmed or photographed performing “sexually explicit activities” or displaying “specified
anatomical areas” for recording or transmission over the World Wide Web or any other media.
15. Sexually Explicit Activities. Includes any of the following:
a. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or
b. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; or
c. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
d. An activity intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person’s lust, passions or sexual desires; or
I-26
ARTICLE I
e. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
f. Excretory function as part of or in connection with any of the activity set forth in 1 through 5 above.
16. Sexually Oriented Business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult novelty or retail store, adult cabaret,
adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center or similar
establishment or any place that permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing “sexually explicit activities” or displaying
“specified anatomical areas” for electronic transmission over the World Wide Web. “Sexually oriented” when used to describe film,
motion picture, videocassette, slides, or other photographic reproductions shall mean film, movies, motion picture videocassette,
slides or other photographic reproductions that regularly depict material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting or describing “sexually explicit activities” or “specified anatomical areas” offered for observation by the patron(s) on
the premises of a sexually oriented business. The definition of “sexually oriented business” shall not include an establishment where
a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the State engages in medically approved
and recognized sexual therapy.
17. Specified Anatomical Areas. Includes any of the following:
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock, or female breast or breasts
of any portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or any combination of the
foregoing; or
b. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, even if opaquely and completely covered.
18. Specified Criminal Acts. Sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, criminal sexual conduct, rape, and crimes classified as sexual
crimes by the State of Michigan or any other state, or crimes connected with another adult use business including but not limited to
the distribution of obscenity, prostitution and/or pandering.
19. Significant or Substantial Portion. Fifteen percent (15%) or more of the term modified by such phrase.
20. Substantial Enlargement. Of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than
fifteen percent (15%), as the floor area exists on the date of adoption of this ordinance.
21. Transfer Of Ownership Or Control. Of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
a. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
b. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
c. The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
Shopping center means a group of commercial establishments designed, built, and managed as a unit to serve the immediate trade
area. It provides on-site parking in proportion to the size, type, and number of stores in the center.
Shrub means a woody plant of one (1) to thirteen (13) feet in height, with several erect, spreading, or prostrate stems and a general
bushy appearance.
I-27
ARTICLE I
Sight lines means the reference to the requirements of the MUTCD.
Sign means the display of any word, numeral, figure, device, design, or trademark to make known an individual, firm, profession,
business, product, or message, and which is visible to the general public. The following types of signs are organized by category in Table
38-1. Definitions of these signs are provided as follows:
Table 38-1 Green Oak Charter Township Summary of Sign Types and Definitions
(1) Building Signs (2) Electronic Message Signs (3) Freestanding Signs
Awning Sign Animated Sign Freestanding Sign
Building Sign Changeable Copy Sign Menu Board Sign
Canopy Sign Electronic Message Sign Monolith Sign
Marquee Sign Flashing Sign Monument Sign
Roof Sign
Roof Sign, Integral
Time and Temperature Display Pole Sign
Underhanging Sign Pylon Sign
Wall Sign Subdivision Entranceway Sign
Window Sign
(4) Off-Premise Signs (5) Election / Free Expression Signs (6) Temporary Signs
Billboard Sign Election Sign Balloon Sign
Off-Premise Sign Free Expression Sign Banner Sign
Construction Sign
Pennant Sign
Portable Sign
Real Estate Development Sign
Real Estate Sign
Sidewalk/Sandwich Sign
(7) Other Definitions Related to Signs
(as provided in this section)
1. Building Signs.
Building sign means any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign. Building signs shall include, but
not be limited to, the following types of signs:
a. Awning sign, meaning a building-mounted sign that provides additional functionality as shelter. (See the definition of the
term “Canopy sign.”)
b. Canopy sign, meaning a sign attached to or hung from a marquee, mansard canopy, or other structure projecting from and
supported by the building and extending beyond the building wall, building line, or lot line, and shall include, but not be
limited to, a building-mounted sign functioning as a marquee and a sign mounted on a marquee or canopy.
c. Marquee sign, meaning any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of, a marquee.
d. Roof sign means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure,
and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
e. Roof sign, integral, means any sign erected or constructed as an integral, or essentially integral, part of a normal roof
structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no
part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six (6) inches.
I-28
ARTICLE I
f. Under Hanging Sign (or Suspended Sign), meaning a sign designed to be mounted underneath a building, canopy, or
marquee.
g. Wall sign, meaning a sign fastened to, or painted on, the wall area of a building or structure that is confined within the limits
of the wall, where the horizontal sign surface is parallel to the wall.
h. Window sign, meaning any sign in any zoning district that is placed inside a window or door window or upon the window
panes or glass or etched on the glass and is visible from the exterior of the window or door.
2. Electronic Message Signs.
a. Animated sign, meaning a sign depicting action, motion, light or color changes through Light Emitting Diodes (LED) or other
electrical or mechanical means.
b. Changeable copy sign, meaning any sign, or portion thereof, with characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or
rearranged without altering the structural integrity of the sign.
c. Electronic Message sign, meaning a sign with the capability of a variable message that utilizes computer-generated
messages or some other electronic or mechanical means of changing copy. These signs include displays using incandescent
lamps, LEDs, LCDs or a flipper matrix.
d. Flashing sign (See also Animated Sign), meaning any sign, which, by method or manner of animation or illumination,
flashes on or off, winks or blinks with varying light intensity, shows motion or creates the illusion of motion, or revolves in a
manner to create the illusion of being on or off at intervals.
I-29
ARTICLE I
e. Time and Temperature Display sign, meaning a variable message sign which displays current time and temperature in a
stationary or alternating manner. Some also display simple messages.
3. Freestanding and Ground Signs.
Freestanding sign and ground sign means a sign supported directly by the ground or with support provided by uprights, braces, pylons
or poles anchored to a permanent foundation or decorative base that is independent from any building or other structure, including
billboards, incidental signs and monolith, subdivision entranceway and business signs. Freestanding and Ground Signs shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:
a. Menu Board sign, meaning a variable message sign that allows a retailer to list products and prices. For example, the bill of
fare for a fast food restaurant.
b. Monolith sign, meaning a three (3) dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted, freestanding sign, consisting of two (2) or
more sides extending up from the base, and upon which a message is painted or posted. A monolith sign may also consist of a
base-mounted cylindrical structure upon which a message is painted or posted.
c. Monument sign, meaning a ground sign with low overall height. (See freestanding sign)
d. Pole Sign, meaning a freestanding sign with visible support structure (but shall exclude billboards).
e. Pylon Sign, meaning a freestanding sign with visible support structure or with the support structure enclosed.
f. Subdivision Entranceway sign, meaning a permanent sign located at the entrance to a residential, office/service,
commercial or industrial subdivision, or site condominium.
4. Off-Premise Signs.
a. Billboard, meaning any surface which contains a message unrelated to premises wherein it is displayed or posted (an offpremises
sign) and is regulated in accordance with regulations governed by the Highway Advertising Act, Public Act No. 106 of
1972 (MCL 252.301 et seq.). See the definition of “Off Premise Sign.” Also known as Outdoor Advertising.
b. Off-Premise sign, meaning any sign that is not related to the use of the property, a product sold, or the sale or lease of the
property on which it is displayed, and that does not identify the place of business as purveyor of the merchandise, services,
etc., advertised upon the sign. A sign that disseminates information that does not directly relate to the use of the property on
which the sign is located. Also known as Outdoor Advertising.
5. Election Signs and Free Expression Signs.
a. Election sign means a temporary sign relating to: (1) the election of a person to public office; (2) a political party; or (3) a
matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body.
b. Free expression sign means a temporary or permanent sign relating to a public issue, ideology, or opinion.
6. Temporary Signs.
Temporary sign means a sign which is used only temporarily and advertises a private or public seasonal or special event, function or sale.
Temporary signs are not permanently mounted. Temporary signs shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. Balloon sign, meaning any air-filled or gas-filled object used as a temporary sign to direct attention to any business or
profession, or a commodity or service sold, offered or manufactured, or any festival or entertainment.
I-30
ARTICLE I
b. Banner sign, meaning a temporary sign produced on cloth, paper, fabric or other combustible material of any other kind,
with or without frames. National, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business, shall not be
considered as a banner.
c. Construction sign, meaning a temporary sign placed at the entranceway to a commercial, industrial, or residential
development that has not been completed.
d. Pennant sign, meaning a sign or display consisting of long, narrow, usually triangular flags of lightweight plastic, fabric
or other materials that may or may not contain a message, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in a series, and
designed to move in the wind.
e. Portable sign, meaning a temporary sign, which is not permanently affixed to a building face or a pole, pylon or other
support that is permanently anchored in the ground. A portable sign is capable of being moved from one location to another.
Portable signs include, but are not limited to:
(1) Signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
(2) Signs converted to A- or T-frames;
(3) Menu and sandwich board signs;
(4) Balloons and other inflatable figures used to attract attention or as signs for a business;
(5) Feather signs or flag signs;
(6) Wire stake signs; and
(7) Signs attached to, or painted on, vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless such vehicle is used in
the normal day-to-day operations of the business
f. Real estate development sign, meaning a sign informing when a subdivision or other real estate development will
commence construction or will be available for occupancy or use on the premises upon which such sign is located.
g. Real estate sign, meaning a temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or
lease of such property.
h. Sidewalk/Sandwich sign, meaning a moveable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is
located, but supported by its own frame and most often forming the cross-sectional shape of an A.
7. Other Sign Definitions.
The following definitions shall also apply to Signs:
a. Border means a narrow strip, often ornamental, along the outer edge of a sign.
b. Business sign means an accessory sign related to the business, activity or service conducted on the premises upon which the
sign is placed.
I-31
ARTICLE I
c. Change of Copy means the replacement of sign text, numbers or graphics with different text, numbers or graphics without
changing the size, height or structural framework of the sign.
d. Common Signage Plan means a signage plan applicable to a multi-tenant commercial or industrial location.
e. Conforming sign means a sign that is legally installed in accordance with federal, state, and local laws and ordinances.
f. Cylindrical sign (see Monolith Sign).
g. Exempt Signs means signs exempted from normal permit requirements.
h. Flag means a rectangular or triangular piece of fabric of a distinctive design that is used as a symbol or as a signaling device.
i. Identification sign means a sign which displays the name and/or address of a person or firm.
j. Illuminated sign means any sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source.
k. Integral sign means a sign carved into stone, concrete or similar material, or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent
type construction and made an integral part of the structure.
l. Interval / Time interval means a definite length of time marked off by two (2) events or different images, or the frequency of
message change for an electronic message sign.
m. Limited Period means for purposes of this ordinance a “limited period of display” time limitation for temporary signs.
n. Marquee means any permanent rooflike structure, projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond
the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
o. Mobile sign means a portable sign mounted on a trailer.
p. Neon sign means a sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with neon gas, which glows when electric current is sent through it.
q. Nonconforming sign means a sign which is prohibited under the terms of this chapter, but was in use and lawful at the date
of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
r. Obsolete sign means a sign that advertises a product, event or service that is no longer available or that advertises a business
that has closed or identifies an event/activity that has ceased.
s. On-Premise Sign means a communication device whose message and design relates to a business, an event, goods,
profession or service being conducted, sold or offered on the same property as there the sign is erected.
t. Sign means the display by any means of any object, device, logo, symbol, word, numeral, figure, device, design or trademark
which is intended to make known an individual, firm, profession, institution, organization, business, product, service, event,
location or message and which is visible to the general public.
u. Sign Face means the portion of a sign plus any borders intended for the display of information on the sign.
v. Street Furniture sign means a sign structure which, by its design, invites, entices, encourages or makes itself convenient or
available to use by the general public for something more than mere visual attraction to its message. Such signs include, but
are not limited to, signage on benches and on table umbrellas used for outdoor, cafe-style dining.
Sill means the horizontal member at the bottom of a window or door.
Snowmobile means any motor-driven vehicle, designed for travel primarily on snow or ice, of a type that utilizes sled-type runners or
skis, an endless belt tread, or any combination thereof, or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, but is
not a vehicle that must be registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.).
Soil removal means the removal of any kind of soil or earth matter, including topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, rock, or similar materials, to a
depth not greater than twelve (12) inches, except common household gardening and general farm care.
Special approval use means a situation wherein a special exception is made by the Planning Commission to accommodate certain land
uses which are not normally compatible with other land uses permitted in a district or whose effects upon adjoining land uses are not
immediately determinable, and therefore require certain conditional regulations and safeguards to guide their development within a
given district.
I-32
ARTICLE I
Stable means an accessory building in which horses are temporarily or permanently boarded for breeding, care, grooming, sale or
training.
State-Licensed Day Care Facilities.
Adult Day Care Facility includes the following definitions:
(1) Adult Family Day Care Home. A private home in which six (6) or less adults eighteen (18) years of age or older, receive
care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill,
developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped that require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult day care home
does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to
a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day care center.
(2) Adult Group Day Care Home. A private home in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) adults eighteen (18)
years of age or older, receive care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It includes facilities for adults who
are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped that require supervision on an ongoing basis.
An adult day care home does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons
released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day care
center.
(3) Adult Day Care Center. A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one (1) or more persons, eighteen (18) years
of age or older, for care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged,
mentally ill, developmentally disabled or physically handicapped that require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult daycare
center does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or
assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day-care center.
Child Day Care Facilities includes the following definitions as defined and regulated by Public Act No. 116 of 1973 as amended:
(1) Child Family Day Care Home. A state-licensed, owner-occupied private residence in which one (1) but not more than six (6)
minor children are received for care and supervision for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent
or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a
home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four (4) weeks in a calendar year.
(2) Child Group Day Care Home. A state-licensed, owner-occupied private residence in which seven (7) but not more than
twelve (12) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended
by a parent or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. It
includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four (4) weeks in a calendar year.
(3) Child Care Center. Also known as “day care center”, a state-licensed facility, other than a private residence, receiving one
(1) or more minor children for care and supervision for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours, and where the parents or
guardians are not immediately available to the child.
State-Licensed Foster Care Facilities.
Adult Foster Care Facility. A state-licensed establishment that provides foster care to adults. It includes facilities and foster care homes
for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis
but who do not require continuous nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include convalescent or nursing homes, homes
for the aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a
correctional facility, or any other facilities which have been exempted from the definition of adult foster care facility by the Adult Foster
Care Facility Licensing Act, Public Act No. 218 of 1979 as amended. The following additional definitions shall apply in the application of
this Ordinance:
(1) Adult Foster Care Small Group Home. A facility with the approved capacity to receive twelve (12) or fewer adults who are
provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or
more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
I-33
ARTICLE I
(2) Adult Foster Care Large Group Home. A facility with approved capacity to receive at least thirteen (13) but not more than
twenty (20) adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four
(24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
(3) Adult Foster Care Family Home. A private residence with the approved capacity to receive six (6) or fewer adults who are
provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5)
or more days a week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for compensation. The adult foster care family home licensee
must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence.
(4) Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility. An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than twenty
(20) adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24)
hours a day, five (5) or more days a week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
Child Foster Care Facility. A state-licensed establishment that provides foster care to minor children. The following additional
definitions shall apply in the application of this Ordinance:
(1) Child Foster Family Home. A private home in which one (1) but not more than four (4) minor children, who are not related
to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to the adoption
code, Chapter X of Public Act No. 288 of 1939 as amended, being sections 710.21 to 710.70 of the Michigan Compiled
Laws, are given care and supervision for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or more days a week, for two (2) or more
consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
(2) Child Foster Family Group Home. A private home in which more than four (4) but fewer than seven (7) minor children, who
are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to
Chapter X of Public Act No. 288 of 1939 as amended, are provided care for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or more
days a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
Steep slope means a naturally occurring land form with a vertical change in elevation of ten (10) feet or more, a slope of twelve percent
(12%) or more, and a length of fifty (50) feet or more measured parallel to the contour lines.
Storm sewer means an artificial conduit to convey stormwater.
Story means the portion of a building, other than a mezzanine, included between the surface of any floor and the floor next above it, or
if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. (See the illustration entitled “Basic Structural
Terms.”)
Story, basement. A basement shall be counted as a story if over fifty percent (50%) of its height is above the level from which the height
of the building is measured or if it is used for business purposes.
Story, half, means the part of a building between a pitched roof and the uppermost full story, such part having a floor area which does
not exceed one-half (½) the floor area of the full story, provided the area contains at least two hundred (200) square feet, with a clear
height of at least seven (7) feet, six (6) inches.
Story, mezzanine, means a full story when more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of the story underneath is covered by such
mezzanine, or,if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is twenty-four (24) feet or more.
Street means the public thoroughfare which affords traffic circulation and the principal means of access to abutting property, including
avenues, places, ways, drives, boulevards, highways, roads, and other thoroughfares, except alleys.
I-34
ARTICLE I
Street frontage means the distance for which a lot line of a zoning lot adjoins a public street, from one (1) lot line intersecting such
street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.
Street furniture sign means a sign structure which, by its design, invites, entices, encourages, or makes itself convenient or available
to use by the general public for something more than mere visual attraction to its message. Such signs include, but are not limited to,
signage on benches and on table umbrellas used for outdoor, cafe-style dining.
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a temporary or permanent location on the ground or is
attached to something having a permanent location in, on or below the ground. When a structure is divided into separate parts by an
unpierced wall, each part shall be deemed a separate structure.
Study area means the geographic area containing the critical arterial intersections, and connecting roadway segments, which are
expected to be affected by the site-traffic generated by a development.
Subdivision entranceway sign means a sign depicting the name of a residential, office/service, commercial, or industrial subdivision,
and located at the entrance to such subdivision.
Suspended sign means a sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
Sustainable means relating to, or being a method of, harvesting or using a resource so that the resource is not depleted or permanently
damaged.
Swale means a shallow stormwater channel that can be vegetated with some combination of grasses, shrubs, and/or trees designed to
slow, filter, and often infiltrate stormwater runoff.
Swimming pool means any artificially constructed portable or non-portable pool, hot tub, or spa capable of being used for swimming or
bathing and having a depth of twenty-four (24) inches (61cm) or more at any point.
Temporary building and use means a building or use permitted by the Zoning Administrator or designee to exist during periods of
construction of the main building, if such period is not to exceed one (1) year.
Temporary sign means a sign which is used only temporarily and advertises a private or public seasonal or special event, function, or
sale. Temporary signs are not permanently mounted. Temporary signs shall include balloon, banner, construction, political, portable, and
real estate signs.
Tent means a shelter of canvas, or similar material, supported by poles and fastened by cords or pegs driven into the ground and which
shall not include the types of small tents used solely for children’s recreational purposes.
Terrace means a level surfaced area without piers or joists, or permanent roof, intended for outdoor use.
Township Board means the Green Oak Township Board.
Township engineer means an engineer appointed by the Township Board to the position of Township engineer or any other person
authorized by the Township Board to perform the duties of Township engineer as set forth in this chapter.
I-35
ARTICLE I
I-36
Township official means the Zoning Administrator or a designee from the building, zoning, and planning department.
Traffic hazard means a source or situation with a potential for harm in terms of human injury or ill health, damage to property, damage
to the environment, or a combination of these.
Traffic impact assessment means a traffic impact study for relatively low traffic generating uses, which focuses on the impacts at
proposed site access points.
Traffic impact statement means a traffic impact study which evaluates the impacts on roadways adjacent to the study site and specified
nearby intersections. Such study is the most common type of impact study.
Traffic impact study means the analysis of the potential traffic impacts generated by a proposed project. This type of study and level of
analysis will vary, dependent upon the type and size of the project, traffic impact assessment, rezoning traffic impact study, traffic impact
statement, and regional traffic impact study.
Trailer means a wheeled vehicle designed to be pulled by a car, truck, or tractor containing a towing mechanism, tongue, or draw bar.
Trailers may be utilized for recreational, commercial, or private non-commercial operations.
Travel trailer means a portable vehicular unit primarily designed for travel and/or recreational usage, which may also contain facilities
for periodic overnight lodging, but which does not exceed eight (8) feet in width or thirty-two (32) feet in length. Such term also includes
folding campers and truck mounted campers, but does not include mobile homes.
Travel trailer park means a family, recreation-oriented facility for the overnight or short-term (not to exceed fifteen (15) days,
consecutively) parking of travel trailers or tents. Such term may also be referred to as a “campground.”
Tree means a woody plant with an erect perennial trunk, which, at maturity, is thirteen (13) feet or more in height, and which has a more
or less definite crown of foliage.
Tributary means a watercourse such as a stream or creek which has definite banks, a bed, and/or visible evidence of a continued flow or
continued occurrence of water and which is identified on the Green Oak Charter Township zoning map. This includes watercourses that
are adjacent to regulated wetlands.
Trip and direction trip mean a single or one (1) direction vehicle movement with either the origin or the destination (exiting or entering)
inside a study site.
Undeveloped state means a natural state preserving natural resources, natural features, scenic or wooded conditions, agricultural use,
open space, or a similar use or condition prior to grading activities. Land in an undeveloped state does not include a golf course but may
include a recreational trail, picnic area, children’s play area, greenway, or linear park. Land in an undeveloped state may be, but is not
required to be, dedicated to the use of the public.
Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or premises, or a building or structure thereon, is designed, arranged, or intended,
or for which it is occupied, maintained, let, or leased.
Utility Scale wind farm means all wind farms that produce greater than fifty (50) kilowatts of energy.
ARTICLE I
Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is or may be used in whole or in part for cable, wireline, or wireless communications
service, electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function.
Variance means to be permitted where strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would cause undue hardship not created by
the owner, as interpreted for a situation containing unique circumstances concerning an individual piece of property.
Vegetation, woodland, refers to plant life in general (i.e., shrubs and groundcover), and as it pertains to part of a woodland area as
protected in this chapter.
Wall sign means a sign fastened to, or painted on, the wall area of a building or structure that is confined within the limits of the wall,
with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of such wall.
Wetland means land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life, and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp. or marsh and which is any
of the following:
(1) Contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream.
(2) Not contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream, and is more than five (5) acres in size.
(3) Not contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream, and is five (5) acres or less in size, if the MDEQ determines that
protection of the area is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the state from pollution, impairment, or
destruction, and the department has so notified the owner, except this subsection may be utilized regardless of wetland size
in a county in which subsection (2) of this definition is of no effect, except for the purpose of inventorying, at the time.
Wetland buffer means a required zone, free of physical disturbance due to construction or earth moving beyond the defined perimeter
of a wetland.
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS) means any device such as a wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine that converts wind energy
to a form of electrical energy greater than one (1) kilowatt.
a. Private WECS means any WECS that is accessory to a principal non-residential or residential use located on the same lot, and is
designed and built to serve the needs of the principal use and has a rated power output of 1OOkw or less.
b. Commercial WECS means any WECS that is designed and built to provide electricity for commercial use.
c. Temporary WECS means any WECS not permanently affixed to a structure or the ground and will serve a need for no more than
three hundred and sixty-five (365) days.
Window sign means any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the
window.
Wireless communications facilities or facility shall mean all structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio
frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals or other wireless communications services, and include
wireless communications equipment, wireless communications support structures, and wireless communications equipment compounds,
as defined herein. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, microwave
relay facilities, telephone transmission equipment building and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this
definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short wave receiving facilities; amateur (ham) radio facilities; private/stand-alone satellite
dishes; essential services structures and facilities; and, governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations
which preempt municipal regulatory authority. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following additional terms are defined:
I-37
ARTICLE I
I-38
(1) Attached wireless communications facilities shall mean wireless communications equipment attached to an existing
wireless communications support structure or in an existing wireless communications equipment compound.
(2) Substantial change in physical dimensions means one or more modifications of the height, width, length, or area of a
wireless communications facility at a location, the cumulative effect of which is to materially alter or change the appearance
of the wireless communications facility.
(3) Wireless equipment means the equipment and components, including cellular antennae, transmitters, receivers, equipment
shelters or cabinets, regular and backup power supply including emergency generators, and power supply, coaxial and fiber
optic cables used in the provision of wireless services, but excluding wireless support structures.
(4) Wireless communications equipment compound means a delineated area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless
communications support structure within which any wireless communications equipment related to that support structure is
located.
(5) Wireless communications support structures or support structures shall mean structures designed to support or capable
of supporting wireless communication equipment. Support structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited
to, monopoles, lattice towers, utility poles, wood poles and guyed towers, buildings, or other structures with such design or
capability.
(6) Collocation shall mean the location by two (2) or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication
equipment on a common wireless communication support structure.
Woodland area means any area, including all trees, shrubs, and groundcover, regardless of size, which is designated on the woodland
area map, including trees that were previously existing as of the effective date of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived. The
Township woodland area map shall be available for review at the Township building department.
Yard, front, means an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a uniform depth (setback) when measured horizontally at right
angles to the front lot line and unoccupied from the ground upward, except as otherwise specified in this chapter.
Yard, rear, means an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a uniform depth (setback) when measured horizontally at right
angles to the rear lot line and unoccupied from the ground upward, except as otherwise specified in this chapter.
Yard, required, side/rear/front/waterfront, means an open space of prescribed width or depth adjacent to a lot or property line on
the same land with a building or group of buildings, which open space lies in the area between the building or group of buildings and
the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. (See illustration
entitled “Lot Terms”.)
Yard, side, means an open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard (or waterfront yard in the case of waterfront lots) and of
a uniform width (setback) measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line; and unoccupied from the ground upward except as
herein otherwise specified.
ARTICLE I
I-39
Figure I-8: Yard
Yard, waterfront, means the area of the lot located between the principal building and the ordinary high-water mark, extending the
full width of the lot, the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the ordinary high-water mark and the nearest point of the
principal building.
Zone lot means a parcel of land in single ownership, that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage,
and use, and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by this chapter.
Zoning Board of Appeals means the Zoning Board of Appeals for the Township of Green Oak, Michigan.
Sec. 38-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Green Oak Township Zoning Ordinance.”
Sec. 38-3. Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment of zoning districts in the Township for the regulation of land
development and land use, and the use and erection of structures on such land in order to:
(1) Meet the needs of the citizens of the Township for food, fiber, energy, and other natural resources, places of residence,
recreation, industry, trade, service, and other uses of land;
(2) Ensure that use of the land shall be situated in appropriate locations and relationships;
(3) Limit the inappropriate overcrowding of land and congestion of population, transportation systems, and other public facilities;
(4) Facilitate adequate and efficient provision for transportation systems, sewage disposal, water, energy, education, recreation,
and other public service and facility requirements; and
(5) Promote public health, safety, and welfare.
ARTICLE I
I-40
(b) For such purposes, the Township Board, by this chapter, divides the Township into districts of such number, shape, and area as it
considers best suited to carry out the act by which this chapter is authorized, and to achieve specific land management objectives
and avert or solve specific land use problems, including the regulation, development, and establishment of districts in areas
subject to damage from flooding or erosion. The Ordinance from which this chapter is derived, regulating land development, is also
adopted for designating or limiting the location, height, number of stories, and size of dwellings, buildings, and structures that
may be erected or altered, including tents and trailer coaches, and the specific uses for which dwellings, buildings, and structures,
including tents and trailer coaches, and the maximum number of families which may be housed in buildings, dwellings, and
structures, including tents and trailer coaches, are erected or altered. The provisions of this chapter are intended to be uniform
for each class of land or buildings, dwellings, and structures, including tents and trailer coaches, throughout each district, but the
provisions in one (1) district may differ from those in other districts. The Township Board does not regulate, nor control the drilling,
completion, or operation of oil or gas wells, or other wells drilled for oil or gas exploration purposes, and shall not have jurisdiction
with reference to the issuance of permits for the location, drilling, completion, operation, or abandonment of such wells.
Sec. 38-4. Construction.
This chapter shall be liberally construed in such a manner as to best effectuate its purpose. In interpreting and applying the provisions
of this chapter, the requirements shall be held to be the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
prosperity and general welfare. Where any condition imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the use of any lot, building, or
structure is either more restrictive or less restrictive than any comparable condition imposed by any other provision of this chapter, or by
the provision of an ordinance adopted under any other law, the provision which is more restrictive or which imposes a higher standard or
requirement shall govern.
Sec. 38-5. Rules applying to text.
The following rules shall apply to the text and language of this chapter:
(1) The particular shall control the general.
(2) In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption, the text shall control.
(3) The term “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The term “may” is permissive.
(4) Terms used in the present tense shall include the future; and terms used in the singular number shall include the plural, and
the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
(5) All buildings are considered structures, but all structures may not be buildings.
(6) The term “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof.
(7) The term “person” includes a corporation, as well as an individual.
(8) The term “used” or “occupied,” as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the term “intended,” “arranged,”
or “designed to be used or occupied.”
(9) Any word or term not defined in this section shall be used with a meaning of common or standard utilization.
Sec. 38-6. Validity.
If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular land, parcel,
lot, district, use, building, or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of such provision to any other parcel, lot, district, use,
building, or structure not specifically included in such ruling.
ARTICLE I
Sec. 38-7. Enabling authority.
The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is adopted pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as
amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq.; Wetlands Protection, part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30301 et seq.); junkyards, Public
Act No. 12 of 1979 (MCL 445.451 et seq.); the Mobile Home Commission Act, Public Act No. 96 of 1987 (MCL 125.2301 et seq.).
Secs. 38-8 - 38-40. Reserved.
I-41
ARTICLE I
I-42
This page is left intentionally blank.
ARTICLE II
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 38-41. Zoning administration.
The Township Board shall designate and employ a Zoning Administrator or designee to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The Zoning Administrator or designee may, with the approval of the Township Board, designate authorized agents to assist in the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 38-42. Duties of Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for a variety of duties related to zoning and planning for Green Oak Charter Township.
Wherever in this Zoning Ordinance specific responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator are listed, the Zoning Administrator may transfer
the responsibilities to a designee to perform the duties of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall:
(1) Receive and review all applications for building and land use permits and certificates of use and occupancy, and approve or
disapprove such applications, based on compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter and such other laws,
codes and ordinances which are applicable to land use and occupancy, and issue certificates when there is compliance with
this chapter.
(2) Receive all applications for site plan review and special approval use permits which the Planning Commission is required to
decide under this chapter and implement the decisions of the Planning Commission.
(3) Receive all applications for appeals, variances, or other matters which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to decide under
this chapter and refer such applications, with recommendations, to the Zoning Board of Appeals for determination.
(4) Receive all applications for amendments to this chapter from the office of the Township clerk and report to the Planning
Commission all such applications, together with recommendations.
(5) Maintain a map showing the current zoning classifications of all land in the Township, which will conform to the true copy
maintained by the Township Clerk.
(6) Maintain written records of all actions taken by the Zoning Administrator and meet with the Planning Commission, upon
request.
(7) Be responsible for providing forms required by the Planning Commission, Township Board or Zoning Board of Appeals, as
required by this chapter, and be responsible for information on such forms necessary for the effective administration of this
chapter, subject to the general policies of the Township Board, Planning Commission, and Zoning Board of Appeals.
(8) Make periodic site inspections of the Township to determine compliance with this chapter, answer complaints of chapter
violations and file periodic reports as needed with the Township Board and Planning Commission.
(9) Have the power to grant building and land use permits and certificates of use and occupancy, and make inspections of
buildings or premises necessary to carry out his or her duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the
Zoning Administrator to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy until the Zoning Administrator has
inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with the requirements of this chapter.
(10) Under no circumstances, be permitted to make changes to this chapter or to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out his
or her duties as the Zoning Administrator.
II-1
ARTICLE II
Sec. 38-43. Building and land use permits.
(a) Required. Excavation for, erection of, addition to, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, or the grading, leveling, or
re-contouring of land of more than twenty-five (25) cubic yards, or the removing of trees in connection with such activities, shall
not be undertaken, nor shall any activity or change of use be commenced until the proper permit has been issued by the Zoning
Administrator. Except upon a written order of the Zoning Board of Appeals, no such building and land use permit or certificate of
use and occupancy shall be issued for any building or structure where the construction, addition, alteration, or use thereof would
be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. A summary of requirements for land use permits and building permits is
provided on the following chart:
Table 43-1 Land Use Permit / Building Permit Summary
Buildings and Structures Subject to Land Use Permits Buildings and Structures Subject to Building Permits
One (1) story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed one hundred and twenty (120) square feet
Any two (2) story structure
Ground-mounted air conditioning units/compressors Structures or buildings larger than one hundred and twenty (120)
square feet in area
Fences In-ground or above-ground swimming pools with a water capacity
of over twenty-four (24) inches deep
Gazebos Decks
Hot tubs / Jacuzzis Retaining walls over four (4) feet in height
Play structures Fences over six (6) feet in height
(b) Exception. Permits shall not be required for temporary structures or buildings less than one hundred and twenty (120) square
feet, or for minor alterations or repairs costing five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less which are made to existing structures, or the
wrecking of buildings and structures of less than one thousand (1,000) cubic foot capacity.
(c) Applications. Application for a building permit or land use permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, signed by the
person requesting the permit or the duly authorized agent of such person. For uses requiring a site plan, the Zoning Administrator
shall not issue a building permit or land use permit until the provisions of Chapter 38, Division 2, Site Plans of this article,
pertaining to site plan review, have been satisfied. For uses not requiring a site plan, there shall be submitted with all applications
for building permit or land use permits, two (2) copies of a drawing, drawn to scale, showing the following:
(1) Location, shape, area, and dimensions for the lot or acreage.
(2) Location of the proposed construction, alteration or repair upon the lot or acreage affected, along with existing structures,
wells, disposal systems, and setback lines.
(3) Dimensions, height, and bulk of structures.
(4) Nature of the proposed construction, alteration, or repair and the intended uses.
(5) Present use being made of any existing structure affected and any proposed change in the use thereof.
(6) Any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to determine compliance with this chapter and to
provide for the enforcement thereof.
(d) Evidence of ownership. All applicants for building or land use permits shall have available for the Zoning Administrator’s
inspection, evidence of ownership of all property affected by the permit, and shall submit the evidence upon the request of the
Zoning Administrator.
II-2
ARTICLE II
(e) Issuance. If the Zoning Administrator finds the application conforms to the requirements of this section and other laws, codes,
and ordinances pertaining to use and occupancy, he or she shall mark, over his or her signature, all copies of the application as
“approved,” and one (1) copy of the application shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator and another copy shall be returned
to the applicant, stating the extent of the work authorized. The approval of the application and the issuance of the permit shall
not be binding upon the Township Board or the Zoning Board of Appeals, in case it is subsequently discovered that the plans or the
completed building do not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
(f) Voiding action. Any building permit granted under this section shall be null and void unless the development proposed shall have
its first zoning site inspection within six (6) months of the date of granting the permit. The Zoning Administrator shall give notice
by certified mail to the holder of a permit that is liable for voiding action before voidance is actually declared. Such notice shall be
mailed to the permit holder at the address indicated on the permit application. The Zoning Administrator may suspend or revoke a
permit issued under the provisions of this section whenever the permit is issued erroneously on the basis of incorrect information
supplied by the applicant or his or her agent, or is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any other laws, codes or
ordinances pertaining to use or occupancy.
(g) Inspections. The construction or use covered by any building permit shall be subject to the following inspections:
(1) At the time of staking out of lot corners and building foundations at all building corners.
(2) At the time a land use activity is commenced.
(3) All normal inspections required by the current building code in effect in the Township.
(4) Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, it shall be the duty of the permit holder(s) to notify the Zoning
Administrator when the construction is ready for final inspection. Failure to make proper notification of the time for
inspection shall automatically cancel the land use permit, and require issuance of a new permit before construction may
proceed or occupancy may be permitted. In the case of a building permit, failure to make proper notification will require
the work to cease until the required inspection can be performed (which may necessitate the removal of completed work to
expose portions for inspection) before construction may proceed or occupancy be permitted.
Sec. 38-44. Special approval use permits.
(a) Applications. Applications for special approval use permits authorized in this section shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator. Application requirements shall conform to the provisions of Section 38-43(c).
(b) Procedures.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed application to determine if all required information has been supplied,
and then forward completed applications and supporting data to the Planning Commission.
(2) Upon receipt of the application for a special approval use permit, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, notice
of which shall be given in accordance with Section 103 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as
amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq., and Section 38-51 of this Ordinance.
(3) Upon conclusion of the public hearing procedures, the Planning Commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions
a special approval use permit. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be incorporated in a statement of findings and
conclusions relative to the special approval use and shall be sent promptly to the Zoning Administrator and the applicant.
(c) Basis of determinations. The Planning Commission shall review the proposed special approval use in terms of the standards
stated in this section, and shall establish that such use and the proposed location meet the following standards:
(1) Will be harmonious and in accordance with the general objectives or any specific objectives of the Township’s Master Plan.
(2) Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character of the area.
II-3
ARTICLE II
(3) Will not be directly or indirectly hazardous or disturbing to existing or future uses, ecosystems, waterways, wetlands, etc.
(4) Will be an improvement in relation to property in the immediate vicinity and to the Township as a whole.
(5) Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities or that the persons responsible for the establishment of the
proposed use will provide adequately for any such service or facility.
(6) Will not create excessive additional public costs and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the Township.
(7) Will be consistent with the intent and purposes of this chapter.
(d) Conditions and safeguards. The Planning Commission may impose such additional conditions and safeguards deemed necessary
for the general welfare, the protection of individual property rights, and ensuring that the purposes of this chapter and the general
spirit and purpose of the district in which the special approval use is proposed will be observed. Special approval use permits may
be issued for specific time periods, as determined by the Planning Commission.
(e) Voiding action. Unless otherwise specified by the Planning Commission, any special approval use permit granted under this
section shall be null and void unless the development proposed shall be operational within one (1) year of the date of special
use approval. The Zoning Administrator shall give notice by certified mail to the holder of a permit that is liable for voiding action
before voidance is actually declared.
(f) A special use permit may be suspended or revoked according to the following procedure:
(1) Conditions which may give rise to a suspension or revocation proceeding include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. The special approval use was not constructed in conformance with the approved plans, or the property is not being used
in conformance with the approved special use; or the approved special use is not operational within two (2) years of the
date of special use approval; or
b. Compliance with the special use permit and any conditions have not been consistently demonstrated and administrative
attempts to secure compliance have been unsuccessful; or
c. The special use permit is issued erroneously on the basis of incorrect or misleading information supplied by the applicant
and/or his/her agent; or
d. The operation of the use granted by special use permit has created a risk or danger to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
e. The special use is a violation of any provision of this ordinance or other township, county, state or federal regulations.
(2) If the Zoning Administrator or designee determines that a condition for suspension or revocation of the special use permit
exists, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a report in writing specifying the specific factual details for the violation and
which support the suspension or revocation of the special use permit.
(3) The Zoning Administrator or designee shall file the report so prepared with the Township Supervisor, who shall provide a copy
to the Township Board, and serve a copy of such report upon the permitee or its authorized agent or employee personally or by
regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested.
(4) After the Supervisor submits the report to the Township Board, the Township Clerk shall schedule a hearing within a
reasonable period of time after Township Board’s receipt of the report to consider the alleged violation. Notice of the
hearing(s) shall be served by the Township Clerk upon the permitee or its authorized agent or employee personally or by
regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested not less than seven (7) days before a scheduled hearing date, and
such notice shall advise the permitee of its right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing before the Township Board.
(5) At all such hearings, the permitee shall have the legal right to defend against the allegations made by way of confronting any
adverse witnesses, by being able to present witnesses in his/her behalf, by being allowed to present arguments, personally or
through legal counsel in his/her own behalf.
II-4
ARTICLE II
(6) The Township Board shall prepare a written statement of its findings within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of all such
hearings and shall serve such findings upon the permitee either personally or by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt
requested. If the Township Board decides that the special use permit shall be suspended or revoked, the permitee shall not
thereafter conduct, operate or carry on the business or use for which the special use permit was granted.
(g) Reapplication. No application for a special approval use permit which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted
until the expiration of one (1) year or more from the date of such denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or change of
conditions found to be sufficient to justify reconsideration by the Planning Commission.
Sec. 38-45. Certificates of use and occupancy.
(a) It shall be unlawful to use, or permit the use or occupancy of, any land, building, or structure for which a building permit is
required, and to use, or permit to be used, any building or structure altered, extended, erected, repaired, or moved, until the Zoning
Administrator or designee shall have issued a certificate of use and occupancy, stating that the provisions of this chapter have been
complied with.
(b) Certificates of use and occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings or structures, or parts thereof, if, after inspection, it is found
that the buildings or structures are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(c) Temporary certificates of use and occupancy may be issued for part of a building or structure. Such temporary certificates are:
(1) For the occupancy of the entire building prior to it being completed;
(2) To be in force for not more than one hundred and twenty (120) days;
(3) Renewable only in thirty (30) day increments, and for not more than five (5) days after the building or structure is fully
completed and ready for occupancy; provided, however, that such portions of the building or structure are in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter and such other laws, codes, and ordinances pertaining to occupancy.
(d) Buildings or uses accessory to dwellings shall not require a separate certificate, but may be included in the certificate for the
dwelling when shown correctly on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as the dwelling.
(e) Applications for certificates shall be made in writing to the Zoning Administrator or designee on forms furnished by the Township
and such certificates shall be issued within seven (7) days after receipt of the application, if found in compliance with subsection
(b) of this section. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant shall be notified of such action and cause within the seven
(7) day period.
Sec. 38-46. Enforcement.
(a) Violations. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall have committed a municipal civil infraction.
(b) Public nuisance per se. A use of land or a dwelling, building, or structure (including a tent or recreational vehicle) which is used,
erected, altered, razed, or converted in violation of this Zoning Ordinance or regulation adopted in accordance with the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq., is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per
se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction, and the owner or agent in charge of the dwelling, building,
structure, tent, recreational vehicle, or land shall be liable for maintaining a nuisance per se.
II-5
ARTICLE II
(c) Fines and imprisonment. The owner or agent in charge of any dwelling, building, structure, tent, recreational vehicle, or land, or
part thereof, where any condition in violation of this chapter shall be created, and who has knowingly assisted in the commission
of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and, upon conviction, shall be liable to for the fines provided for in Chapter 20,
law enforcement. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues.
(d) Rights and remedies. The rights and remedies provided in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies
provided by law.
(e) General responsibility. The Township Board or its duly authorized representative is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing
this chapter and the Township Board is hereby empowered, in the name of the Township, to commence and pursue any and all
necessary and appropriate actions and/or proceedings in the circuit court of the county, or any other court having jurisdiction,
to restrain and/or prevent any noncompliance with, or violation of, any of the provisions of this chapter, and to correct, remedy
and/or abate such noncompliance or violation. It is further provided that any person aggrieved or adversely affected by such
noncompliance or violation may institute suit and/or join the Township Board in such a suit to abate the noncompliance or
violation.
Sec. 38-47. Performance guarantee.
(a) For the purposes of this section, the term “performance guarantee” means a cash deposit, certified check, or automatically
renewing irrevocable letter of credit from a bank chartered and located in the United States of America in the amount of at least
one hundred and twenty-five (125%) percent of the estimated cost of the improvements to be made, as determined by the
applicant and verified by the Township.
(b) In the interest of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter, protecting the natural resources and the health, safety,
and welfare of the residents of the Township and future users or inhabitants of an area for which a site plan for a proposed use has
been submitted, the Township Board, upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, may require the applicant to deposit
a performance guarantee as set forth in this section. The purpose of the performance guarantee is to ensure completion of those
improvements connected with the proposed use as defined in this chapter.
(c) Where the Township Board requires a performance guarantee, such performance guarantee shall be deposited with the Township
Treasurer prior to the issuance of a building and land use permit by the Township for the development and use of the land. Upon
the deposit of the performance guarantee, the Township shall issue the appropriate building and land use permit.
(d) The approval shall also prescribe the period of time within which the improvements for which the performance guarantee has been
required are to be completed, which period will begin from the date of the issuance of the building permit.
(e) If the performance guarantee deposited is a cash deposit or certified check, the Township shall rebate to the applicant fifty percent
(50%) of the deposited funds when seventy-five percent (75%) of the required improvements are completed as confirmed by
the Township, and the remaining fifty percent (50%) of the deposited funds when one hundred percent (100%) of the required
improvements are completed as confirmed by the Township. If a request is made by the applicant for a temporary certificate of use
and occupancy without completion of the required exterior improvements, the performance guarantee required in this section may
be applied by such applicant to assure compliance of the approved site with the standards of this chapter and the specifications of
the approved site plan.
II-6
ARTICLE II
(f) Upon the satisfactory completion, as determined by the Township, of the improvement for which the performance guarantee was
required, the Township shall return the deposited performance guarantee to the applicant.
(g) If the applicant defaults in making the improvements for which the performance guarantee was required within the time period
established by the Township, the Township shall have the right to use the performance guarantee deposited to complete the
improvements through contract or otherwise, including, specifically, the right to enter upon the subject property to make the
improvements. If the performance guarantee is not sufficient to allow the Township to complete the improvements for which it
was posted, the applicant shall be required to pay the Township the amount by which the cost of completing the improvements
exceeds the amount of the performance guarantee deposited. Should the Township use the performance guarantee, or a portion
thereof, to complete the required improvements, any amount remaining after such completion shall be applied first to the
Township’s administrative costs in completing the improvement, with any balance remaining being refunded to the applicant.
If the applicant has been required to post a performance guarantee or bond with another governmental agency, other than the
Township, to ensure completion of an improvement associated with the proposed use prior to the Township conditional approval,
the applicant shall not be required to deposit with the Township a performance guarantee for that specific improvement. At the
time the performance guarantee is deposited with the Township and prior to the issuance of a building and land use permit, the
applicant shall enter into an agreement, incorporating the provisions of this section, with the Township regarding the performance
guarantee.
Sec. 38-48. Fees.
The Township Board shall, by resolution, determine and set the fees to be charged for:
(1) All permits and certificates, and copies thereof;
(2) Appeals to the Zoning Board of Appeals;
(3) Applications to the Planning Commission for special approval uses or site plan reviews;
(4) Rezoning applications; and
(5) All other applications and services provided for in this chapter.
Sec. 38-49. Furnishing records to interested persons.
Complete applications and permits shall be furnished to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest upon the payment to the
Township treasurer of a fee determined by the Township Board.
Sec. 38-50. Natural Rivers and Tributary Overlay permit.
(a) Requirement. Excavation for, erection of, addition to, alteration, or moving of any building or structure, or the grading, leveling,
or recontouring of land, or the removing of trees in connection with these activities shall not be undertaken nor shall any activity
or change of use be commenced within the Natural Rivers or Tributary overlay zones until a permit has been issued by the Zoning
Administrator or designee pursuant to this section.
(b) Application requirements. Application for a Natural Rivers and Tributary Overlay permit shall be made to the Planning and
Zoning Administrator, signed by the person, firm, partnership, or corporation requesting the same or by the duly authorized agent
of such person, firm, partnership or corporation. For those uses requiring a site plan, the Planning and Zoning Administrator shall
not issue the aforementioned permit until the provisions of Article II, Division 2, Site Plan Review, have been satisfied. For those
uses not requiring a site plan, there shall be submitted with all applications for Natural Rivers and Tributary Overlay permits, two
(2) copies of a drawing, drawn to scale showing:
II-7
ARTICLE II
(1) The location, shape, area, and dimensions for the lot, lots, or acreage.
(2) Ordinary high-water mark of adjacent waterways.
(3) The location of the proposed construction, alteration, or repair upon the lot, lots, or acreage affected, along with existing
structures, wells, and disposal systems.
(4) The dimensions, height, bulk of structures, and setback lines.
(5) The nature of the proposed construction, alteration, or repair and the intended uses.
(6) The limits of proposed land disturbance shown in relation to the natural vegetation strips required under Sections 38-361(f)
(3) and 38-362(g), as well as proposed tree protection and sedimentation/erosion control measures.
(7) The present use being made of any existing structure affected and any proposed change in the use thereof.
(8) Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Administrator to determine compliance with this
chapter and to provide for its enforcement.
(c) Evidence of ownership. All applicants for permits under this section shall have available for the Planning and Zoning
Administrator’s inspection, evidence of ownership of all property affected by the permit and shall submit the same upon the
request of the Planning and Zoning Administrator.
(d) Issuance of permit. If the Planning and Zoning Administrator finds the application conforms to the requirements of this chapter
and other laws, codes, and ordinances pertaining to use and occupancy, they shall mark all copies of the application approved
over their signature, one copy of which shall be retained by them, and another copy shall be returned to the applicant, stating the
extent of the work authorized. The approval of the application and the issuance of the permit shall not be binding upon the Board
or the Zoning Board of Appeals, in case it is subsequently discovered that the plans or the completed building do not conform to
the requirements of this chapter. The issuance of a permit for work within the Natural Rivers or Tributary overlay zone pursuant
to this section does not release the applicant from the permit requirements of other agencies, including, but not limited to, Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Permits issued by the Livingston County Drain Commissioner pursuant to Part 91 of Act 451 of
the Public Acts of 1994.
(e) Voiding of permit. Any permit granted under this section shall be null and void unless the development proposed shall have its
first zoning inspection within six (6) months of the date of granting the permit. The Planning and Zoning Administrator shall give
notice by certified mail to the holder of a permit that is liable for voiding action before voidance is actually declared. Said notice
shall be mailed to the permit holder at the address indicated on said permit application. The Planning and Zoning Administrator
may suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this Ordinance whenever the permit is issued erroneously on the
basis of incorrect information supplied by the applicant or their agent or is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of
any other laws, codes or ordinances pertaining to use or occupancy.
(f) Inspection. The construction or use covered by any building or land use permit shall be subject to the following inspections:
(1) At the time of staking out grading limits and identifying trees proposed for removal, but prior to the commencement of such
activity.
(2) Following grading and tree removal, where necessary, at the time of staking out of lot corners and building foundations at
all building corners. It shall be the duty of the holder of every permit to notify the Planning and Zoning Administrator when
completed grading and tree removal and staking of lot and building corners are ready for inspection. Failure to make proper
notification of the time for inspection shall automatically cancel the permit, and require issuance of a new permit before
construction may proceed or occupancy may be permitted.
(3) Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, it shall be the duty of the holder of every permit to notify the Planning
and Zoning Administrator when the construction is ready for inspection. Failure to make proper notification of the time for
inspection shall automatically cancel the permit, and require issuance of a new permit before construction may proceed or
occupancy may be permitted.
II-8
ARTICLE II
(4) All normal inspections required by the current building code in effect in the Township.
(5) At the time a land use activity is commenced.
Sec. 38-51. Public notice.
When notice of a Township action is required, such notice shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006
as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq., and the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq.
Secs. 38-52 - 38-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SITE PLANS
Sec. 38-71. Review required in specific districts.
Site plan review and approval of all development proposals within specific zoning districts is required in accordance with the following
provisions. The intent of this division is to provide for consultation and cooperation between the developer and the Planning Commission
so that both parties might realize maximum sustainable utilization of land and minimum adverse effect upon the surrounding land uses.
Through the application of the following provisions, the attainment of the Township’s Master Plan will be assured and the Township will
develop in an orderly fashion.
(1) Submission. A site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval for the following:
a. Any permitted or special use in RM, RMH, LB, VMU, GB, HC, RO, LI, and GI districts (see Section 38-234 for PUDs).
b. All residentially related permitted and special uses in single-family districts, such as but not limited to churches, schools,
roads, and public facilities.
c. Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of this chapter.
d. Any change and/or conversion of use as permitted and regulated by this chapter within the same zoning district.
e. Any addition to an existing principal or accessory building:
1. Wherein the proposed addition constitutes an increase of either one thousand (1,000) square feet or ten percent
(10%) or more as compared to the existing building or use, whichever is less.
2. Wherein the proposed addition or expansion would require a variance from the provisions of this chapter, no matter
what size the addition or expansion.
(2) Review and approval criteria. The site plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission upon finding that
the following conditions are met:
a. The proposed use will not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood.
b. There is a proper relationship between thoroughfares and proposed service drives, driveways, and parking areas.
c. The location of buildings, outside storage receptacles, parking areas, screen walls, and utility areas is such that the
adverse effects of such uses will be minimized for the occupants of that use and the surrounding areas.
d. The proposed development provides for proper development of roads, easements, and public utilities, and protects the
general health, safety, welfare, and character of the Township.
e. The proposed development meets the requirements and standards for grading and surface drainage, and for the design
and construction of storm sewers, stormwater holding facilities, extended retention facilities to treat stormwater runoff
before it reaches a wetland area, water mains, sanitary sewers, and for acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes or
approaches, as determined by the Township engineers and as set forth in the county road commission’s construction
standards and, where appropriate, the Township, and the county drain commissioner’s standards.
II-9
ARTICLE II
f. All buildings or groups of buildings shall be arranged so as to permit emergency vehicle access, by a practical means, to
all sides.
g. The natural resources are preserved by developing in a sustainable manner which will not detrimentally affect or destroy
natural features, such as lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, steep slopes and woodlands.
h. There is protection of the local groundwater resources and the recognition of a close relationship between wetland areas
and static groundwater levels. The proposed development respects the natural topography by minimizing the amount of
cutting, filling and grading required in and around wetland areas and surface waterbodies.
i. The proposed development will not cause soil erosion, sedimentation or degradation of surface water or groundwater
quality.
j. The stormwater management systems and facilities will preserve the natural drainage characteristics and enhance the
aesthetics of the site.
k. To ensure that storm drainage or stormwater Best Management Practices are implemented for the protection of
downstream landowners. The procedures, standards, and recommendations as set forth in the Low Impact Development
Manual for Michigan (www.semcog.org) shall be considered, as well as the standards within the Green Oak Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance. Refer to Figure 38-366-1 for representative LID techniques.
l. The wastewater treatment and water supply systems comply with applicable federal, state and county requirements.
m. Sites which include storage, use, sale or manufacture of hazardous substances or wastes, fuels, salt or chemicals will be
designed to prevent spills and discharges of polluting materials to the air, surface of the ground, groundwater or nearby
waterbodies, or the environment.
n. Secondary containment shall be provided for aboveground areas where hazardous substances are stored or used.
Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substances for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary
for the recovery of any released substance.
o. General purpose floor drains shall only be allowed if they are approved by the responsible agency for connection to
a public sewer system, drain to an on-site closed holding tank (not a septic system), or regulated through a state
groundwater discharge permit.
p. State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill prevention, recordkeeping, emergency response, transport,
and disposal of hazardous substances shall be met. No discharges to groundwater or surface water, including direct and
indirect discharges, shall be allowed without required permits and approvals.
q. The submitted site plan has been reviewed by the Township engineer, planner, and fire chief to ensure that the plan
conforms to adopted Township standards and provisions within this chapter.
r. The location of buildings, parking, drives, landscaping, and other improvements on the site is appropriate for the lot size
and configuration.
s. Landscaping, including trees, shrubs, and other vegetative material, is provided to maintain and improve the aesthetic
quality of the site and area.
t. The proposed use is in compliance with all Township ordinances and any other applicable laws.
(3) Required data.
a. Plans submitted for site plan approval shall contain all of the data set forth in subsection (3)b. of this section prior to
review for approval of such plans by the Planning Commission. Final construction plans must be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator or designee and must be reviewed and approved prior to obtaining a building and land use permit.
b. Site plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire development. The sheet size shall be at least twenty-four (24)
inches by thirty-six (36) inches, with the plan view drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet for property less
than three (3) acres, or one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet for property three (3) or more acres. Included on the
site plan will be all dimensions, and the following:
1. The name of the development and the areas of the development, in acres.
II-10
ARTICLE II
2. The location of the development, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet, with a north
point indicated. The location map shall indicate the section, township, and range, as well as the name of the
township and county, and all relevant corporate, township, range, and section lines.
3. The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant, the property owner, if different, and the planner,
designer, engineer, or surveyor who was responsible for the design of the proposed development.
4. The names of all abutting subdivisions or condominiums within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed
development; the layout of streets, indicating street names, right-of-way widths, and connections with adjoining
streets; the widths and location of alleys, easements, and public walkways; the property owners’ names of each
adjacent property and the property lines; and the zoning classification of the proposed development and the
adjacent properties.
5. All existing and proposed lot lines, property line structures, parking areas, etc., within the site and within one
hundred (100) feet of the proposed development, as well as the proximity to major thoroughfares and section
corners.
6. The plan or plat for the development, drawn to a scale of not more than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet,
and including a legal description of the property and all existing utility easements or County drains. All acreage in
the proposed street right-of-way, park, or other common areas shall be provided on the plan or plat.
7. All existing and proposed street right-of-way centerlines.
8. The date (month, day, and year) of preparation, including revisions, title block, scale, north arrow, and cardinal
points.
9. Site data chart, comparing the existing and proposed improvements with the schedule of regulations for the
appropriate zoning district.
10. Location of any existing and proposed sanitary sewers, water mains, Low Impact Development stormwater
intervention, storm drains, stormwater/sedimentation facilities, and other underground facilities within or adjacent
to the proposed development, including the location and dimensions of any associated easements.
11. A site report for the property, if the property is not to be served by a public sewer and water systems, as described in
the county health department rules. Such report shall include soil boring and percolation test data for the property.
12. Physical features, including:
i. Locations and dimensions of all existing and proposed access drives, street intersections, driveways, sidewalks,
service lanes, signs, curbing, and acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes. Written approval from the
county road commission for a driveway curb cut must accompany the site plan submitted documents.
ii. Location of existing and proposed service facilities aboveground and belowground, including:
A. Well sites;
B. Septic systems and other wastewater treatment systems, and the location of the septic tank, drainfield
and reserve field (soil absorption system) should be clearly distinguished;
C. Water mains, hydrants, pumphouses, standpipes, and building services and sizes;
D. Sanitary sewers and pumping stations;
E. Stormwater control facilities and structures, including storm sewers, swales, retention and detention
basins, drainageways, sedimentation ponds, and other facilities, including calculations for sizes, designed
in compliance with the Township’s Stormwater Management Ordinance and compliance with the Low
Impact Development Manual for Michigan. Refer to Figure 38-366-1 for representative LID techniques;
F. Soil erosion control methods;
G. Location of all easements;
H. Location and size of interior and exterior areas and structures to be used for storage, use, loading/
unloading, recycling or disposal of hazardous substances;
II-11
ARTICLE II
I. Location of all underground and aboveground storage tanks for such uses as fuel storage, waste oil holding
tanks, chemical storage, hazardous waste storage, collection of contaminated stormwater or washwater
and all similar uses for which a pollution incidence prevention plan will be required;
J. Location of exterior drains, dry wells, catchbasins, retention/detention areas, sumps and other facilities
designed to collect, store or transport stormwater or wastewater. The point of discharge for all drains and
pipes shall be specified on the site plan;
K. Delineation of areas on the site which are known or suspected to be contaminated, together with a report
on the status of site cleanup; and
L. Submission of the hazardous substances reporting form for site plan review.
iii. Proposed plan for site grading and surface drainage.
iv. All buildings, with dimensioned floor plans, setback and yard dimensions, typical elevation views of proposed
structures, finished floor and grade line elevations, floor area, and height of all proposed buildings.
v. Location of the dimensioned parking spaces, number and calculations used to determine the number of spaces,
loading spaces, and method of surfacing.
vi. Exterior lighting information in accordance with Section 38-364.
vii. Location and description of all existing and proposed buffer areas, landscaping, berms, fencing, and walls in
accordance with Section 38-177(h).
viii. Sidewalks and bike paths.
ix. Trash receptacle pad locations and methods of screening.
x. Transformer pad locations and methods of screening.
xi. Dedicated road or service drive locations.
xii. Entrance details, including sign locations and size of entrance signs, exit signs, and all other site signs.
xiii. Designation of fire lanes.
xiv. Exterior door locations and sizes.
xv. Any other pertinent physical features.
xvi. Description of exterior wall construction.
13. Natural features, including:
i. A statement of parcel soil characteristics of the site to at least the detail provided by the U.S. Soil Conservation
Service in the county soil survey.
ii. Existing topography, with a maximum contour interval of two (2) feet indicated, and the topography on the site
and beyond the site for a distance of one hundred (100) feet in all directions.
iii. A grading plan, showing finished contours at a maximum interval of two (2) feet, correlated with existing
contours so as to clearly indicate required cutting, filling, and grading.
iv. Location of existing drainage courses, lakes, ponds, rivers, and streams, including their water surface elevation,
floodplain elevation, and ordinary high-water mark.
v. Location of existing wetlands and wetland buffers.
vi. Site investigation report, when required by Section 38-72(c).
vii. Delineation of the flood hazard area.
viii. Location of natural resource features, including woodlands, as follows:
A. For an area in which no development is proposed, the general location of all trees and an estimate of the
number, size, species present, and general description of shrubs and groundcover shall be provided.
B. In areas proposed for development, an inventory of all trees with a dbh greater than six (6) inches,
regardless of species, shall be provided, complete with distribution of trees by species and dbh as well as
shrubs and groundcover.
C. Location of all woodland areas, accurate to the nearest foot.
II-12
ARTICLE II
D. Perimeter dripline of the woodland areas.
E. All landmark trees (i.e., genus, species, and dbh), with driplines accurate to the nearest foot.
F. Elevational information at the base of each landmark tree and any tree in an area proposed to be
developed.
G. Clearly delineated surveyed lines beyond which no disturbance shall occur during both construction and
occupation of the property.
H. Location of any permanent protective barriers and soil erosion control measures.
I. Detailed description of all mitigation measures required by this chapter to compensate for the loss of
woodland areas due to development of the property.
14. The following additional information for multiple-family, cluster, and PUD developments:
i. Density calculations by type of unit by bedroom count.
ii. Designation of units by type of unit in each building.
iii. Carport locations and details, where proposed.
iv. Specific amount of recreation space and locations.
v. Type of recreation facilities to be provided in recreation space.
vi. If proposed, details of community buildings and fencing of swimming pools.
15. The following additional information for commercial and industrial developments:
i. Loading/unloading areas.
ii. Gross and usable floor area.
iii. Number of employees during peak usage.
iv. A listing of all hazardous materials and processes.
v. Pollution incidence prevention plan.
vi. Potential materials emitted into the environment.
(4) Application procedure. An application for site plan review shall be processed in the following manner:
a. All site plans, as well as other required data and exhibits, shall be submitted to the building department and must
contain the following in order to be accepted:
1. A signed and complete application.
2. Fifteen (15) copies of the site plan, along with all other required data and exhibits. The applicant may submit ten
(10) sets of scaled drawings (eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches) and five (5) sets of full size drawings
(twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches), or submit all fifteen (15) sets at full size.
3. Required fees.
b. Upon receipt of the site plan, the building department shall:
1. Forward a copy of the site plan to the Township planner within two (2) business days to ensure compliance with
subsection (3) of this section.
2. Forward, within two (2) business days, a copy of the site plan and application, if in compliance with subsection (3)
of this section, to the Township engineer and fire chief, or other such fire safety personnel, for review. If compliance
with subsection (3) of this section is not demonstrated, the site plan shall be returned to the applicant.
3. Receive reviews from the Township planner and engineer within twenty-one (21) days of receipt of the plans
(fourteen (14) days for subsequent reviews). A determination shall be made in such reviews as to whether the
criteria outlined in subsection (2) of this section has been satisfied. The building department shall send copies of the
planner’s and engineer’s comments for response by the applicant.
i. If in compliance with subsection (2) of this section, proceed to subsection (4)b.4. of this section.
ii. If not in compliance with subsection (2) of this section, the site plan will be sent back to the applicant for
revision or Zoning Board of Appeals variance.
II-13
ARTICLE II
4. Place review of the site plan on the next available Planning Commission agenda, as determined by the Planning
Commission chairperson and/or building department, provided conformance with subsection (2) of this section has
been demonstrated.
5. Forward a copy of the site plan, application, and all reviews conducted by the planner, engineer, and fire chief, and
the applicant’s response to such reviews, to each Planning Commission member.
c. The applicant shall forward copies of the site plan to the county health department, drain commissioner, and road
commission, as applicable or as required.
(5) Planning Commission action. After review of the application and site plan, the Planning Commission may take the
following actions:
a. Approval. Upon finding that the application and site plan meet the criteria of subsection (2) of this section, the Planning
Commission shall approve the site plan.
b. Approval with minor revisions. Upon finding that the application and site plan meet the criteria in subsection (2)
of this section and required information in subsection (3) of this section, except for minor revisions, the Planning
Commission may approve the site plan, conditioned upon such revisions being made by the applicant and reviewed by
appropriate Township staff and/or consultants.
c. Tabling. Should additional information or clarification of the site plan be required, from either Township consultants,
public agencies (i.e., the county road commission, drain commissioner or health department), or the applicant, the
Planning Commission may table the site plan review. Tabling shall require the site plan to be placed on an agenda for a
designated future date, up to one (1) year, for reconsideration.
d. Denial. Upon finding that the application and site plan do not meet one (1) or more of the criteria in subsection (2)
of this section, or all the required information listed in subsection (3) of this section was not provided, or that revisions
necessary to meet such criteria are so extensive as to require the preparation of a new site plan, the Planning Commission
may deny the site plan. In such case, “denied” shall be written on the plan and the reasons for denial shall be indicated in
the Planning Commission’s resolution.
e. Distribution. When a site plan has been reviewed by the Planning Commission and all steps have been completed, five
(5) copies of the application and plans will be marked “approved” or “denied,” for the following distribution:
1. One (1) copy shall be returned to the petitioner.
2. One (1) copy shall be forwarded to the building department for a permanent record.
3. The other three (3) copies shall be placed in the permanent file.
f. Final approval. Upon final approval by the Planning Commission, a building and land use permit may be applied for
through the Zoning Administrator or designee (building department). Compliance with all Township ordinances and the
approved site plan is mandatory.
(6) Effect of approval. When an applicant receives final site approval, he or she must develop the site in complete conformity
with the approved site plan. The site plan approval shall be valid for a period of one (1) year. If the project is not under
construction, as authorized by a building and land use permit, at the expiration of the approval time, the site plan approval
become null and void, and the developer shall make a new application for approval. A one (1) year extension may be granted
if requested by the applicant in writing prior to the original site plan expiration date. A time extension to the site plan
approval may be granted by the Planning Commission.
(7) Administrative review of minor site plans. An administrative review committee, consisting of the Township engineer,
planner, Planning Commission chairperson, and building official designated by the Township supervisor, is hereby authorized
to conduct administrative review of minor site plans. The committee will evaluate and consider minor site plans for approval,
conditional approval, referral to the Planning Commission, or denial. The minor site plans shall be subject to all other site plan
criteria, requirements, and standards as included in this section. A minor site plan may be applied for in any of the following
cases:
a. Accessory uses incidental to a conforming existing use, where such use does not require any variance or site modification.
II-14
ARTICLE II
b. Expansions and/or additions to existing conforming structures or additions of principal buildings and accessory buildings
less than two thousand (2,000) square feet or not more than ten percent (10%) of the existing floor area, whichever is
less.
c. Provision for additional loading/unloading spaces and landscape improvements as required by this chapter.
(8) Minor changes of site plan approved by the Planning Commission. An Administrative Review Committee, consisting of the
Zoning Administrator, Township Engineer, Planner, Planning Commission Chairperson, Building Official or person designated by
the Township Supervisor, is hereby authorized to grant minor changes to site plans approved by the Planning Commission under
certain circumstances. For purposes of this section, “minor changes” to an approved site plan shall be those minor changes that
do not materially affect the approved design character; do not change the use of the property; do not increase building units;
do not violate setback, height or other ordinance requirements; do not substantially affect the required landscaping; do not
increase the permitted square footage of any buildings; do not affect easement descriptions; do not substantially impact the
required engineering approval; and do not substantially impact any required environmental response activities. Examples of
minor changes include, but are not limited to:
a. For residential buildings, the size of structures may be reduced or increased by 5%, provided that the overall density of
units does not increase.
b. Square footage in non-residential buildings may be decreased or increased by up to 5% or 10,000 square feet, whichever
is smaller.
c. Horizontal and/or vertical elevations may be altered by up to 5%.
d. A building may be moved by no more than 10 feet horizontal.
e. Designated areas not to be disturbed may be increased.
f. Plantings approved in the final landscape plan may be replaced by similar types of landscaping on a one-to-one or
greater basis.
g. Improvements may be made to access or circulation, such as inclusion of deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing,
pedestrian/bicycle paths, etc.
h. Changes of building materials to another of higher quality may be made.
i. Changes may be made of floor plans which do not alter the character of the use.
j. Slight modifications of sign placement or reduction of size may be made.
k. Relocation of sidewalks and/or refuse storage stations may be made.
l. Internal rearrangement of a parking lot may be made which does not affect the number of parking spaces or alter access
locations or design.
m. Changes required or requested by the Township for safety reasons may be made.
n. Minor adjustments in the location of lot lines.
o. Approval of the location of mechanical equipment originally omitted from the approved site plan.
Sec. 38-72. Site investigation report.
(a) Intent. It is the intent of this section to ensure that the purpose and intent of this chapter is fulfilled through the submittal of a site
investigation report which contains the information as provided in this section. The protection and conservation of irreplaceable
natural resources from pollution, impairment, or destruction is of paramount concern.
(b) Approval, disapproval, and conditional approval. The Planning Commission shall have the function, duty, and power to
approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the site investigation report, subject to compliance with certain modifications and
conditions, in accordance and in conjunction with the review and approval of a site plan, subdivision plat, or condominium plan,
with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
II-15
ARTICLE II
(c) Required. A site investigation report shall be filed for any petition for a site plan, condominium or subdivision review, special
approval use permit, or lot split involving a private road in which two (2) of four (4) possible environmental factors are involved,
including the on-site existence of floodplains, wetlands over one (1) acre, woodlots over one (1) acre, or being within the natural
river corridor. If only one (1) such factor is present, the Planning Commission may require a site investigation report.
(d) Submittal. A site investigation report shall be presented to the Planning Commission for approval, disapproval, or approval
subject to compliance with certain modifications and conditions in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter, along
with the following:
(1) A description of the proposed project, including the location, purpose, and extent of the project.
(2) The existing zoning and building requirements for the proposed project.
(3) Whether any local, state, and federal permits are required for the project, and if so, a designation of such required local, state,
and federal permits.
(4) A description of the natural and cultural features of the project, including but not necessarily limited to:
a. A description of the topography of the land and soil;
b. The existing water resources, including surface water, groundwater, drainage, floodplains and wetlands, water quality,
and the effect of the project on any aquifer of same and/or neighboring wells;
c. A description of general stormwater flow and opportunities to reduce stormwater runoff using Best Management
Practices (BMP) as defined in the Township’s Stormwater Management Ordinance and the Low Impact Development
Manual for Michigan. Refer to Figure 38-366-1 for representative LID techniques.
d. A description of the existing vegetation, including the existence of any landmark trees, habitat, and wildlife;
e. A description of the existing aquatic ecosystems, including a description of the fish species and habitat; and
f. A description of the proposed land use, water use, economic and social conditions, any archaeological and historical
resources, and community facilities and services which are in existence.
(5) A statement describing the environmental impact of the proposed project, which shall include the following:
a. A description of the impact on the topography and soils, including any disruption, erosion, etc.
b. A description of the impact on water resources, including:
1. The effect on any surface water;
2. The effect on any groundwater or water table, aquifers, and existing wells;
3. The effect of any water discharges, increased stormwater runoff or alteration of natural drainage;
4. A description of the water quality of both surface water and groundwater;
5. A description of the susceptibility of the project to flooding; and
6. A description of any wetland impact.
c. A summarization of the impact on terrestrial ecosystems (the relationship between the land resources and the organisms
which depend upon it), including a description of the impact on the following:
1. The vegetation and habitat, describing, in particular, whether there would be any alteration and/or loss to such
vegetation and habitat;
2. The impact on wildlife, including any disruption of habitat and whether the project would affect any endangered or
rare species of wildlife.
d. A summarization of the environmental impact on aquatic ecosystems (the relationship between the wetland and water
resources and the organisms which depend on them), which shall include a summary of the impact on the following:
1. The fish species, including the impact on the type and number of fish species;
2. Other species of vertebrates, including the impact on the type and number of species; and
3. The effect on the habitat, including whether such habitat will be altered or disrupted.
e. A summarization of the environmental impact on the cultural environment, which shall include a summary of the
following:
II-16
ARTICLE II
1. The effect on neighboring land and water uses;
2. The impact on economic and social conditions, including the economy, lifestyles, etc., of the surrounding residents;
3. The impact on any archaeological and historical resources, including whether such resources would be disrupted or
altered, or such sites disturbed; and
4. The impact on community facilities and services, including, but not limited to, schools, roads, police and fire services,
etc.
f. A section dealing with protection of woodland areas. The preservation of woodlands, trees, landmark trees (see Section
38-363(f)), similar woody vegetation, and related natural resources shall have priority over development when there
are other on-site location alternatives. The integrity of woodland areas shall be maintained irrespective of whether such
woodland areas cross property lines. The woodland areas shall be evaluated on the basis of information supplied by the
petitioner, including consideration of the following:
1. Soil quality as it relates to potential tree disruption;
2. Habitat quality;
3. Tree species, including diversity of tree species;
4. Tree size and density, noting all landmark trees;
5. Health and vigor of tree stands;
6. Understory species and quality; and
7. Other factors, such as the value of the woodland areas as a scenic asset, windblock, noise buffer, environment asset
(i.e., cooling effect), and the value of specimen or historic trees within the woodland areas.
(e) Modifications. The Planning Commission shall have the function, duty, and power to require any modification in the site
investigation report or require any modification or impose any condition upon approval of any project which requires a site
investigation report or requires any modification or imposes any condition upon approval of any project which requires a site
investigation report to ensure that the purpose and intent of this chapter is fulfilled.
(f) Revocation. Any site investigation report which has been approved and any amendment, permit, or application which has been
approved pursuant to the approval of the site investigation report may be revoked when the construction of such development
is not in conformance with the approved plans or site investigation report, or if the site investigation report contains false
information which would have the effect of violating the purpose and intent of this chapter, in which case the Township Board
shall give the applicant notice of intention to revoke such permit, amendment, or approved development at least ten (10) days
prior to review thereof by the Township Board. After conclusion of such review, the Township Board may revoke the approval of the
development, amendment, or plan if the Planning Commission feels that a violation in fact exists and has not been remedied prior
to such hearing.
(g) Appeal. The decision of the Planning Commission with respect to the site investigation report approval may be appealed to
the Zoning Board of Appeals upon written request by the property owner or petitioner for a hearing before such Zoning Board
of Appeals. In the absence of such request being filed within sixty (60) days after the decision is rendered by the Planning
Commission, such decision becomes and remains final.
Secs. 38-73 - 38-90. Reserved.
II-17
ARTICLE II
DIVISION 3. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS*
Sec. 38-91. Created.
There is hereby created a Township Zoning Board of Appeals (referred to in this chapter as the “ZBA”), which shall perform its duties and
exercise its powers as provided in this division and in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL
125.3101 et seq., and in such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public health, safety, and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.
Sec. 38-92. Membership.
(a) The ZBA shall be composed of five (5) regular members who shall be selected in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act,
Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq. One of the members of the ZBA shall be a member of the Township
Planning Commission. The remaining, and any alternate, members shall be selected from the electors of the Township residing
within the zoning jurisdiction of the Township. The members selected shall be representative of the population distribution and of
the various interests present in the Township. One (1) regular member may be a member of the Township Board. An elected officer
of the Township shall not serve as chairperson of the ZBA. An employee or contractor of the Township Board may not serve as a
member of the ZBA.
(b) The Township Board may appoint no more than two (2) alternate members of the ZBA for the same term as regular members of the
ZBA. They shall serve as members of the ZBA upon the call of the chairperson where a regular member is absent from, or unable
to attend, a meetings of the ZBA. An alternate member may also be called to serve in place of a regular member for the purpose
of reaching a decision on a case in which a regular member has abstained for reasons a conflict of interest. The alternate member,
having been appointed, shall serve on the case until a final decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same
voting rights as a regular member of the ZBA in the cases in which the alternate member serves.
(c) The terms of office for members appointed to the ZBA shall be for three (3) years, except for members serving because of their
membership on the Planning Commission or Township Board, whose terms shall be limited to the time that they are members of
those bodies. When members are first appointed, the appointments may be for less than three (3) years to provide for staggered
terms. A successor shall be appointed not more than one (1) month after the term of the preceding member has expired.
Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be for the remainder of the term.
(d) A member of the ZBA may be removed by the Township Board for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written
charges and after a public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of
interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes
malfeasance in office.
Sec. 38-93. Meetings.
All meetings of the ZBA shall be held at the call of the chairperson or at such times as the ZBA shall determine. Special meetings shall be
held at the call of the chairperson, as the ZBA shall determine or upon request of at least two (2) members of the ZBA; provided, however,
that at least forty-eight (48) hours notice shall have been given to each member prior to the time set for the special meeting. The ZBA
shall not conduct business unless a majority of the members of the ZBA are present. All meetings of the ZBA shall be open to the public.
The ZBA shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official action. The ZBA shall have the power to subpoena and
II-18
ARTICLE II
request the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony, and the production of books, papers, files, and other evidence
pertinent to the matters before the ZBA. The ZBA shall also have the power to request the production of additional documentation or
information which it deems necessary to render a decision on an application, and shall have the power to postpone a decision on an
application until such time as the additional information which has been requested is produced by the applicant. The ZBA shall maintain
a record of its proceedings which shall be filed in the office of the Township Clerk.
Sec. 38-94. Appeals.
(a) An appeal may be taken to the ZBA by any person, firm, or corporation, or any officer, department, board, or bureau aggrieved by a
decision of a Zoning Administrator or Building Official concerning the administering and enforcing of the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance. In order to be “aggrieved by a decision,” the person or other entity must have a property interest recognized under the
law, and sufficient standing as recognized under the law, to challenge the decision. Such appeal shall be taken within such time
as prescribed by the ZBA by general rule, but in no event later than thirty (30) days after the date of the decision from which the
appeal is taken, by filing with the Zoning Administrator and the ZBA a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning
Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the ZBA all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
(b) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the
ZBA after the notice of appeal has been filed by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the ZBA or the circuit court, on application and due cause shown.
(c) The ZBA shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give notice in accordance with the provisions
of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq. and Section 38-51, and shall
render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. The ZBA shall state the grounds of each determination. Any person
may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
(d) If the ZBA receives a written report seeking an interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance or an appeal of an administrative decision,
the ZBA shall conduct a public hearing on the request. Notice shall be given as required under Section 38-51. However, if the
request does not involve a specific parcel of property, notice need only be published as provided in Section 38-51 and given to the
person making the request as provided.
(e) At a hearing, a party may appear personally or by agent or attorney.
(f) The ZBA may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination and may issue or
direct the issuance of a permit.
(g) If there are practical difficulties for nonuse variances as provided in Section 38-95 in the way of carrying out the strict letter of
the Zoning Ordinance, the ZBA may grant a variance in accordance with this section, so that the spirit of the Zoning Ordinance is
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
(h) The ZBA shall have the authority to grant nonuse variances relating to the construction, structural changes, or alteration of
buildings or structures related to dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or to any other nonuse-related standard in the
ordinance.
II-19
ARTICLE II
Sec. 38-95. Jurisdiction.
(a) The ZBA, as created in Section 38-91, is a body of limited power. The ZBA shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) Hear and decide on all matters referred to it upon which it is required to pass under this chapter.
(2) Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(3) Make a determination as to the appropriate zoning district for a use not specifically listed in this chapter. In making such a
determination, the ZBA shall consider, among other things, the specific characteristics of the use in question and compare
such characteristics with the characteristics of uses expressly permitted in the district. Such characteristics shall include,
but not be limited to, daily traffic congestion and traffic patterns, types of merchandise or service provided, types of
goods produced, expected hours of operation, and other characteristics which relate in any fashion to the proposed use in
comparison to permitted uses. The ZBA shall determine whether such use shall be permitted by right, special land use, or as
an accessory use. The ZBA shall have the authority to establish general standards and conditions under which a use may be
included in a district when making a determination as to an unlisted use.
(4) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error of law in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by an administrative official of the department of building and zoning in the enforcement of this chapter.
(5) Hear and decide appeals taken under Article IX, pertaining to signs.
(6) Interpret the zoning map.
(7) In hearing and deciding appeals, have the authority to grant such variance from the provisions of this chapter as may be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent so that the function of this chapter shall be observed, public health, safety, and
welfare secured, and substantial justice done, including the following:
a. Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter;
b. Permit the erection and use of a building or use of a premises in any district for public utility purposes necessary to public
convenience and service, so located, designed, erected, and landscaped to conform harmoniously with the architecture
and plan of the Township;
c. Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance,
such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements;
d. Permit modification of the height, setback, and area regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate
improvement of a lot which is of such shape or located with relation to surrounding development or physical
characteristics that it cannot otherwise be appropriately or reasonably improved without such modification;
e. Approve building and permits for legal nonconforming uses to terminate on a date specified in the approval documents,
which date shall not exceed two (2) years from the date of the permit, provided such uses are deemed helpful to the
development of certain areas and which will not be detrimental to the neighboring areas;
f. Permit a change of use from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted
classification, provided that the proposed use is suitable or more appropriate to the district than the existing
nonconforming use;
g. Permit the erection of a one-family dwelling on a nonconforming lot held under separate and distinct ownership from
the adjacent lots, and of record at the time of passage of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and which has
less than the lot area requirements of this chapter for the district in which such lot is located.
(8) Upon appeal, in specific cases, authorize site variation or modification of the provisions of this chapter, with such conditions
and safeguards as it may determine, as may be in harmony with the spirit of this chapter, and so that public safety and welfare
will be secured and substantial justice done, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter would involve practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. No such variance or modification of the provisions of this
chapter shall be granted unless it appears that, at a minimum, all the following facts and conditions exist:
a. There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the property involved that do not apply
generally to other properties in the same district or zone.
II-20
ARTICLE II
b. Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property
in the same zone and vicinity. The possibility of increased financial return shall not of itself be deemed sufficient to
warrant a variance.
c. The granting of such variance or modification will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially
injurious to the property or improvements in such zone or district in which the property is located.
d. The granting of such variance will not adversely affect the purpose or objectives of the Master Plan of the Township.
e. The condition or situation of the specific piece of property, or the intended use of such property, for which the variance is
sought is not of so a general or recurrent a nature.
f. The practical difficulty causing the need for the variance request was not self-created by the applicant.
(9) In consideration of all appeals and all proposed variations to this chapter, before making any variations from this chapter in a
specific case, determine that the standards set forth in subsections (a)(7) and (a)(8) of this section have been met, and that
the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the
congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair
established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, or welfare of
the inhabitants of the Township.
(b) The ZBA shall not have the power or authority to:
(1) Alter or change this chapter or the zoning map.
(2) Alter or change the zoning district classification of any property.
(3) Grant a use variance or otherwise approve of a use not specifically permitted under the zoning district classification. Such
prohibition shall not be interpreted to restrict the power of the ZBA to classify an unlisted use as set forth in subsection (a)(3)
of this section, and to determine the appropriate zoning district for such unlisted use.
(4) Grant a dimensional variance for any residential property which has the effect of rezoning that residential property to a
different residential zoning classification provided in this chapter. For purposes of this subsection, the term “effect of rezoning”
means a request to vary or reduce the required lot area regulations in any residential zoning classification by an amount of
fifteen percent (15%) or greater. However, such prohibition shall not apply in the case of a property owner seeking such a
dimensional variance to develop one (1) residential structure on a single parcel of residential land.
(5) Hear an appeal relative to any decision rendered on a planned unit development.
(6) Hear an appeal relative to any decision rendered on a special land use.
(7) Hear an appeal from a decision rendered by the Planning Commission or Township Board on any matter not otherwise
expressly under the jurisdiction of the ZBA. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to restrict or limit the jurisdiction of
the ZBA to interpret the provisions of this chapter, grant variances from the literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
or otherwise exercise the powers set forth in subsection (a) of this section.
Sec. 38-96. Determination and payment of fees.
All fees required by the provisions of this chapter shall be established by resolution of the Township Board. All fees shall be paid to the
department of building and zoning at the time of the filing of the application of appeal.
Sec. 38-97. Exercising powers.
In exercising the powers set forth in this division, the ZBA may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and,
to that end, shall have all the powers of the administrative official of the department of building and zoning from whom the appeal
is taken. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the ZBA shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision,
II-21
ARTICLE II
or determination of any administrative official of the department of building and zoning, or to decide in favor of the applicant any
matter upon which the ZBA is authorized to render a decision. The ZBA may, in its discretion, grant rehearing of any decision to consider
additional and new matters related to the relief requested, when such rehearing is requested within twenty (20) days of the ZBA’s initial
decision. The ZBA shall also have the right to reconsider a prior decision rendered by it if such motion for reconsideration occurs at the
next regularly scheduled meeting after the decision in question, and the motion for reconsideration is made by a member of the ZBA who
voted with the prevailing side. The decision of the ZBA shall be final, insofar as it involves discretion in the finding of the facts.
Sec. 38-98. Notice of hearing.
The ZBA shall make no recommendation, except in a specific case and after a hearing conducted by the ZBA. Notice shall be given in
accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq., and
Section 38-51.
Sec. 38-99. Validity of orders.
(a) An application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be resubmitted for
a period of one (1) year from the date of the last denial, except on grounds of newly-discovered evidence or proof of materially
changed conditions found upon consideration by the Zoning Board of Appeals to be valid.
(b) Prior to granting a variance for a particular parcel of property, all other existing infractions or violations of the Zoning Ordinance or
other Township ordinances or regulations related to the property shall be resolved.
Secs. 38-100 - 38-130. Reserved.
II-22
ARTICLE III
ARTICLE III. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sec. 38-131. District designations.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township is hereby divided into the following districts:
Zoning Districts
PL Public land
RF Residential/farming
RE Residential rural estate
LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3 Residential single-family
RM Residential multiple-family
RMH Residential mobile home park
LB Local business
GB General business
HC Highway commercial
RO Research office
LI Limited industrial
GI General industrial
PUD Planned unit development
VMU-1 Village Mixed Use 1
VMU-2 Village Mixed Use 2
Sec. 38-132. Zoning district map.
(a) Identification. The zoning districts as provided in Section 38-131 are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled
“Zoning District Map of Green Oak Township.” The zoning district map, along with all notations, references and other explanatory
information, shall accompany and be made a part of this chapter.
(b) Authority. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the zoning district map which may be published, a true and current
copy of the zoning district map, available for public inspection, shall be located in, and maintained by, the office of the Township
Clerk. The clerk’s copy shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of any land, parcel, lot, district, use, building, or
structure in the Township.
(c) Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts
indicated on the zoning district map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) A boundary indicated as approximately following the centerline of a highway, alley, or easement shall be construed as
following such centerline.
(2) A boundary indicated approximately following a recorded lot line or the line bounding a parcel shall be construed as following
such line.
(3) A boundary indicated as approximately following a municipal boundary line of a city, village, or township shall be construed
as following such line.
(4) A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be construed as being located midway in the right-of-way.
III-1
ARTICLE III
(5) A boundary indicated as following a shoreline shall be construed as following such shoreline, and, in the event of a change in
the shoreline, shall be construed as following the shoreline existing at the time the interpretation is made.
(6) The boundary indicated as following the centerline of a stream or river, canal, lake, or other body of water shall be construed
as following such centerline.
(7) A boundary indicated as parallel to, or an extension of, features in subsections (c)(1)--(6) of this section shall be so construed.
(8) A distance not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(9) Where a physical or cultural feature existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the official zoning map or any
other circumstances not covered by subsections (c)(1)--(8) of this section, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the
location of the zoning district boundary.
(10) Where a district boundary line divides a lot which is in single ownership at the time of adoption of the Ordinance from which
this chapter is derived, the Zoning Board of Appeals may permit an extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot to
the nearest lot line, but not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
(11) If any portion of any newly created lot or parcel created after January 23, 1999 falls within the boundaries of the natural
river overlay zone, the entire lot or parcel shall be subject to the regulations of the natural river overlay zone. If, however, the
underlying zoning district imposes more strict requirements (in terms of minimum lot size, required setbacks, etc.), the more
strict requirements shall prevail.
(12) Only that portion of a lot or parcel overlaid by the Spring Mill Creek/Davis Creek overlay zone shall be required to adhere to
its provisions. In cases where the underlying zoning district imposes more strict requirements (in terms of minimum lot size,
required setbacks, permitted land uses, etc.), the more strict requirements shall prevail.
Sec. 38-133. Application of regulations.
The regulations established in this Article within each zoning district shall be the minimum regulations for promoting and protecting
the public health, safety, and general welfare. Each district, as created in this Article, shall be subject to the regulations contained in this
Ordinance, which shall be applied in the following manner:
(1) No building shall be erected, altered, or moved, nor shall any building or structure or premises be used for any purpose, other
than as specifically permitted in the district in which such building, structure, or premises is located.
a. Permitted uses. Uses shall be permitted by right only if specifically listed as principal permitted uses in the zoning
district. Uses not expressly permitted are prohibited.
b. Accessory uses and buildings. Accessory uses and buildings are permitted only if such uses are clearly incidental to the
permitted principal uses.
c. Special approval uses. Special uses are permitted as listed in the various zoning districts, subject to receipt of special
use approval subject to Section 38-44.
(2) Uses of land or buildings or structures for commercial uses or purposes that are prohibited by or contrary to federal, state
or local regulations and ordinances are expressly prohibited in any zoning district within the Township. Medical marihuana
provisioning centers, safety compliance facilities, dispensaries, cooperatives, or other shared growing facilities or any other
operation or facility similar in nature are expressly prohibited. However, the following uses are exempt from this prohibition in
accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law No. 1, MCL 333.26423(d):
a. Medical marihuana activities, including the use or possession of Marihuana by a registered qualifying patient, as defined
in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law No. 1, subject to Section 38-201;
b. Medical marihuana activities, including the growth/cultivation of marihuana or provision of services to a qualifying
patient by a primary caregiver as defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated Law No. 1, subject to
Section 38-201.
(3) No building shall be erected or altered so as to:
a. Exceed the height limit specified for the district in which such building is located.
III-2
ARTICLE III
b. Occupy a greater percentage of lot area than is specified for the district in which such building is located.
c. Intrude upon the required front, rear, or side yards as specified for the district in which such building is located.
d. Accommodate or house a greater number of families than is specified for the district in which such building is located.
e. Provide less living space per dwelling unit than is specified for the district in which such building is located.
(4) No lot area shall be reduced or diminished so that yards and other open spaces shall be smaller than specified, nor shall the
density of population be increased in any manner, except in conformity with the area regulations, nor shall the area of any lot
be reduced below the minimum requirements established in this article for the district in which such lot is located.
(5) No part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the purposes of compliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building.
(6) Every building erected, altered, or moved shall be located on a lot of record as defined in this chapter and, except in the case of
approved multiple dwelling, commercial, and industrial developments, there shall be no more than one (1) principal building
and its permitted accessory structures located on each lot in any district.
(7) Whenever any street, alley, or other public way within the Township shall have been vacated by official governmental action
and when the lands within the boundaries thereof attach to, and become a part of, lands adjoining such street, alley, or public
right-of-way, they shall automatically and without further governmental action thenceforth acquire and be subjected to the
same zoning regulations as are applicable to lands to which they shall attach, and they shall be used for the same use as is
permitted under this chapter for such adjoining lands.
(8) Whenever any fill is placed in any lake or stream, the land created thereby shall automatically and without further
governmental action thenceforth acquire and be subjected to the same zoning regulations as are applicable to lands to which
they shall attach or be adjacent, and they shall be used for the same purposes as are permitted under this chapter for such
adjoining lands. No use of the surface of any lake or stream shall be permitted for any purpose not permitted on the land from
which the use emanates.
Sec. 38-134. Intent and purpose of districts.
The intent and purpose of each district is as follows:
(1) PL public land district. The intent of the PL district is to establish a district in which the principal use of land is primarily
the extensive public use of natural areas, essentially unimproved or undeveloped open spaces, public buildings or public
activities involving development or utilization of the land, educational facilities and the related services and functions which
are normally operated with them, and institutions and quasi-public uses. Further, the intent is to support the general intent
of this chapter, protect and preserve public open space, and ensure orderly transition to appropriate uses when such public
use is abandoned. When and if, in the course of governmental operations, land so classified and zoned shall pass out of the
possession of the public owner and into the possession of a private owner, such land will have to pass through established
rezoning procedures before it can be used by the new owner. The zoning of public land permits the Township to determine, at
such future time, the appropriate use which maybe made of such land.
(2) RF residential/farming district. The intent of the RF district is to provide a district in which very low density singlefamily
residential development, agriculture, and farm residential may occur in close proximity to each other, along with
other compatible uses often occupying large areas. The prevalent use of the district area is considered to be residential. The
regulations of such district are designed to conserve and protect low density residential uses and its occupancy uses, while
accommodating an agricultural use and its related accessory uses. Such regulations are also designed to exclude uses and
buildings which demand substantial public services, such as major thoroughfares, public sewer or water facilities, drainage,
and other public services.
(3) RE residential rural estate district. The intent of the RE district is to provide a district to encourage a single-family
residential development on larger size lots than those in the R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3 districts, enabling the developer to
incorporate environmentally fragile areas, such as ravines and wetlands, into his or her design; retain, preserve, and protect
III-3
ARTICLE III
a predominantly open and non-urban character within the Township; and reduce the need for public services to such areas
because of reduced density.
(4) LA (Lake Area), R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3 residential single-family districts. The intent of the LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3
districts is to provide districts in which the main use is single-family residential, plus its normal accessory and compatible
supportive uses. A reasonable range of lot sizes is envisioned, which will provide a choice of desirable and economically
feasible development opportunities for all members of the general public. Certain other private and public uses are permitted,
but subject to conditions which will ensure their compatibility with the main use and character of such districts.
(5) RM residential multiple-family district. The intent of the RM district is to provide sites for two-family and multiple-family
dwelling structures and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between nonresidential districts and
lower density single-family districts. The RM district is further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type
of unit in an otherwise low density single-family community. Due to its buffering characteristic between residential and
nonresidential uses, the RM district is intended to provide a residential area which is low rise in character, yet provides greater
density by allowing increased building coverage in the most intense single-family residential district.
(6) RMH residential mobile home park district. The intent of the RMH district is to provide districts of such size and location as
will encourage good mobile home residential development, adjacent to essential community services, and otherwise protect
the health, safety, and welfare of mobile home residents in the Township. In addition to the requirements of this article, all
mobile home parks shall comply with the mobile home commission act, Public Act No. 96 of 1987 (MCL 125.2301 et seq.), and
the current mobile home code adopted by the state mobile home commission.
(7) LB local business district. The intent of the LB district is to provide a district in which a neighborhood’s local service and
convenience shopping facilities can be optimally located to best serve each neighborhood of the Township. Such regulations
are a means to discourage strip or linear development, and to encourage stable and desirable development in a cluster or
planned pattern.
(8) GB general business district. The intent of the GB district is to provide a district in which the community’s overall
commercial and business facilities can be centralized to most efficiently and effectively serve the general Township and
adjacent areas. Other uses are permitted which are generally compatible with the character and requirements of the
commercial and business uses. Such regulations are designed to reduce possible conflicts with adjacent land uses and to
provide conditions which encourage proper development within the district.
(9) HC highway commercial district. The intent of the HC district is to provide a district for commercial and business uses which
primarily serve the motoring public. When located in the HC district, such uses are prevented from encroaching into other
districts where they would be deemed incompatible. The proper development of the uses permitted in the HC district under
special approval are subject to conditions which are designed to promote homogenous and desirable patterns of usage.
(10) RO research office district. The intent of the RO district is to provide for research and office uses in a planned development.
When located in the RO district, such uses are to be developed in a manner which will complement neighboring land uses
and the community, while at the same time provide for the necessary nonmanufacturing uses such as corporate office and
research facilities.
(11) LI limited industrial district. The LI district is intended to primarily accommodate research, wholesale, and warehouse
activities, and light industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the district, and in no manner
affect, in a detrimental way, any of the surrounding districts. The LI district is intended for the manufacturing, compounding,
processing, packaging, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material.
The processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, shall not
be permitted.
(12) GI general industrial district. The intent of the GI district is to provide a district whose location will permit heavy
manufacturing types of use. Further, the GI district is intended to provide land for the more large-scale and intense
manufacturing, fabricating, and assembling uses. While such uses may occasionally produce external physical effects
noticeable, to a limited degree, beyond the boundaries of the site, every possible effort shall be made to minimize such
effects.
III-4
ARTICLE III
(13) PUD planned unit development. The intent of the PUD district is to authorize the use of the PUD for the purposes of:
a. Encouraging the use of the land in accordance with its natural characteristics and adaptability;
b. Conserving natural features, such as wetlands and woodlots, and the expenditure of energy;
c. Encouraging innovation in land use design, viewsheds and planning;
d. Providing for usable, functional open space and wildlife corridors;
e. Preserving viewsheds and the rustic, rural appearance of the area;
f. Providing enhanced housing, employment, shopping, traffic circulation and recreational opportunities for the citizens of
the Township; and
g. Bringing about a greater compatibility of design and use.
(14) Village Mixed Use 1 and 2. The intent of these districts is to allow mixed-use development for specific areas of the Township
in a manner which has a well-coordinated design and which allows a complimentary interface between residential and nonresidential
uses.
Sec. 38-135. Schedule of use regulations.
The schedule of use regulations shall be as follows:
(1) PL public land districts.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the PL district include the following:
1. Public or private forest preserves and game refuges.
2. Essential services and structures of a nonindustrial charger, not including maintenance depots or warehouses.
3. Public golf courses, subject to Section 38-196(17).
4. Public parks and recreation activities.
5. Public cemeteries.
6. Other public uses.
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within the PL district include the following:
1. Residential uses which are associated with a conservation, educational or recreation use.
2. Public and private conservation areas, structures or roads for the development, protection, and conservation of open
space, watersheds, water, soil, forests and wildlife resources.
3. Public travel trailer parks, campgrounds, and parks, subject to Section 38-196(11).
4. Marinas, swimming areas, winter sports arenas, nature study areas, roadways, parking areas, shooting ranges and
playfields for medium and high intensity uses, and facilities included in the construction and operation thereof.
5. Sale of food and alcoholic beverages when part of a recreational activity.
6. Public educational or vocational training facilities.
(2) LA (Lake Area), R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3 residential single-family districts.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3 districts include the following:
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Publicly owned parks and recreation facilities.
3. Public educational institutions.
4. Stables, as accessory to residential dwellings, with no more than five (5) horses, subject to Section 38-196(18).
5. Accessory uses, subject to the provisions of Section 38-171.
6. Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 38-194.
7. Swimming pools, subject to the provisions of Section 38-171(9).
8. Essential services of a nonindustrial character, not including maintenance depots and warehouses.
9. State Licensed Day Care Facilities.
i. Child Family Day Care Homes (six (6) or fewer minor children).
ii. Adult Family Day Care Homes (six (6) or fewer adults).
III-5
ARTICLE III
10. State Licensed Foster Care Facilities.
i. Adult Foster Care Family Home, excluding an adult foster care facility licensed by a state agency for the care and
treatment of persons released from or assigned to adult correctional institutions (six (6) or fewer adults).
ii. Child Foster Family Homes (four (4) or fewer minor children).
iii. Child Foster Family Group Homes (five (5) or six (6) minor children).
11. Farm operations, subject to the Michigan Right to Farm Act, MCL 286.471, et. seq., as amended.
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3 districts include the following:
1. Churches, subject to Section 38-196(1).
2. Private schools.
3. Municipal buildings and utility buildings not requiring outdoor storage.
4. Private noncommercial recreation.
5. Hospitals, subject to Section 38-196(4).
6. Golf courses and country clubs, subject to Section 38-196(17).
7. State Licensed Day Care Facilities.
i. Adult Group Day Care Homes (seven (7) to twelve (12) adults)
ii. Child Group Day Care Homes (seven (7) to twelve (12) minor children)
8. Museums.
9. Cemeteries.
10. Common use riparian lots, subject to Section 38-365.
(3) RE residential rural estate district.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the RE district include all permitted uses in the LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3
districts, subject to the minimum requirements of the RE district.
b. Farm operations, subject to the Michigan Right to Farm Act, MCL 286.471, et. seq. as amended.
c. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within the RE district include the following:
1. All special uses permitted in the LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-3 districts, subject to the minimum requirements of the RE
district.
(4) RF residential farming district.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the RF district include the following:
1. All permitted uses in the LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, and RE districts, subject to the minimum requirements of the RF
district.
2. Farm operations, subject to the Michigan Right to Farm Act, MCL 286.471, et. seq., as amended.
3. Roadside stands for the display and sale of produce raised or grown on the premises, subject to Section 38-196(15).
4. Public parks and recreation areas, forest preserves, resource conservation areas, refuges, and similar low intensity
activities.
5. Agricultural composting, subject to Section 38-196(27), and subject to the Michigan Right to Farm Act, MCL
286.471, et. seq. as amended.
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within the RF district include the following:
1. All special uses permitted in the LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, and RE districts, subject to the minimum requirements of
the RF district.
2. Public and private cemeteries.
3. Golf driving ranges, subject to Section 38-196(17).
4. Airports, helicopters, and other vertical land and takeoff craft landing ports and aircraft landing fields, subject to
Section 38-196(25).
5. Stables, subject to Section 38-196(18).
6. Kennels, subject to Section 38-196(19).
7. Private day camps and campgrounds, subject to Section 38-196(11).
III-6
ARTICLE III
8. Recreational vehicle storage yards.
9. Quarries and excavations, subject to Section 38-359.
10. Confined animal feedlots, subject to Section 38-196(12).
11. Participatory commercial recreation, including:
i. Golf driving ranges, subject to Section 38-196(17).
ii. Commercial stables, subject to Section 38-196(18).
iii. Swimming pools, recreation fields for the purpose of softball, baseball, soccer, football, indoor archery, air gun
(paint ball) recreation, subject to Section 38-196(26).
(5) RM residential multiple-family district.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the RM district include the following:
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Two-family dwellings.
3. Multiple-family dwellings.
4. Public educational institutions.
5. Accessory uses, subject to Section 38-171.
6. Senior housing complexes, subject to Section 38-196(13).
7. Family Day Care Homes, subject to Section 38-196(6).
8. Adult Foster Care Small Group Home.
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within the RM district include the following:
1. All special uses permitted in the LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, and RE districts.
2. Convalescent homes, subject to Section 38-196(14).
3. Adult Day Care Centers, subject to Section 38-196.
4. Child Care Centers, subject to Section 38-196.
5. Adult Foster Care Large Group Homes, subject to Section 38-196.
6. Adult Foster Care Congregate Facilities, subject to Section 38-196.
Table 135-1 Green Oak Charter Township State Licensed Facilities Summary Listing of Permitted/Special Uses
Use LA R-1 R-2 R-2A R-3 RE RF RM VMU LB GB HC
Adult Day Care Home (=6) P P P P P P P P
Adult Group Day Care Home (7-12) SAU SAU SAU SAU SAU SAU SAU SAU
Adult Day Care Center (>1) SAU SAU
Child Family Day Care Home (=6) P P P P P P P P
Child Group Day Care Home (7-12) SAU SAU SAU SAU SAU SAU SAU SAU
Child Day Care Center (>1) SAU SAU SAU SAU SAU
Adult Foster Care Small Group Home (<12) P P
Adult Foster Care Large Group Home (13-20) SAU SAU
Adult Foster Care Family Home (=6) P P P P P P P P
Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility (>20) SAU SAU
Child Foster Care Family Home (1-4) P P P P P P P P
Child Foster Family Group Home (5-6) P P P P P P P P
P Permitted Use
SAU Special Approved Use
III-7
ARTICLE III
(6) RMH residential mobile home park district.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the RMH district include the following:
1. Mobile home parks, subject to the provisions of Section 38-137(h).
2. Public parks and recreational facilities.
3. Public educational institutions.
4. Accessory uses, subject to Section 38-171.
5. Family day care homes, subject to Section 38-196(6).
6. Foster family homes.
7. Foster family group homes.
8. Adult foster care family homes.
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within the RMH district include all special uses permitted in the LA, R-1,
R-2, R-2A, R-3, and RE districts, except hospitals.
(7) LB local business district.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the LB district include the following:
1. Retail businesses which supply commodities, such as groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods, drugs, gifts and
notions, or hardware.
2. Personal service establishments, such as repair shops for watches, small appliances, shoes and televisions, beauty
shops, and barbershops.
3. Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, subject to Section 38-196(28).
4. Professional offices for doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, and other similar professions.
5. Financial and business service establishments, banks, credit unions, and insurance offices.
6. Post offices and other similar governmental offices serving nearby residential areas.
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within the LB district include the following:
1. Eating and drinking establishments, excluding drive-in restaurants, subject to Section 38-196(2).
2. Indoor and outdoor commercial recreation, subject to Section 38-196(8) or 38-196(11).
3. Shops providing merchandise to be sold on the premises, provided that not more than five (5) persons are employed
on the premises in the production of merchandise being sold.
4. Planned shopping centers, subject to Section 38-196(20).
5. Mini-storage, subject to Section 38-196(21).
6. Child day care centers, subject to Section 38-196(6).
(8) GB general business.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the GB district include the following:
1. All uses permitted in the LB district.
2. Private clubs and lodges, provided, sales and services are to members and guests only.
3. Supermarkets.
4. Public or private business schools or colleges.
5. Health and fitness clubs.
6. Theaters, excluding drive-in theaters.
7. Eating and drinking establishments, subject to Section 38-196(2).
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within the GB district include the following:
1. All special uses permitted in the LB district.
2. Assembly halls or dancehalls, subject to Section 38-196(8).
3. Open air businesses when developed in conjunction with a permitted use and subject to Section 38-196(9).
4. Plant nurseries, subject to Section 38-196(23).
5. Vehicle wash establishments, subject to Section 38-196(24).
III-8
ARTICLE III
6. Mortuaries, subject to Section 38-196(7).
7. Bowling alleys, indoor skating rinks and similar recreational uses, subject to Section 38-196(8).
8. Veterinary offices, including animal hospitals and clinics, subject to Section 38-196(10).
9. Warehouse/indoor storage associated with retail sales businesses.
10. Public garages, automobile service stations, filling stations, and associated convenience stores subject to Section
38-196(16).
11. Child care centers, subject to Section 38-196(6).
(9) HC highway commercial district.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the HC district include the following:
1. All uses permitted in the GB district.
2. New and used car sales and showrooms.
3. Hotels and motels, subject to Section 38-196(5).
4. Public and commercial storage garages.
5. Bus and train passenger stations.
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within the HC district include the following:
1. All special uses permitted in the GB district.
2. Drive-in restaurants, subject to Section 38-196(2).
3. Body shops.
4. Lumberyards.
5. Recreational vehicle storage yards.
6. New and used bus, truck (one (1) ton and over), and heavy equipment sales and storage.
7. Adult regulated uses, subject to Section 38-197.
8. Vehicle storage garages.
9. Truck stops or truck plazas.
10. Child care centers, subject to Section 38-196(6).
(10) LI limited industrial district.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the LI district include the following:
1. Wholesale establishments, warehouses, cartage businesses, and truck terminals.
2. Manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment from previously prepared materials, or
repair of such products as, but not limited to:
i. Bakery goods and candies;
ii. Cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and toiletries;
iii. Hardware and cutlery;
iv. Pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only
by electricity or gas;
v. Musical instruments, toys, and novelties;
vi. Metal or rubber stamps, or other small, molded rubber products;
vii. Electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, and electronic consumer products;
viii. Electric or neon signs;
ix. Light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, siding, etc.;
x. Textile goods;
xi. Apparel and leather goods;
xii. Furniture and fixtures;
xiii. Printing and publishing.
III-9
ARTICLE III
3. Manufacture, compounding, assembling, reassembly, packaging, or treatment of articles or merchandise from
previously prepared materials, including but not limited to felt, fiber, glass, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious
or semi-precious metals or stones, and wire.
4. Tool, die, and machine shops.
5. Contractor equipment and material storage yards.
6. Municipal equipment and material storage yards.
7. Permitted uses in the RO zoning district.
8. Experimental, film or testing laboratories.
9. Mini-storage or self-storage warehouses, subject to Section 38-196(21).
10. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses customarily incidental to any of the principal uses set forth in subsections
(10)a.1.--9. of this section.
11. Movie Studio Buildings and film or video production.
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within the LI district include the following:
1. Municipal waste or water treatment facilities.
2. Automobile body repair stations.
3. Lumber and planing mills.
4. Building materials and lumber supply sales and/or storage.
5. Sales, leasing, and storage of contractors’ equipment and supplies.
6. Truck and trailer rental facilities.
7. Retail sales of goods assembled, manufactured, compounded, processed, packaged, or treated from previously
prepared materials, or repaired or stored, on the premises, provided, the building floor area devoted to retail sales
comprises no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of principal building floor area and the outdoor sales area
comprises no more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the minimum required lot area.
8. Central dry cleaning plants, subject to Section 38-196(28).
9. Airports.
10. Commercial outdoor storage.
11. Recreational vehicle storage yards.
12. Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to the special land uses set forth in subsections (10)
b.1.--11. of this section.
13. Other uses of the same nature or class as those listed as either a principal use in subsection (10)a. of this section or a
special land use in this subsection (10)b., which, as determined by the Planning Commission, are no more obnoxious
or detrimental to the surrounding area than the uses listed in such subsections.
14. Special uses in the RO zoning district.
15. Reserved.
16. Commercial composting.
17. Adult regulated uses, including body art establishments and pawn shops, subject to Section 38-197.
18. Vehicle Towing Facilities.
19. Movie Studio Buildings and film or video production if production is 24-hour operation or if outdoor storage is
considered.
20. Indoor recreation establishments including, but not limited to, batting cages, dance studios, cheerleading,
gymnastics, courts and fields for football, soccer, tennis, basketball, driving ranges, archery, skating rinks, hockey,
and other indoor recreation facilities, subject to a review of parking by the Planning Commission and subject to the
submittal of parking studies based upon the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards, if required.
(11) GI general industrial district.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the GI district include the following:
III-10
ARTICLE III
1. All permitted uses in the LI district.
2. Any manufacturing or other industrial type or related use, including the assembly, alteration, cleaning, fabrication,
finishing, machining, processing, production, repair, servicing, storage, testing, or treating of materials, goods, or
products, which is not injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or
creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other matter, toxic and noxious materials, odors, fire or explosive hazards,
or glare or heat, including but not limited to the following:
i. The manufacturing, fabrication, and assembling of motor vehicle equipment and parts, farm machinery and
equipment, or heavy industrial machinery and equipment.
ii. Production, manufacturing, processing, and packaging of such products as cereals, dog foods, soft drinks, and
distillation of grains and fruits.
iii. Drop forges, heavy stamping, fabricating, assembly, and other manufacturing processes, except tanneries,
slaughterhouses, stockyards, oil refineries, or soap factories.
iv. Lumber and planing mills.
v. Manufacturing or processing of wood, concrete, cinder blocks, and brick.
vi. Permitted uses in the RO zoning district.
vii. Manufacture of major appliances.
viii. Pressing, stamping, or forming of major sheet metal parts.
ix. Manufacture of iron, aluminum, bronze, and other castings.
3. Certain uses which, by their nature, would be dangerous in a community where large residential areas are
prohibited. Such uses shall include the manufacture of explosives, gasoline, and other crude oil byproducts.
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses within the GI district include the following:
1. Municipal waste or water treatment facilities.
2. Junkyards, subject to Section 38-196(3).
3. Recreational vehicle storage yards.
4. Central dry cleaning plants, subject to Section 38-196(28).
5. Production, processing and packaging of such products as cosmetics, toiletries, and pharmaceuticals.
6. Special uses in the RO zoning district.
7. Reserved.
8. Commercial composting.
(12) RO Research offices district.
a. Permitted uses. Permitted uses within the RO district include the following:
1. Any use charged with the principle function of technical training.
2. Office buildings for executive, administrative, clerical, accounting, engineering, architecture, drafting, and sales
functions.
3. Data processing and computer centers, including sales, service, and maintenance of electronic data processing
equipment.
4. Warehousing accessory to the above uses.
b. Special approval uses. Special approval uses shall include any use charged with the principal function of basic research,
design, and pilot or experimental product development.
(13) PUD Planned unit development.
a. Permitted uses.
1. All uses permitted in any other zoning district.
2. Accessory uses in accordance with the provisions of Section 38-171.
(14) Village Mixed Use-1 and Village Mixed Use-2.
a. Permitted and Special Uses shall comply with the listing of uses and requirements specified in Table 138-1.
III-11
ARTICLE III
Sec. 38-136. Schedule of area, height, and setback regulations.
The following regulations regarding lot sizes, yards, setbacks, lot coverage, building size, and densities apply within the zoning districts as indicated. No building shall be
erected, nor shall an existing building be altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except
in conformity with the regulations established in this section for the district in which such building is located. No portion of a lot used in complying with the provisions of this
section for yards, courts, or lot area occupancy in connection with an existing or projected building or structure shall again be used to qualify or justify any other building or
structure existing or intended to exist at the same time.
Schedule of Regulations
Zoning District
Minimum Lot Size per Unit Maximum Building Height Minimum Yard Setback Required Maximum % Lot
Area Covered by
All Buildings - Lot
Coverage
Maximum %
of Impervious
Surface
Additional Regulations
Area
Width at
Building Site
Stories Feet
Front
Yard
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Waterfront
Yard**
Public Lands, PL
Residential Farming, RF
5 acres 300 feet 2½ 32 60 feet 20 feet 50 feet 60 feet 20% --
(see Section 38-137(a)-
(c))
Residential Rural Estate, RE 2 acres 150 feet 2½ 32 50 feet 20 feet 50 feet 50 feet 25% -- “
Lake Area Residential, LA 7,200 sq ft 60 feet 2½ 32 30 feet 7 feet 30 feet 30 feet 30% -- “
Residential Single-Family, R-1 12,000 sq ft 90 feet 2½ 32 30 feet 10 feet 40 feet 30 feet 30% -- “
Residential Single-Family, R-2 21,750 sq ft 125 feet 2½ 32 40 feet 15 feet 45 feet 40 feet 30% -- “
Residential Single-Family, R-2A 32,670 sq ft 135 feet 2½ 32 45 feet 20 feet 50 feet 45 feet 30% -- “
Residential Single-Family, R-3 1 acre 150 feet 2½ 32 45 feet 20 feet 50 feet 45 feet 30% -- “
Residential Multiple Family, RM 3 acres 200 feet 2½ 32 35 feet 20 feet 50 feet 35 feet 30% --
(see Section 38-137(d)-
(g))
Residential Mobile Home Park,
RMH
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- (see Section 38-137(h))
Local Business, LB 20,000 sq ft 100 feet 2½ 32 25 feet 20 feet 25 feet 25 feet 35% 90%
General Business, GB 20,000 sq ft 100 feet 2½ 32 40 feet 25 feet 30 feet 40 feet 35% 90%
Highway Commercial, HC 20,000 sq ft 100 feet 2½ 35 50 feet 15 feet 40 feet 50 feet 35% 90%
Limited Industrial, LI 1 acre 150 feet 3 50 50 feet 20 feet 40 feet 50 feet 35% 90%
General Industrial, GI 2 acres 200 feet 3 50 75 feet 35 feet 75 feet 75 feet 35% 90%
Research Office, RO 1 acre 150 feet 3 50 50 feet 15 feet 40 feet 50 feet 35% 90%
Village Mixed Use 1, VMU-1 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- (see Table 138-1)
Village Mixed Use 2, VMU-2 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- (see Table 138-2)
* If fronting on a natural river, these setbacks will not apply.
* Refer to Section 38-137(i) for additional standards.
III-12
ARTICLE III
Sec. 38-137. Miscellaneous regulations.
(a) The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be as follows:
(1) One (1) story, one thousand (1,000) square feet.
(2) One and one-half (1½) stories, one thousand one hundred and fifty (1,150) square feet.
(3) Two (2) stories, one thousand three hundred and fifty (1,350) square feet.
(b) All single-family dwellings in the LA and R-1 district are required to be served by sanitary sewers.
(c) Minimum lot widths are required along the street right-of-way upon which the lot fronts. In the case of corner lots, minimum lot
widths must be met along both street frontages. Where curvilinear street patterns or culs-de-sac result in irregularly shaped lots
with nonparallel side lot lines, no less than eighty percent (80%) of the minimum lot width shall be required at the street right-ofway,
provided one hundred percent (100%) of the minimum lot width is met at the building line.
(d) Site requirements for the RM district are as follows:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings shall have a minimum lot size of three (3) acres.
(2) Two-family dwellings shall have a minimum lot size of one (1) acre per two-family unit.
(3) A minimum site size of three (3) acres is required for multiple-family developments, other than two-family dwellings.
(4) Multiple-family residential developments which are not served by public sanitary sewers, cluster septic systems, or approved
package treatment plants shall comply with the following lot area requirements per dwelling unit:
a. Efficiency units, five thousand (5,000) square feet.
b. One (1) bedroom units, five thousand (5,000) square feet.
c. Two (2) bedroom units, ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
d. Three (3) bedroom units, twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet.
(5) Multiple-family residential units which are served by public sanitary sewers, cluster septic systems, or approved package
treatment plants shall comply with the following lot area requirements per dwelling unit:
a. Efficiency units, two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
b. One (1) bedroom units, two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
c. Two (2) bedroom units, five thousand (5,000) square feet.
d. Three (3) bedroom units, seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
(6) All packaged treatment plant facilities shall meet all applicable federal, state, and local standards and regulations. The
collection system used in conjunction with a packaged treatment facility shall be designed to readily connect into a future
public sewer service without the need for reconstruction of any main or later sewer links.
(e) The minimum required floor space per dwelling unit in each multiple dwelling structure shall be as follows:
(1) Efficiency apartments, three hundred and fifty (350) square feet.
(2) One (1) bedroom apartments, six hundred (600) square feet.
(3) Two (2) bedroom apartments, eight hundred (800) square feet.
(4) Three (3) bedroom apartments, one thousand (1,000) square feet.
Plus an additional eighty (80) square feet for each bedroom in excess of three (3) bedrooms in any dwelling unit.
(f) Where two (2) or more multiple, row, or terrace dwelling structures are erected on the same lot or parcel, a minimum distance
between any two (2) structures shall be equal to the height of the highest structure, and the maximum building length shall not
exceed two hundred (200) feet.
III-13
ARTICLE III
(g) No multiple dwelling shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a perimeter property line which abuts a single-family
residential district.
(h) All mobile home parks shall be located in the RMH residential mobile home park district. All uses permitted within the RMH district
shall comply with the mobile home commission act, Public Act No. 96 of 1987 (MCL 125.2301 et seq.), the current mobile home
code adopted by the state mobile home commission, and the following additional standards:
(1) Front and rear yard. Each mobile home site shall have front and rear yards of not less than fifteen (15) feet each.
(2) Side yard. A minimum of twenty (20) feet shall be maintained between mobile homes.
(3) Lot area. The mobile home park shall be developed with sites averaging five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet per
mobile home unit. The five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet for any one (1) site may be reduced by twenty percent
(20%), provided the individual site shall be equal to at least four thousand four hundred (4,400) square feet. For each square
foot of land gained through the reduction of a site below five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet, at least an equal
amount of land shall be dedicated as open space, but in no case shall the open space and distance requirements be less than
that required by the mobile home code and this chapter.
(4) Landscape buffer. A landscape buffer shall be required along the boundaries of the mobile home park which abut a district
other than RMH. For mobile home parks with less than twenty-five (25) sites, a fifteen (15) foot, unoccupied, landscaped
bufferstrip shall be provided. For mobile home parks with twenty-five (25) sites or more, a twenty-five (25) foot, unoccupied,
landscaped bufferstrip shall be provided. The fifteen (15) foot setback between any mobile home park boundary and a mobile
home, as required by the mobile home code, may be included as part of the landscape bufferstrip. The selection spacing and
size of plant material shall be such as to create, within a five (5) year period from the date of planting, a horizontal obscuring
effect for the entire length of the entire buffer, and a vertical obscuring effect of no less than ten (10) feet.
(5) On-site vehicle parking. A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided on each mobile home site. The parking
spaces will be constructed in accordance with the mobile home code adopted by the state mobile home commission.
(6) Open space. Each mobile home park shall provide at least one (1) easily accessible open space area containing at least five
hundred (500) square feet per mobile home site in the park. Optional recreational improvements, such as swimming pools,
recreational buildings, children’s playgrounds, picnic areas, game fields and courts, or similar areas or facilities, shall be
considered as fulfilling part or all of the total open space requirement. The landscape buffer as required in subsection (h)(2) of
this section may be included as part of the required open space.
(7) Access. Each mobile home park shall have two (2) paved accesses, at least one (1) of which shall be to a primary
thoroughfare.
(8) Submission of final plans and specifications. Upon completion of construction of all buildings and site improvements
represented on the approved mobile home park construction plans and specifications, the developer, owner, or operator of
the park, in conjunction with an architect or engineer, shall submit final plans and specifications, prepared in accordance with
R125.1913 of the department of consumer and industry services, to the Zoning Administrator or designee.
(i) In cases where the waterfront yard setback of the principal structure on one (1) or both of the lots immediately adjacent to the
subject property is less than that which is required for the district, the waterfront yard setback on the subject property may be
reduced to a distance equal to the average of the waterfront yard setbacks on the two (2) immediately adjacent lots, as shown in
the figure below. In cases where the ordinary high-water mark is irregular, the building official or designee shall determine the
average waterfront setback. Regardless of the allowable waterfront yard setback, the front yard setback shall be as presented in
the schedule of regulations.
III-14
ARTICLE III
Sec. 38-138 Village Mixed Use Districts.
(a) Intent and purpose. The purpose of the Village Mixed Use Districts shall be to encourage the development of property in
accordance with the Green Oak Charter Township Master Plan and other portions of the Township in a matter that will: allow mixed
use development; arrive at a coordinated development pattern which addresses both style and architecture appropriate for the
area; ensure safe and complementary vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns; improve environmental quality; and provide an
attractive transition between residential and commercial properties.
Village Mixed Use shall be specified for the areas as designated on the Green Oak Charter Township Master Plan and in other
optional areas of the Township.
The provisions of this District are intended to establish the Village Mixed Use as an area which accomplishes one or more of the
following:
(1) Promotes the Goals and Policies of the Green Oak Charter Township Master Plan.
(2) Promotes a compatible mixture of uses in close proximity to one another.
(3) Places public spaces in accessible locations and links prominent uses and features that act as landmarks, symbols, and focal
points for community identity.
(4) Enhances the visual appearance of the District by preserving the natural views and coordinating design of buildings, site
arrangement and landscaping, signs, and other elements.
(5) Improves environmental quality through low impact development and innovative stormwater management in order to
preserve the water quality of the Huron River.
(6) Manages access to businesses and future development while simultaneously preserving the flow of automobile and
pedestrian traffic on the surrounding road system in terms of safety, capacity needs, and speed.
(7) Improves traffic flow and safety.
(8) Provides for a coordinated development pattern which allows a well-designed transition between commercial and residential
land uses.
III-15
ARTICLE III
(9) Promotes energy efficiency and full or partial Leadership in Energy and Environmental (LEED) ratings.
(10) Incorporates Low Impact Development (LID) design practices in order to minimize negative environmental impacts.
(11) Promotes the concepts of Transit Oriented Design (TOD) along the US-23 corridor, Washtenaw-Livingston Rail Line (WALLY), or
other County roads.
(12) Creates a walkable, human-scale environment.
(b) Applicable area and requirements. The Village Mixed Use District encompasses the area as illustrated on the Zoning Map of
Green Oak Charter Township and other areas as may be zoned Village Mixed Use. The requirements of this Section shall be applied
in addition to the requirements of the applicable zoning districts and other applicable sections of the Green Oak Charter Township
Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Schedule of uses. Use and development of land and buildings shall only be for the following specified uses. Land and/or buildings
in the district indicated at the top of Table 138-1 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following abbreviations:
P: Permitted Use – Land and buildings in this District may be used for the purposes listed by right as a permitted use.
S: Special Land Use – Land and/or buildings in this District may be used for this purpose by obtaining Special Land Use approval when all
applicable standards cited in Section 38-44, Special Land Use Approval are met.
Table 138-1
PRINCIPAL USE VILLAGE MIXED USE DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
Residential Uses:
Single-Family dwellings P 38-138
Two-Family dwellings P 38-138
Multiple-Family dwellings P 38-138
Housing for the elderly S 38-44, 38-138, 38-196
Home occupations P 38-194
Residential (above first floor commercial) P 38-138
Elder Cottage Housing Opportunities (ECHO) S 38-44, 38-138, 38-196(29)
Care Centers:
Family foster care P 38-138
Group foster care S 38-44, 38-138
Family day care P 38-138
Group day care S 38-44, 38-138
Child care centers S 38-44, 38-138
Assisted living (Nursing homes) S 38-44, 38-138
Public/Quasi-Public:
Cemeteries S 38-44, 38-138
Public/Semi-public parks S 38-44, 38-138
Public services S 38-44, 38-138
Public service buildings S 38-44, 38-138
Hospitals S 38-44, 38-138, 38-196
Public primary/secondary schools S 38-44, 38-138
Colleges S 38-44, 38-138
Churches S 38-44, 38-138, 38-196
III-16
ARTICLE III
Food/Restaurants/Entertainment:
Restaurant - sit down S 38-44, 38-138
Restaurant - take-out/home delivery (excluding drive-thru) S 38-44, 38-138
Video rental P 38-138
Coffee shop (excluding drive-thru) P 38-138
Theatres/Auditoriums (less than 500 seats) S 38-44, 38-138
Office/Service Uses:
Medical clinic P 38-138
Personal service P 38-138
Professional offices P 38-138
Professional services P 38-138
Veterinary clinic P 38-138, 38-196
Retail Commercial Uses:
Banks, savings and loan, credit unions P 38-138
Banks, etc. with drive-thru P 38-138
Teller, automated, 24-hour P 38-138
Retail business P 38-138
Pharmacies (with drive-thru) S 38-44, 38-138
Shopping plazas P 38-138
Recreational Uses:
General commercial outdoor recreation S 38-44, 38-138, 38-196
Golf courses (with or without restaurants) S 38-44, 38-138, 38-196
Golf driving ranges, mini-golf S 38-44, 38-138
Fitness S 38-44, 38-138
P = Permitted Use S = Special Land Use
(d) Schedule of regulations. Each use within the Village Mixed Use shall comply with Table 138-2 for area, height, setback, and lot
coverage. Corresponding uses shall include:
Table 138-2 Schedule of Village Mixed Use Regulations
Residential Single-Family Residential Multi-Family
Mixed Use Buildings and
Non-Residential Uses
Minimum Lot Area 12,000 square feet N/A N/A
Minimum Lot Width 90 feet N/A N/A
Residential Density 3.5 units/acre maximum 8 units/acre maximum N/A
Minimum Front Yard 30 feet 20 feet
30 feet (unless waived or modified by
Planning Commission)
Minimum Side Yard 10 feet 20 feet between buildings 20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard 40 feet 40 feet 40 feet
Maximum Building Height 2½ stories (32 feet)
2½ stories (32 feet)
4 stories (Senior Housing)
3 stories (36 feet)
III-17
ARTICLE III
(e) Single-family residential lot size averaging. The Planning Commission may allow a variation in lot size from those
requirements set forth in the Schedule of Regulations provided in Table 138-2. However, no single lot may be reduced by more
than thirty-five percent (35%) from the scheduled minimum lot size set forth in Table 138-2. Average lot size shall be calculated by
adding together the area of each buildable lot and dividing by the number of building lots proposed for said development. Lot size
averaging shall only be allowed if there is an equivalent increase in the amount of open space.
(f) General design standards. All proposed development and construction within the Village Mixed Use District shall comply with
the following standards:
(1) Development patterns. Proposed development shall reflect characteristics and design features of compact developments
that are consistent with the Green Oak Charter Township Master Plan. The intent of the District is to create a coordinated
development pattern which provides a smooth transition between uses and properties. Transition may be created through
coordination of building styles and setbacks, landscape buffers, and cross-access between properties.
(2) Mixed use requirements. A mix of uses is encouraged and may include first floor commercial and upper floor office or
residential uses.
(3) Open space and community design features. Each non-residential establishment shall contribute to the establishment or
enhancement of community and public spaces by providing at least two (2) of the following: patio/seating area, pedestrian
plaza with benches, window shopping walkway, outdoor playground area, kiosk area, water feature, clock tower or other such
deliberately shaped area and/or focal feature or amenity that, in the sole discretion of the Township, adequately enhances
such community and public spaces.
(4) Site access, parking and loading. Overall street and/or driveway design and layout shall be an integral component of
site design providing for both internal access to service the development of properties and cross-access between individual
properties. Grid patterns for street network systems are required. Site access, parking and loading shall meet the standards
set forth in Article VII. In addition, off-street parking for non-residential uses shall be located predominantly within the side
or rear yard areas. All required parking for non-residential uses shall be located within the side or rear yard. The Planning
Commission may allow parking in the front yard, subject to traffic safety, visibility, convenience, landscape buffering, or other
site factors.
(5) Pedestrian pathways and sidewalks. Emphasis shall be placed on providing a pedestrian circulation system which
promotes safety and connects neighborhoods with open space, community facilities and commercial/office/mixed use areas.
Vehicular access and circulation shall be planned to ensure safe pedestrian movement within the development.
Pedestrian systems shall provide safe, all-weather, efficient, and aesthetically pleasing means of on-site movement and shall
be an integral part of the overall site design concept. Pedestrian pathway connections to parking areas, buildings, other
amenities and between on-site and perimeter pedestrian systems and safety paths shall be planned and installed wherever
feasible.
(6) Alternative transportation/transit. Development should promote alternative transportation concepts including
connections to park and ride facilities, linkage to safety paths, facilities for bicycle storage or bike racks, and possible
connection to train transportation (WALLY) or transit stations.
(7) Signage. All signs permitted within this District shall be subject to the provisions of Article IX, Signs, and the following
requirements and standards.
a. All signs shall be designed so as to be integral and compatible with the architecture and landscaping component of the
development.
b. A comprehensive common sign plan shall be submitted with each development project for review and approval by
the Planning Commission. Multi-tenant commercial signage or multi-phase residential projects shall include unified
graphics, colors or structural components in order to achieve a consistent and coordinated design.
(8) Lighting. All lighting shall conform to the requirements of Section 38-364. In addition, in order to maintain pedestrian
safety, site security, and accentuate architectural details, pedestrian lighting shall be provided for pedestrian walkways,
III-18
ARTICLE III
building entries and other areas where illumination is needed to permit safe pedestrian travel. Light fixtures shall have a
coordinated design appearance. Lighting shall be adjusted to natural light cycles. Excessive lighting and light spill over is
prohibited and regulated by Section 38-364.
(9) Landscaping/greenbelts/buffers/screening elements. All landscape features of the site shall conform to the requirements
set forth in Section 38-177.
(10) General site design/architectural guidelines for non-residential uses. It is the intent of the District to provide an
environment of high quality and complementary building architecture and site design. Special emphasis shall be placed upon
methods that tend to reduce the visual impact of large buildings, to encourage tasteful, imaginative design for individual
buildings, and to create a complex of buildings compatible with the streetscape.
Building design shall contribute to the uniqueness of the Village Mixed Use with predominant materials, elements, features,
color range and activity areas tailored specifically to the site and its context. In the case of projects which contain more than
one building, each individual building shall include predominant characteristics shared by all buildings in the development
so that the development forms a cohesive sense of design and design continuity. A standardized prototype design shall be
modified if necessary to meet the provisions of this Ordinance.
(11) Non-residential building materials. The following exterior finish materials are required on the front façade and any façade
facing a street or parking area. These requirements do not include areas devoted to windows and doors.
a. All walls exposed to public view from the street or parking area shall be constructed of not less than sixty percent (60%)
brick or stone. Panel brick and tilt-up brick textured paneling shall not be permitted.
b. The remaining façade may include wood or fiber cement siding. Exterior finish insulation systems (EFIS) may be used for
architectural detailing above the first floor. Vinyl siding may be used on walls above a height determined to be measured
from the highest point of the roof to a level below which represents the highest forty percent (40%) of total building
height.
c. Buildings that have upper stories shall be designed to create a distinct and separate ground floor area through the use of
accent such as a cornice, change in material or textures, or an awning or canopy between the first and second stories.
(12) Windows and doors.
a. Storefront/ground floor. Storefronts facing a public or private street right of way shall have windows, doorways and
signage which are integrally designed and painted. No less than seventy percent (70%) of the storefront/ground floor
façade shall be clear glass panels and doorway. Glass areas on storefronts shall be clear or lightly tinted. Mirrored glass is
prohibited. Required window areas shall be either windows that allow views into retail space, working areas or lobbies,
pedestrian entrances, or display windows set into the wall. Windows shall not be blocked with opaque materials or
the back of shelving units or signs. The bottom of the window must be no more than three (3) feet above the adjacent
exterior grade. Window signs shall comply with Section 38-407.
III-19
ARTICLE III
(13) Residential architectural requirements. Townhouses and one/two-family residential dwellings shall meet the following
architectural design requirements:
a. Building design. Residential buildings shall utilize high-quality traditional architecture, such as but not limited to: Arts
& Crafts, Colonial, Foursquare, Gothic Revival, Italianate, Tudor, Victorian, and other traditional styles characteristic of the
Midwestern United States.
b. Building elevations. As part of a subdivision, condominium, or multiple-family site plan application, typical elevations
shall be approved by the Planning Commission and in accordance with the design standards of this section.
c. Front façade. All residential units shall provide a pedestrian door facing the front lot line.
d. Building material. All buildings shall utilize high-quality building materials that are in keeping with traditional
architectural styles. Permitted wall materials include brick, stone, wood, and fiber cement siding. Vinyl siding may be
permitted only above the first floor.
(14) Streetscape design requirements.
a. Street design standards. All streets shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the Livingston County Road
Commission (LCRC) and the Green Oak Charter Township Private Road Standards (Section 38-449).
b. Sidewalks/safety paths.
1. Sidewalks shall be required along the frontage of all buildings and shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide concrete
and provided on both sides of the street.
III-20
ARTICLE III
2. Sidewalks shall be seven (7) feet wide where abutting a parking space or road curb.
3. Safety paths shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet wide, shall be constructed within a public right of way but
separate from any improved roadway, and shall be linked to the Township’s safety path system.
c. Street trees. One (1) canopy tree with a minimum caliper of two and one-half (2.5) inches shall be provided for every
fifty (50) feet of frontage, planted within planters, tree grates within the sidewalk, or within a six (6) foot wide green
planting strip located between the curb and sidewalk.
d. Street connections. The Village Mixed Use Area shall be developed as an integral area with an interconnected street
network. Street connections shall be provided to all adjacent parcels. The use of culs-de-sac and dead-end streets shall
be discouraged, and a grid pattern shall be required unless waived by the Planning Commission. Where it is not possible
to provide a through-street, the Planning Commission may allow a looped drive with a common green in the center. The
circular drive around the green shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide, measured face to face of curb. The green shall be
no less than forty (40) feet at its narrowest dimension.
e. Bicycle facilities. Developments shall be designed to accommodate bicycle travel, including the provision of safety
paths and bike racks at destination points such as shopping and recreational facilities.
f. Electric vehicle recharge stations shall be considered near convenient public parking areas.
III-21
ARTICLE III
(g) Applicable area and requirements. Two (2) separate zoning districts are established for Village Mixed Use. These districts are
Village Mixed Use-1 and Village Mixed Use-2.
(1) Village Mixed Use-1. The Village Mixed Use-1 District encompasses the area as designated on the 2008 Master Plan. The
requirements of this Section (Sec. 38-138) shall be applied in addition to the requirements of the applicable zoning districts
and other applicable sections of the Green Oak Charter Township Zoning Ordinance.
(2) In addition to the general regulations contained within Section 38-138, all development within the Village Mixed Use-1
District shall comply with the following:
a. Not more than ten (10) to twenty (20) contiguous acres of the total acreage in the VMU-1 District may be used for senior
citizen housing, including independent senior housing, assisted living, nursing or convalescent homes.
b. Not more than twenty (20) acres of the total acreage in the VMU-1 District may be used for local business uses with an
aggregate square footage of rentable space not exceeding one hundred and twenty-five thousand (125,000) square feet
with the requirement that no single tenant shall exceed twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Large-format retail use is
specifically prohibited. Commercial areas shall be concentrated and contiguous in order to create a Village Center.
c. In order to promote traffic safety and necessary intersection improvements along Whitmore Lake Road, future
development should reserve area for a relocated Winans Lake Road right-of-way. Reserved areas for a future park and
school should also be considered.
d. Not less than one hundred and twenty-five (125) to one hundred and thirty-five (135) acres of the total acreage in the
VMU-1 District may be used for single-family residential homes on varying lot sizes complying with R-1, R-2, R-2A, and
R-3 standards.
e. Not more than seventy (70) to eighty (80) acres of the total acreage in the VMU-1 District may be used for multi-family
housing including apartments, condominiums, townhouses, garden apartments or other attached units.
f. Civic uses. Sites developed with civic uses such as schools, churches, libraries, government offices and parks require
specific architectural treatment and design that is unique from other uses. The Planning Commission may permit
modifications to the dimensional and building height requirements as part of the site plan review. In considering
the modifications, the Planning Commission shall determine that the design of the building, location of the building
and parking, and the relationship of the site design to the streetscape and adjacent buildings are in keeping with the
intended character of the Village Mixed Use Area.
g. Phasing. Village Mixed Use-1 shall be concurrently developed with residential and non-residential uses. Commercial
and other non-residential development shall not occur without previously approved and/or constructed residential
development in accordance with a development agreement. The Township shall require a phased development
agreement specifying timing, phasing, road, utility, site construction scheduling, or performance guarantees.
(h) Review procedures – Village Mixed Use-1. All development applications within the Village Mixed Use-1 District shall follow the
procedures required for permitted or special uses and the appropriate submittal requirements for Special Uses (Section 38-44), Site
Plans (Section 38-71), or other development review requirements. Properties zoned Village Mixed Use-1 shall not be eligible for
consideration as an Open Space Planned Unit Development option under Section 38-231. All applications shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator with required application forms, number of copies, and fees.
(1) Design review. Development applications within the Village Mixed Use-1 District shall be submitted to the Design Review
Committee. The Committee shall be comprised of the following:
a. Chairperson of the Planning Commission,
b. One (1) additional member of the Planning Commission appointed by the Planning Commission Chair,
c. One (1) member from the Township Board appointed by the Supervisor,
d. One (1) resident of the Township or a professional architect or builder with design experience,
e. The Zoning Administrator, and
f. The Township Planning Consultant.
III-22
ARTICLE III
(2) The Design Review Committee shall review all plans for compliance with the Intent and Purpose of the Village Mixed Use-1
District as well as adopted design standards.
(3) Review procedures for Village Mixed Use-1. The property owners or their representative shall submit the following:
a. An application form from the Zoning Administrator, indicating the applicant’s name, mailing address, location of the
property, name of architect and such other information as deemed necessary by the appropriate reviewing body.
b. Eight (8) copies of the proposed design plan to include elevation drawings of the front, side, and rear of the building
visible to the public and elevation drawings of adjacent structures, showing general design treatment including color and
materials of all walls, screens, towers, openings, lighting, and signs, and the treatment to be utilized in concealing any
exposed mechanical and electrical equipment.
c. Swatches or a materials sample board for proposed building and samples of all colors to be used.
d. Any other material, drawings and documents which may be helpful to or requested by the Design Review Committee.
(4) Township Board Review. All applications for review within the Mixed Use-1 District shall be submitted for concurrent
review to the Township Board. Preliminary review comments from the Township Board shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission prior to final action by the Planning Commission.
(5) The Design Review Committee for Village Mixed Use-1 shall make its best effort to act upon the application within fortyfive
(45) days of submittal and shall submit its recommendation to the Planning Commission. An extension of time may be
permitted by the Planning Commission if mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the appropriate reviewing body.
(6) The applicant and/or the person who has prepared the materials submitted to the Design Review Committee for Village Mixed
Use-1 may be required to appear in person before the Design Review Committee.
(7) The Planning Commission shall make its best effort within forty-five (45) days of receiving the recommendation of the Design
Review Committee for Village Mixed Use-1 to approve, disapprove, or postpone an application for development within the
Village Mixed Use District.
(8) Design review standards. The Design Review Committee for Village Mixed Use-1 may recommend deviations to the
architectural requirements of this Section in order to allow for creativity and flexibility in development and design. Each
deviation shall require a finding that the design standard sought to be deviated from would, if no deviation was permitted,
prohibit an enhancement that would be in the public interest. A front elevation drawing of the proposed building which
highlights the requested deviations shall be provided superimposed on a color drawing or photograph of the entire block and
adjacent blocks in both directions showing the relation of the proposed building design to other buildings along the street,
which shall be utilized to evaluate the proposed building design based upon all of the following criteria:
a. Innovations in architectural design may be permitted, provided the building design shall be in keeping with the desired
character of the Village Mixed Use Area, as articulated in the Green Oak Charter Township Master Plan.
b. The building shall be oriented towards the front sidewalk and maintain or enhance the continuity of the pedestrianoriented
environment. A modification shall not result in an increased dominance of vehicular parking or garage doors
along the front of the building.
c. The roof design shall not be out of character with other buildings along the block and shall be within the minimum and
maximum height requirements of the District.
(i) Village Mixed Use-2. The Village Mixed Use-2 District encompasses future planned or zoned areas within the Township which are
not part of Village Mixed Use-1. In addition to the general design requirements of Section 38-138(g), Village Mixed Use-2 areas
shall also be subject to design requirements and zoning procedures established by the Planning Commission and Township Board
as part of a Planned Unit Development (PUD). An Open Space Planned Unit Development (Section 38-231) shall be applied for in
conjunction with this zoning category, and shall comply with the requirements of Sections 38-138(a) through 38-138(h) unless
specifically modified as part of a Planned Unit Development.
Secs. 38-139 - 38-170. Reserved.
III-23
ARTICLE III
III-24
This page is left intentionally blank.
ARTICLE IV
ARTICLE IV. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Sec. 38-171. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses.
Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Where the accessory building is attached to a principal building, it shall be subject and must conform, to all area, height
and setback regulations of this chapter which apply to principal main buildings. For an accessory building to be considered
“attached” to a principal building, it must share a common wall and foundation of sufficient size to accommodate an access
door. Accessory buildings attached to a principal building by way of a breezeway or similar overhead attachment, without the
presence of a common foundation, shall be considered detached accessory structures for the purposes of this chapter.
(2) Detached accessory buildings shall not be allowed in the front yard except for lots bordering on water, pursuant to subsection
(4), below. No accessory building shall be located in or on any utility or private road easement.
(3) A detached accessory building to a residential building may occupy not more than twenty-five (25%) percent of a required
rear yard and/or twenty (20%) percent of any non-required rear yard. On parcels up to and including two (2) acres, the
accessory building shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the gross floor area of the principal building. On parcels between
two (2) and five (5) acres, the accessory building floor area shall not exceed one hundred (100%) percent of the living area of
the principal building. In the RE or RF zoning districts and on lots greater than five (5) acres, the total gross floor area of all
buildings shall not exceed five (5%) percent of the net lot area. A detached accessory building on a waterfront lot of any size
shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of a required front yard and/or twenty (20%) of any non-required front yard.
(4) A detached accessory building or structure to a residential building shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to any
principal building. This shall exclude air conditioning units and electrical generators. Any accessory building or structure shall
it not be located closer than five (5) feet to any side or rear lot line or as specified within this section. Detached accessory
buildings and structures shall not encroach upon required waterfront yard setbacks on waterfront lots, except in the following
circumstances:
a. Boat lifts/hoists may be located anywhere within a required waterfront yard setback.
b. No greater than one utility shed or similar structure, not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area, may encroach
up to twenty (20) feet into the required waterfront yard setback.
c. In-ground or above-ground swimming pools, per subsection (9) below.
(5) On lots or parcels with a net lot area of one (1) acre or greater no detached accessory building in an LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, RE,
NR, or RM district shall exceed one and a half (1 ½) stories or twenty-two (22) feet in height. For lots or parcels with a net lot
area less than one (1) acre, accessory buildings shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in height. Accessory buildings in all other
districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in said districts. No more than one (1)
detached accessory building shall be permitted on residential lots of less than five (5) acres. For residential lots greater than
five (5) acres, one (1) accessory building shall be permitted, plus one (1) for each whole five (5) acres of lot area (see Table
171-1 below).
Table 171-1
Acreage Number of Accessory Buildings
Less than 10 acres One (1) accessory building
10 to 14.9 acres Two (2) accessory buildings
15 to 19.9 acres Three (3) accessory buildings
20 to 24.9 acres Four (4) accessory buildings
25 to 29.9 acres Five (5) accessory buildings
Note: An additional accessory building would be allowed for each whole five (5) acres of lot area.
IV-1
ARTICLE IV
(6) When an accessory building to a residential building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a
continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard line required on the
lot to the rear of such corner lot. An accessory building shall in no case be located closer than ten (10) feet to a street right-ofway
line.
(7) A detached accessory garage may be constructed within the front yard of a waterfront lot, but not less than twenty-five (25)
feet from the road right-of-way or front lot line, provided that the lot in question is legally nonconforming and the provisions
of subsections (1) through (5) of this section are met.
(8) Buildings erected as garages or accessory buildings shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes.
(9) Private swimming pools shall be subject to the following:
a. Private swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs shall adhere to the following requirements with regard to location and
setbacks:
1. Private swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs shall not be permitted in the front yard.
2. Private swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs shall not be permitted within a required side yard setback.
3. Private swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs shall be installed no closer than ten (10) feet from the rear property line.
4. On waterfront lots, in-ground pools, spas, or hot tubs may be located no closer than twenty (20) feet from the
waterfront lot line; however, associated structures and buildings (pump houses, etc.) shall adhere to the setback
requirements of Section 38-171(4). Aboveground swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs must adhere to the required
waterfront yard setback for the district within which it is located.
5. Private swimming pools shall be located no closer than four (4) feet from any building on the lot. This shall exclude
spas or hot tubs.
6. No portion of the swimming pool, spa, or hot tub or associated structures shall be permitted to encroach upon any
easement or right-of-way which has been granted for public utility use.
Figure 38-171
Required Fencing - Aboveground Pools
b. For the protection of the general public, all swimming pools (except as noted in Figure 38-171) shall be completely
enclosed by a chain link fence or a fence of comparable safety, subject to the following provisions:
1. Ground fencing shall be not less than four (4) feet nor more than six (6) feet in height, and set at a distance of not
less than four (4) feet from the outside perimeter of the pool wall.
IV-2
ARTICLE IV
2. Pool fencing on waterfront lots shall adhere to the requirements of Section 38-176(d).
3. Perimeter fencing for aboveground hot tubs or spas shall not be required if fitted with locking safety covers.
4. All openings in any such fence or building shall be equipped with a self-closing, self-latching gate or door which
shall be securely locked with a tamper-proof lock when the pool is not in use.
5. In the event that the entire premises are enclosed by fence or wall, then said fence requirement may be waived by
the building official, after due inspection and approval.
Sec. 38-172. Temporary dwellings.
No cabin, trailer, motor home, mobile home, or other temporary structure, whether of a fixed or movable nature, may be erected, moved,
or used for any dwelling purpose whatsoever, for any length of time, except as follows:
(1) The location shall not be injurious to the surrounding property or neighborhood, such as in a properly authorized travel trailer
park.
(2) The water supply and toilet facilities serving each temporary dwelling shall conform to the minimum requirements as set
forth by the county health department.
(3) An application for a building and land use permit for the construction, erection or movement of a temporary dwelling shall be
made to the Zoning Administrator or designee on a special form used for that purpose. The application shall be accompanied
by a drawing, showing the location of each proposed structure, and the proposed water supply and toilet facilities for such
structure.
(4) After due consideration, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall approve or deny a permit for the temporary dwelling,
and shall clearly set forth on the permit that the structure is intended as a temporary dwelling, and that such dwelling is to
be vacated upon the expiration of a specific time limit to be determined by the Zoning Administrator or designee. On delivery
of the permit, the owner or occupant shall certify in a space allotted for that purpose that he or she has full knowledge of the
terms of the permit, and the penalty applicable in the event of a violation of this section. No permit shall be transferable to
any other owner or occupant. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall require a cash bond as a condition of approval.
Sec. 38-173. Temporary construction.
(a) Temporary construction buildings and/or construction activities shall be allowed in any zone for a period of one (1) year if a
building and land use permit is obtained from the Zoning Administrator or designee. A second year may be allowed if there appears
to be no unreasonable delay in the activities, and there appears to be a necessity for such activities.
(b) For the purposes of this section, the term “temporary construction activities with or without temporary buildings” means
construction activities, other than actual construction of buildings approved pursuant to a building and land use permit. Such
activities include, but are not limited to, a construction yard for the development of a subdivision or multiple-family project, a
cement or asphalt making operation for streets or roads in the Township, and other similar activities.
(c) The Zoning Administrator or designee shall determine, before issuing a building and land use permit, whether the proposed
temporary construction building and/or construction activity is necessary and, if it is necessary, that it should be located at
the proposed location. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall also find that the proposed activity does not place excessive
burden on the sanitary sewer and/or water system, nor create a hazardous fire condition. In granting the approval, the Zoning
Administrator or designee may set such conditions as appear necessary to minimize disturbance to the area and the surrounding
land uses. As a condition of approval, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall require the posting of a cash bond, corporate
surety bond, or letter of credit to guarantee compliance with this chapter and all other applicable Township ordinances, standards,
rules, and regulations, and a proper cleanup of the site at a time indicated on the building and land use permit.
IV-3
ARTICLE IV
(d) Activities allowed pursuant to this section shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) All roads used for ingress or egress, on or off the site, shall be kept dust free by oiling, chemical substances, or water, and/or by
hardtopping with cement or a bituminous substance.
(2) Work areas shall be kept clean and clear.
(3) Work areas shall be posted with the owner’s and operator’s names and telephone numbers.
(4) Work yards shall be fenced or otherwise made safe.
(5) Truck crossings and other means of ingress and egress shall be posted two hundred (200) feet therefrom in either direction to
warn motorists.
(6) Working hours shall be between 7:00 a.m.--10:00 p.m. on Monday--Friday; 8:00 a.m.--7:00 p.m. on Saturday; and 8:00
a.m.--6:00 p.m. on Sunday. No work shall be permitted on Sundays or holidays except by special permission of the Zoning
Administrator or designee.
Sec. 38-174. Standards for single-family dwellings, mobile homes, and prefabricated housing.
No site built single-family dwelling, mobile home, modular housing dwelling or prefabricated house located outside a mobile home park,
or mobile home subdivision shall be permitted unless such dwelling unit conforms to the following standards:
(1) Square footage. Each such dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum square footage requirements of this chapter for the
zone in which it is located.
(2) Dimensions. Each such dwelling unit shall have a minimum width across any front, side, or rear elevation of twenty (20)
feet and shall comply in all respects with the single state construction code act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et
seq.), including minimum heights for habitable rooms. Where a dwelling is required by law to comply with any federal or state
standard or regulation for construction, and where such standard or regulation for construction is different than that imposed
by the single state construction code, then and in that event such federal or state standard or regulation shall apply.
(3) Foundation. Each such dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in
accordance with the single state construction code and shall have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions of the dwelling
and constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable building code. All dwellings shall be securely
anchored to the foundation in order to prevent displacement during windstorms.
(4) Undercarriage. Such dwelling units shall not be installed with attached wheels. Additionally, no dwelling shall have any
exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage, or chassis.
(5) Sewage disposal or water supply. Each such dwelling unit shall be connected to a public sewer and water supply or to such
private facilities approved by the local health department.
(6) Storage area. Each such dwelling unit shall contain a storage capability area either in a basement located under the dwelling,
in an attic area, or in a separate or attached structure of standard construction similar to, or of better quality than, the
principal dwelling. Such storage area shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the square footage of the dwelling or one hundred
(100) square feet, whichever shall be less.
(7) Architecture. All dwellings shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity.
All homes shall have a roof overhang of not less than six (6) inches on all sides, or alternatively with windowsills or roof
drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the dwelling. The dwellings shall not
have less than two (2) exterior doors, with the second one being in either the rear or side of the dwelling. Steps shall also be
required for exterior door areas or to porches connected to such door areas where a difference in elevation requires such steps.
(8) Compatibility determination. The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by
the Zoning Administrator or designee. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the character, design, and
appearance of one (1) or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks within two thousand (2,000) feet
of the subject dwelling where such area is developed with dwellings to the extent of not less than twenty percent (20%) of
IV-4
ARTICLE IV
the lots situated within such area, or, where such area is not so developed, by the character, design, and appearance of one
(1) or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks throughout the Township. The foregoing shall not be
construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour, or relief
from the common or standard designed home.
(9) Additions. Each such dwelling unit shall contain no addition, room, or other area which is not constructed with similar quality
workmanship as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a
foundation as required in this section.
(10) Code compliance. Each such dwelling unit shall comply with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile
home, all construction and plumbing, electrical apparatus, and insulation within and connected to such mobile home shall be
of a type and quality conforming to the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards, as promulgated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280, and as such standards may be amended from time-totime.
Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements.
(11) Building and land use permit. All construction required in this section shall be commenced only after a building and land
use permit has been obtained in accordance with the applicable state construction code provisions and requirements.
(12) Exceptions. The standards of this section shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park, except to
the extent required by state or federal law or as otherwise specifically required in this chapter and pertaining to such parks.
Mobile homes which do not conform to the standards of this section shall not be used for dwelling purposes within the
Township unless located within a mobile home park or a mobile home subdivision district for such uses, or unless used as a
temporary residence as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Sec. 38-175. Essential services.
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the township. The construction of
buildings associated with but not included in the definition of essential services shall be subject to the provisions of article II, division
2, pertaining to site plans. Otherwise, the construction, maintenance, and alteration of essential services shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter, including the schedule of regulations (Section 38-136).
Sec. 38-176. Walls and screens.
(a) Within the limits of the front yard space of a lot in a residential district, no fence, wall, or other screening structure shall exceed
three (3) feet in height. No such fence or wall located within a side or rear yard shall exceed six (6) feet in height.
(b) In a commercial, industrial, or research office district, no fence, wall, or other screening structure shall exceed twelve (12) feet in
height.
(c) Barbed wire, spikes, nails, or any other sharp point or instrument of any kind on top or on the sides of any fence, and electrified
fences are prohibited in the LA, R-3, R-2, R-1, RM, and RMH zoning districts. Barbed wire cradles may be placed on top of fences
enclosing public utility buildings or wherever deemed necessary in the interest of public safety.
(d) On waterfront lots, fences, walls, screens, and other structures which are located between the main building and the water front
shall be of an open air type, permitting visibility through at least eighty percent (80%) of its area, and shall measure no greater
than four (4) feet in height, excepting the safety requirements for private swimming pools in Section 38-171(9).
(e) Retaining walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with applicable building code requirements.
IV-5
ARTICLE IV
Sec. 38-177. Landscaping and screening.
(a) Intent and scope.
(1) Intent. Landscaping enhances the visual image of the Township, preserves natural features, improves property values, and
alleviates the impact of noise, traffic, and visual distraction associated with certain uses. Screening is important to protect less
intensive uses from the noise, light, traffic, litter, and other impacts of more intensive nonresidential uses. The provisions of
this section are intended to set minimum standards for the design and use of landscaping, greenbelts, and screening, and for
the protection and enhancement of the Township’s environment. More specifically, the intent of this section is to:
a. Improve the appearance of off-street parking areas, vehicular use areas, and property abutting public rights-of-way;
b. Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the neighborhoods that abut nonresidential areas, parking
areas, and other intensive use areas, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and welfare;
c. Reduce soil erosion and sedimentation; and
d. Increase stormwater infiltration, thereby helping to prevent flooding.
e. Incorporate Best Management Practices for Low Impact Development as identified in the LID Manual for Michigan,
including but not limited to:
• Native plant re-vegetation
• Planter boxes
• Bio-retention
• Vegetated filter strips
• Vegetated roofs
• Vegetated swales
• Other
Refer to Figure 38-366-1 for representative LID techniques.
(2) Scope of application. No site plan shall be approved unless it shows landscaping consistent with the requirements of this
section. A building permit shall not be issued until the required landscape plan is submitted and approved, and a certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued unless provisions set forth in this section have been met or a performance guarantee has been
posted. The requirements in this section shall not apply to single-family detached homes, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(3) Minimum requirements. The requirements in this section are minimum requirements, and under no circumstances shall
such requirements preclude the developer and the Township from agreeing to more extensive landscaping.
(4) Design creativity. Creativity in landscape design is encouraged. Accordingly, required trees and shrubs may be planted
at uniform intervals, irregular intervals, or in groupings, depending on the designer’s desired visual effect and, equally
important, the intent of the Township to coordinate landscaping on adjoining properties.
(5) Summary of regulations. The following table summarizes the landscaping regulations contained in this section:
IV-6
ARTICLE IV
Summary of Minimum Landscape Requirements1
Landscaping
Island Ratio
Minimum Height
(Feet)
Minimum Width
(Feet)
Deciduous or
Evergreen Trees
Ornamental Trees
Deciduous or
Evergreen Shrubs
General site landscaping
Section 38-177(c)(1)
-- -- --
1 per 3,000 square
feet
-- --
Landscaping adjacent to
roads Section 38-177(c)(2)
-- -- 20 1 per 30 lineal feet 1 per 100 lineal feet 5 per 30 lineal feet
Greenbelts
Section 38-177(4)
-- -- 20 1 per 30 lineal feet -- 2
Greenbelts used for screening
Section 38-177(2) and (5)
-- 6 20 3 -- --
Berms in front yard
Section 38-177(2)
-- 4 4 1 per 30 lineal feet 1 per 100 lineal feet 5 per 30 lineal feet
Berms used for screening
Section 38-177(3) and (5)
-- 3, 5 4 3 -- --
Parking lot landscaping
Section 38-177(6)
20 square feet
per space
-- 5, 6 1 per 300 square
feet
-- --
1 See Section 38-177(b) and (c) for detailed requirements.
2 Five (5) shrubs may be substituted for each tree.
3 Evergreens must be closely spaced no further than fifteen (15) feet apart to form an eighty percent (80%) visual barrier in summer and sixty percent (60%) visual barrier
in winter within three (3) years.
4 See Section 38-177(c) for detailed requirements.
5 Berms used to screen parking areas from view from the road shall not exceed three (3) feet, per Sections 38-177(b)(1)c., 38-177(b)(2)c., and 38-188(3)c.
6 Minimum area of each parking lot landscaped area shall be two hundred (200) square feet.
(b) Specific landscaping requirements for zoning districts.
(1) Commercial, office, and industrial districts. All lots or parcels of land located in the LB, GB, HC, RO, LI, and GI zoning
districts shall comply with the following landscaping requirements:
a. General site landscaping. All undeveloped portions of the site not already containing specific landscape requirements
shall conform to the general site requirements in subsection (c)(1) of this section.
b. Landscaping adjacent to road. All commercial, office and industrial developments shall comply with the requirements
for landscaping adjacent to the road in subsection (c)(2) of this section.
c. Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking from the view of the road, in which case, the berm
shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height, and shall be planted in accordance with subsection (c)(2) of this section.
The berm shall be located totally on private property and adjacent to the road right-of-way.
d. Screening. Screening in the form of a landscaped berm, greenbelt, or wall shall be required wherever a nonresidential
use in a commercial, office, or industrial district abuts directly upon land zoned or used for residential purposes, and
where loading areas would be visible from residential districts. Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements
in subsection (c)(5) of this section. If a wall is used instead of landscaping, the requirements in Section 38-176 shall be
complied with, but a landscaped greenbelt conforming to subsection (c)(4) of this section shall be required on the side of
the wall facing the residential district.
e. Greenbelts. Except where screening is required, a landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along side and rear property
lines in accordance with subsection (c)(4) of this section.
f. Parking lots. Off-street parking areas containing greater than twenty (20) spaces shall comply with the requirements for
parking lot landscaping in subsection (c)(6) of this section.
IV-7
ARTICLE IV
Figure IV-1
Landscaping Requirements for Commercial, Office and Industrial Districts
(2) Multiple-family districts. All lots or parcels of land located in the RM zoning district shall comply with the following
landscaping requirements:
a. General site landscaping. All undeveloped portions of the site not already containing specific landscape requirements
shall conform to the general site requirements in subsection (c)(1) of this section.
b. Landscaping adjacent to road. All multiple-family developments shall comply with the requirements for landscaping
adjacent to the road in subsection (c)(2) of this section.
c. Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking from the view of the road, in which case, the berm
shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height, and shall be planted in accordance with subsection (c)(2) of this section.
The berm shall be located totally on private property and adjacent to the road right-of-way.
d. Screening. Screening in the form of a landscaped berm, greenbelt or wall shall be required on all sides of a multiplefamily
development abutting land zoned or used for single-family residential purposes. Landscaped screening shall
comply with the requirements in subsection (c)(5) of this section. A wall may be used instead of landscaping adjacent
to nonresidential districts, subject to the requirements in Section 38-176. If a wall is used instead of landscaping, the
requirements in Section 38-176 shall be complied with, but a landscaped greenbelt conforming to subsection (c)(4) of
this section shall be required on the side of the wall facing the residential district.
e. Greenbelts. Except where screening is required, a landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along side and rear property
lines in accordance with subsection (c)(4) of this section.
f. Parking lots. Off-street parking areas containing greater than ten (10) spaces shall comply with the requirements for
parking lot landscaping in subsection (c)(6) of this section.
g. Privacy screen. Where multiple-family dwellings are designed so that rear open areas or patio areas front onto a public
street, a landscaped privacy screen shall be provided. The screen may consist of a combination of trees, shrubs, and
berms, subject to review by the Planning Commission.
IV-8
ARTICLE IV
Figure IV-2
Landscaping Requirements for Multiple-Family Residential Districts
(3) Nonresidential uses in residential districts. All nonresidential uses developed in residential zoning districts shall comply
with the following landscaping requirements:
a. General site landscaping. All undeveloped portions of the site not already containing specific landscape requirements
shall conform to the general site requirements in subsection (c)(1) of this section.
b. Landscaping adjacent to road. All nonresidential developments shall comply with the requirements for landscaping
adjacent to the road in subsection (c)(2) of this section.
c. Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking from the view of the road, in which case, the berm
shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height, and shall be planted in accordance with subsection (c)(2) of this section.
The berm shall be located totally on private property and adjacent to the road right-of-way.
d. Screening. Screening in the form of a landscaped berm, greenbelt or wall shall be required on all sides of a
nonresidential use abuts directly upon land zoned or used for residential purposes. Landscaped screening shall comply
with the requirements in subsection (c)(5) of this section. If a wall is used instead of landscaping, the requirements in
Section 38-176 shall be complied with, but a landscaped greenbelt conforming to subsection (c)(4) of this section shall
be required on the side of the wall facing the residential district.
e. Greenbelts. Except where screening is required, a landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along side and rear property
lines in accordance with subsection (c)(4) of this section.
f. Parking lots. Off-street parking areas containing greater than ten (10) spaces shall comply with the requirements for
parking lot landscaping in subsection (c)(6) of this section.
IV-9
ARTICLE IV
Figure IV-3
Landscaping Requirements for Non-Residential Uses in Residential Areas
(c) General landscaping requirements.
(1) General site requirements. All undeveloped portions of the site shall conform to the following general landscaping
standards, except where specific landscape elements, such as greenbelts, berms, parking lot landscaping, landscaping along
roadways, or screening are required:
a. All undeveloped portions of the site shall be planted with grass, ground cover, landscape mulch, shrubbery, landscape
stone, or other suitable live plant material, which shall extend to any abutting street pavement edge. Grass areas in the
front yard of all nonresidential uses shall be planted with sod or hydroseeded.
b. A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted on nonresidential parcels at the rate of one (1) tree per
three thousand (3,000) square feet, or portion thereof, of any undeveloped open area for which specific landscaping
requirements do not appear elsewhere in this chapter. Required trees may be planted at uniform intervals, irregular
intervals, or in groupings.
(2) Landscaping adjacent to roads.
a. Planting requirements.
1. Where required, landscaping adjacent to public and private roads shall comply with each of the following planting
requirements:
Planting Type Requirement
Deciduous or evergreen trees 1 per 30 lineal feet of road frontage
Ornamental trees 1 per 100 lineal feet of road frontage
Shrubs 5 per 30 lineal feet of road frontage
2. For the purposes of computing the length of road frontage, openings for driveways and sidewalks shall not be
counted. Trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, irregular intervals, or in groupings.
IV-10
ARTICLE IV
b. Location and dimensions. Required landscaping adjacent to public and private roads shall be located totally on
private property within a planting strip adjacent to the road right-of-way and shall be planted in accordance with the
requirements for intersection visibility under Section 38-178. The minimum width of the planting strip shall be twenty
(20) feet.
Figure IV-4
Landscaping Adjacent to Roads
(3) Berms. Where required, berms shall conform to the following standards:
a. Dimensions. Unless otherwise indicated or appropriate, required berms shall be measured from the grade of the parking
lot or flat ground adjacent to the berm, and shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one (1) foot vertical for
each three (3) feet horizontal (thirty-three percent (33%) slope), with at least a two (2) foot flat area on top. Berms may
undulate in height, subject to review and approval of the berm design as shown on the site plan. All berms shall conform
to the requirements for intersection visibility under Section 38-178.
b. Protection from erosion. Any required berm shall be planted with sod, ground cover, or other suitable live plant
material to protect the berm from erosion so that it retains its height and shape.
c. Required plantings.
1. Berms located in the front yard of nonresidential parcels shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements
for landscaping adjacent to roads as set forth in subsection (c)(2) of this section.
2. Berms used for screening, other than in the front yard, shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for
screening as set forth in subsection (c)(5) of this section.
IV-11
ARTICLE IV
Figure IV-5
Berms
d. Measurement of length. For the purpose of calculating required plant material, the berm length shall be measured
along the exterior edge of the berm.
(4) Greenbelts. A twenty (20) foot greenbelt shall be required along the side and rear property lines of all nonresidential
developments, and shall conform to the following standards:
a. Location. Required greenbelts shall be located between the property line and any developed or paved area, including
parking areas, access drives, and buildings.
b. Measurement of length. For the purposes of calculating required plant material, the greenbelt length shall be
measured along the exterior edge of the greenbelt.
c. General planting requirements.
1. Ground cover. Grass, landscape mulch, landscape stone, or other suitable live plant material shall be planted over
the entire greenbelt area, except where paved walkways are used.
2. Trees and shrubs. Except where the greenbelt is used for screening, a minimum of one (1) deciduous or evergreen
tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) lineal feet, or portion thereof, of required greenbelt or, alternatively, five
(5) shrubs may be substituted for each required tree. Trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, irregular
intervals, or in groupings.
3. Distance from sidewalk. Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four (4) feet to the right-of-way line where
the greenbelt abuts a public sidewalk.
d. Use as screening. Greenbelts used for screening shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for screening
as set forth in subsection (c)(5) of this section.
IV-12
ARTICLE IV
Figure IV-6
Greenbelt Along Side & Rear Property Lines
(5) Screening.
a. General requirements. Unless otherwise specified, wherever an evergreen or landscaped screen is required, screening
shall consist of closely spaced evergreen plantings (i.e., no farther than fifteen (15) feet apart), which can be reasonably
expected to form an eighty percent (80%) visual barrier in summer and a sixty percent (60%) visual barrier in winter,
and that will be at least six (6) feet above the ground level within three (3) years of planting. Deciduous plant materials
may be used, provided that an eighty percent (80%) visual barrier in summer and a sixty percent (60%) visual barrier in
winter is maintained. Wherever screening is required adjacent to residentially zoned or used property, the screening shall
be installed as soon as practicable in relation to site grading and general construction activities.
b. Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment, such as air compressors, pool pumps, transformers, sprinkler pumps,
satellite dish antennae and similar equipment, shall be screened on at least three (3) sides. Insofar as practical, such
screening shall exceed the vertical height of the equipment being screened by at least six (6) inches within two (2) years
of planting.
IV-13
ARTICLE IV
Figure IV-7
Screening Between Conflicting Land Uses
(6) Parking lots. In addition to required screening, all off-street parking areas shall be landscaped as follows:
a. Landscaping ratio. Off-street parking areas containing more than twenty (20) spaces shall be provided with at least
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaping per parking space; however, landscaping around the perimeter of the
parking lot shall not satisfy such requirement. Suitable interior parking lot landscaping is illustrated in the following
Figure IV-8. Whenever possible, parking lot landscaping shall be designed to improve the safety of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, guide traffic movement, break up the expanse of pavement, create shade, and improve the appearance
of the parking area.
b. Minimum area. Landscaped areas in parking lots shall be no less than five (5) feet in any single dimension and no less
than two hundred (200) square feet in area. Landscaped areas in or adjacent to parking lots shall be protected with
curbing or other means to prevent encroachment of vehicles.
c. Other landscaping. Landscaping provided to satisfy other requirements elsewhere on the parcel shall not be counted in
meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements.
d. Required plantings. Requirements for plant material shall be based on the location, size, and shape of the parking lot
landscaped area. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per three hundred (300) square feet, or fraction thereof,
of interior landscaped area. At least fifty percent (50%) of each interior landscaped area shall be covered by living plant
material, such as sod, shrubs, ground cover, or trees. The landscape plan shall indicate the types, sizes, and quantities of
plant material proposed for such area.
e. Compliance with Low Impact Development. Best Management Practices for stormwater management of parking lots
shall be implemented. These shall comply with the Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan and the Green Oak
Charter Township Stormwater Management Ordinance. Refer to Figure 38-366-1 for representative LID techniques.
IV-14
ARTICLE IV
Figure IV-8
Parking Lot Landscaping
(7) Rights-of-way. Public rights-of-way located adjacent to required landscaped areas and greenbelts shall be planted with
grass or other suitable live ground cover, and shall be maintained by the owner or occupant of the adjacent property as if the
rights-of-way were part of the required landscaped areas or greenbelts. No plantings, except grass or ground cover, shall be
permitted closer than three (3) feet from the edge of the road pavement.
(8) Maintenance of unobstructed visibility for drivers. No landscaping shall be established or maintained on any parcel
or in any parking lot that will cause a traffic hazard by obstructing the view of drivers. All landscaping shall be planted in
accordance with the requirements for intersection visibility as set forth in Section 38-178.
(9) Potential damage to utilities. In no case shall landscaping material be planted in a way that will interfere with or cause
damage to underground utility lines, public roads, or other public facilities. Species of trees whose roots are known to cause
damage to public roadways, sewers, or other utilities, such as willows and silver maples, shall not be planted closer than
fifteen (15) feet from any such roadway, sewer, or utility.
(10) Divider medians. Where traffic on driveways, maneuvering lanes, private roads, or similar vehicle accessways is separated by
a divider median, the median shall be curbed and have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. A minimum of one (1) deciduous or
evergreen tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) lineal feet, or portion thereof, of median. Trees may be planted at uniform
intervals, irregular intervals, or in groupings, but in no instance shall the center-to-center distance between trees exceed sixty
(60) feet.
(11) Irrigation. The site plan shall indicate the proposed method of watering landscaped areas. Although not required, installation
of an in-ground irrigation/sprinkler system is encouraged, particularly in front yards.
(d) Landscape material standards. Unless otherwise specified, all landscape materials shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Plant quality. Plant materials used in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be nursery grown, free of pests
and diseases, hardy in southeastern portion of the state, in conformance with the American Standards for Nursery Stock of
the American Landscape and Nursery Association (formerly the American Association of Nurserymen), and shall have passed
inspections required under state regulations.
(2) Nonliving plant material. Plastic and other nonliving plant material shall not be considered acceptable to meet the
landscaping requirements of this section.
IV-15
ARTICLE IV
(3) Plant material specifications. The following specifications shall apply to all plant material proposed in accordance with the
landscaping requirements of this section:
a. Deciduous shade trees shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2½) inches in caliper when measured six (6) inches
abovegrade, and the first branch shall be a minimum of four (4) feet abovegrade when planted.
b. Deciduous ornamental trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1½) inches in caliper when measured six (6) inches
abovegrade, and shall have a minimum height of four (4) feet abovegrade when planted.
c. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height when planted and shall have a minimum spread of two and
one-half (2½) feet. The size of the burlapped root ball shall be at least ten (10) times the caliper measured six (6) inches
abovegrade.
d. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height when planted. Low growing shrubs shall have a minimum spread of
twenty-four (24) inches when planted.
e. Hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken visual screen within two (2) years after
planting, barring unusual growing conditions such as drought or disease. Hedges shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in
height when planted.
Summary of Plant Material Specifications1
Minimum Caliper Minimum Height Minimum Spread
Deciduous Trees 2½ inches2 4 feet (first branch) --
Ornamental Trees 1½ inches2 4 feet (first branch) --
Evergreen Trees -- 6 feet 2½ feet
Shrubs -- 2 feet 2 feet
Hedges -- 2 feet --
1 See Section 38-177(d)
2 Measured six (6) inches abovegrade
f. Ground cover used in lieu of turf grasses, in whole or in part, shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished
appearance and reasonably complete coverage after one (1) complete growing season.
g. Grass area shall be planted using species normally grown as permanent lawns in the southeastern portion of the state.
Grass, sod, and seed shall be clean and free of weeds, pests, and diseases. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or
seeded. When grass is to be established by a method other than complete sodding or seeding, nurse grass seed shall be
sown for immediate effect and protection until complete coverage is otherwise achieved. Straw or other mulch shall be
used to protect newly seeded areas.
h. Mulch used around trees, shrubs, and vines shall be a minimum of three (3) inches deep, and installed in a manner as to
present a finished appearance.
i. Use of plant materials that cause disruption to storm drainage or that are susceptible to pests or disease is not
encouraged. The following plant materials exhibit such characteristics, and their use is not encouraged in the Township:
1. Box elder.
2. Chinese elm.
3. Siberian elm.
4. Honey locust (with thorns).
5. Black locust.
6. Ginkgo (female only).
7. Tree of Heaven.
8. European barberry.
IV-16
ARTICLE IV
9. Mulberry.
10. Cottonwood.
11. Willow.
12. Silver maple.
(e) Installation and maintenance. The following standards shall be observed where installation and maintenance of landscape
materials are required:
(1) Manner of installation. Landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike manner to ensure the continued growth of
healthy plant material. Areas to be landscaped shall be provided with a minimum topsoil depth of six (6) inches. Trees, shrubs,
hedges, and vines shall be generously mulched at the time of planting.
(2) Perimeter landscaping. Landscaping along the perimeter shall be installed prior to construction, except where such
landscaping would be destroyed during construction.
(3) Seeding or sodding. Lots or parcels shall be seeded or sodded within ninety (90) days after occupancy.
(4) Protection from vehicles. Landscaping shall be protected from vehicles through use of curbs or wheelstops in parking lots.
Landscape areas shall be elevated above the pavement to a height that is adequate to protect the plants from snow removal,
salt, and other hazards.
(5) Timing of installation. Timing of installation shall be as follows:
a. Landscaping provided for nonresidential and multiple-family residential projects shall generally be installed upon
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Where extenuating circumstances warrant (e.g., if development is completed
during the off season when plants cannot be installed), the Planning Commission or building official shall have the ability
to establish an alternative schedule for the installation of the required landscaping. If landscaping is to be installed after
the certificate of occupancy is granted, the developer shall provide a performance guarantee to ensure installation of
the required landscaping as established by the Planning Commission or building official, such as an irrevocable letter of
credit, in an amount equal to the estimated value of the proposed landscape improvements.
b. Landscaping of all common areas associated with single-family residential developments shall generally be installed
upon the occupancy of the first lot or unit of the development, or of a particular phase in the case of a phased
development. Where extenuating circumstances warrant, the Planning Commission or building official shall have the
ability to establish an alternative schedule for the installation of required landscaping. To ensure that landscaping is
installed according to the schedule established by the Planning Commission or building official, the developer may be
required to provide a performance guarantee, such as an irrevocable letter of credit, in an amount equal to the estimated
value of the proposed landscape improvements. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, required street trees
shall be installed within ninety (90) days of occupancy of each lot or unit, or by June 1 for residences occupied in winter
months.
(6) Maintenance.
a. Landscaping required by this section shall be maintained in a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, and free from refuse
and debris. All unhealthy and dead plant material shall be replaced immediately upon notice from the building official,
unless the season is not appropriate for planting, in which case, such plant material shall be replaced at the beginning of
the next planting season.
b. All constructed or manufactured landscape elements, such as, but not limited to, benches, retaining walls, edging, etc.,
shall be maintained in good condition and neat appearance. Rotten, deteriorated, or damaged landscape elements shall
be repaired, replaced, or removed.
(7) Irrigation. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available and acceptable supply of water, and with at least
one (1) spigot located within three hundred (300) feet of all plant material to be established and maintained. Trees, shrubs,
and other plantings and lawn areas shall be watered regularly throughout the growing season. The Planning Commission
may require an irrigation system to stabilize plant materials, in particular for larger parcels over five (5) acres; landscaped
IV-17
ARTICLE IV
areas over one thousand (1,000) square feet in area; locations where screening is considered crucial to achieve land use
compatibility; and/or where more formalized plantings are proposed (as opposed to natural spacing and clustering of plant
material).
(f) Existing plant material. The following regulations shall apply to existing plant material:
(1) Consideration in the landscape design. In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development,
the Planning Commission may permit substitution of such plant material in place of the requirements set forth in this section,
provided such substitution is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this section and this chapter in general. Existing hedges,
berms, walls, or other landscape elements may be used to satisfy the requirements set forth in this section, provided that such
landscaping is in conformance with the requirements of this section.
(2) Preservation. Existing trees shall be preserved as set forth in Section 38-363. Replacement trees required under Section 38-
363(i) to mitigate tree removals should be specifically indicated as such on the submitted landscape plan, and shall not count
toward the satisfaction of any landscaping requirements provided under this section.
(g) Modifications to requirements. In consideration of the overall design and impact of a specific landscape plan and in
consideration of the amount of existing plant material to be retained on the site, the Planning Commission may modify the specific
requirements outlined in this section, provided that any such adjustment is in keeping with the intent of this section and this
chapter in general. In determining whether a modification is appropriate, the Planning Commission shall consider whether the
following conditions exist:
(1) Topographic features or other unique features of the site create conditions such that strict application of the landscape
regulations would result in a less effective screen than an alternative landscape design.
(2) Parking, vehicular circulation or land use are such that required landscaping would not enhance the site or result in the desired
screening effect.
(3) The public benefit intended by the landscape regulations could be better achieved with a plan that varies from the strict
requirements of this section.
In consideration of a reduction in landscaping, the Planning Commission may seek a donation to the Township’s tree fund.
(h) Landscape plan requirements. All development proposals for which landscaping or tree replacement/mitigation is required
under this section or Section 38-363(i), respectively, shall submit a landscape plan demonstrating compliance with such sections.
The required landscape plan shall include the following:
(1) Location of all proposed plant material.
(2) Schedule of all proposed plant materials, indicating the botanical and common name, number, size, and root type, as well as
which landscaping or tree replacement requirement, if any, the plant material is intended to satisfy.
(3) Calculations used for determining the required number of trees and shrubs.
(4) Proposed groundcover in all unpaved areas of the site.
(5) Location of all landmark trees existing on the site.
(6) Proposed topographical contour lines.
(7) Berm cross sections, if proposed.
(8) Planting details.
(9) Method of irrigation.
(10) Details of any proposed structures, such as retaining walls, gazebos, arbors, fences, etc.
IV-18
ARTICLE IV
Sec. 38-178. Intersection visibility.
On any corner lot in any district having front and side yards, no fence, wall, screen, hedge, sign, or other structure or planting shall
obstruct the visibility of street vehicular traffic between the heights of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet in an area measuring thirty (30)
feet from the point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines and the tangent connecting the thirty (30) foot extremities of the
intersecting right-of-way lines.
Sec. 38-179. Number of principal buildings per lot.
In all single-family residential districts, only one (1) principal building shall be placed on a single lot of record.
Sec. 38-180. Required street frontage.
Any parcel of land which is to be occupied by a use or building, other than an accessory use or building, shall have frontage on, and direct
access to, a public street or private road which meets one (1) of the following conditions:
(1) A public street which has been accepted for maintenance by the county road commission; or
(2) A permanent and unobstructed private road of record and built in accordance with Article X, pertaining to private roads.
Sec. 38-181. Building grades.
(a) Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation that a finished grade shall be maintained to cause the flow
of surface water to run away from the walls of the building. The finished grade shall be a sloping grade, beginning at the sidewalk
level, and shall be maintained and established from the center of the front lot line to the finished grade line at the front of the
building, and, in the absence of appropriate drainage at the rear lot line, a finished grade shall be maintained from the rear lot
line to the front lot line, with both grades sloping to the front property line; however, this shall not prevent the grading of a yard
space to provide sunken or terraced areas, provided proper means are constructed and maintained to prevent the runoff of surface
water from flowing onto adjacent properties. Finished grade elevations for roads without curves shall be determined by using the
elevation at the centerline of the road in front of the lot as the established grade, or such grade as may be otherwise be determined
by the Township engineer or the Zoning Administrator or designee.
(b) When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two (2) existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building,
the Zoning Administrator or designee shall use the existing established finished grade or the minimum established grade in
determining the proper grade around the new building. The yard around the new building shall be graded in such a manner as to
meet existing codes and to preclude normal runoff of surface water to flow onto the adjacent property.
(c) Final grades shall be approved by the administrator, who may require a grading plan which has been duly completed and certified
by a registered engineer or land surveyor.
(d) The finished grade at the building line shall be established a minimum of eight (8) inches and a maximum of twelve (12) inches
above the crown of the road in all residential areas, except that such requirement may be adjusted by the administrator after taking
into consideration the public health, safety, and general welfare of the area, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards
in conformity with the general purposes and intent of this chapter.
IV-19
ARTICLE IV
(e) All grades shall be established and maintained so that surface water runoff damage does not occur to adjoining properties prior to,
during, and after construction.
Sec. 38-182. Buildings to be moved or demolished.
(a) No building and land use permit shall be granted for the moving or demolishing of buildings or structures from outside or within
the limits of the Township to be placed on property within the limits of the Township unless the administrator shall have made an
inspection of the building to be moved and has found that it is structurally safe, will not adversely affect the character of existing
buildings in the neighborhood of the new location and will fully comply with the building code and other codes regulating the
health, safety, and general welfare of the Township. A performance bond will be established from time-to-time by resolution of the
Township Board of a sufficient amount to ensure the cost of completing the building for occupancy within a period of not less than
six (6) months from the date of the permit, shall be furnished before the permit is issued.
(b) Any building moved within a district and placed upon a foundation, or any building moved into a district from outside the district,
shall be considered a new building and shall be subject to all the limitations and requirements set forth in this chapter relating to
uses, construction, permits, and certificates.
(c) The administrator shall approve in writing the route to be used to move any building.
(d) All debris from any demolished building or structure shall be disposed of properly. The foundation materials shall be removed
and disposed of, and the site shall be backfilled with clean earth materials that are devoid of all debris, large stones, and organic
materials. The site shall be graded to a smooth, even surface and seeded to grass.
Sec. 38-183. Dwellings in nonresidential districts.
No dwelling shall be erected in a nonresidential zoning district; however, the sleeping quarters of a watchperson or caretaker may be
permitted by the Planning Commission as a special approval use.
Sec. 38-184. Yard encroachments.
(a) Terraces, patios, and similar unroofed accessory surface area may project into a required yard as follows:
(1) Such surface area must be unroofed and without walls, piers, joists, or other continuous enclosure;
(2) Such surface area may project into the required rear or waterfront yard setback, provided that no such surface area shall be
permitted nearer than seven (7) feet to any lot line;
(3) Such surface area may have open railings or fences not exceeding forty-two (42) inches in height and may have noncontinuous
windbreaks, visual screens, or walls not exceeding six (6) feet in height in a rear yard, or four (4) feet in height in a
front, side, or waterfront yard, or not enclosing more than half the perimeter of said terrace, patio, or similar structure.
(4) No such surface area shall violate or encroach upon any riparian buffer in accordance with Section 38-361(f)(3)e.
(5) Swimming pools shall be in accordance with Section 38-171(9).
(b) Unenclosed porches or decks without roofs may project into a required yard a distance not to exceed six (6) feet, provided such
porch or deck shall not exceed one (1) story in height; that such porch or deck shall not be permitted within seven (7) feet of any
side lot line; and that no building shall have more than one (1) such porch in any one (1) yard. In no case shall these structures
violate or encroach upon any wetland buffer.
IV-20
ARTICLE IV
(c) Enclosed porches or roofed porches and other enclosed appurtenances shall be considered an integral part of the building to which
they are attached and shall be subject to all yard requirements thereof.
(d) Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, cornices, eaves, gutters, and similar features may project into any required
yard a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches.
(e) Unenclosed and unroofed fire escapes, outside stairways, and balconies may project into a required yard a maximum of five (5)
feet.
(f) Decks shall be subject to the Schedule of Regulations, Section 38-136, for yard setbacks and maximum lot coverage except as
modified in this section.
Sec. 38-185. Exceptions to height regulations.
(a) The following structural appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations for authorized uses in any district:
(1) Those that are purely ornamental in purpose, such as church spires, belfries, domes, cupolas, ornamental towers, flagpoles,
and monuments.
(2) Those that are integral to mechanical or structural functions, such as chimneys, smokestacks, water tanks, elevator and
stairway penthouses, ventilators, bulkheads, aerials, antennae, electronic devices, heating and cooling units, and fire towers.
(3) Those that are necessary to proper building design, such as cornices and parapet walls, which shall not exceed the height
limitations by more than five (5) feet and shall have no window openings.
(4) Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) shall be subject to the height limitations as listed in Section 38-200.
(b) The permitted exceptions set forth in subsection (a) of this section may be authorized only when the following conditions are
satisfied:
(1) No portion of any building or structure permitted as an exception to a height limitation shall be used for human occupancy or
commercial purposes.
(2) Any structure permitted as an exception to a height limitation shall be erected no higher than such height as may be
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which it is intended to serve.
(3) Structures permitted as exceptions to height limitations shall not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross roof
area of any building upon which such structures may be located.
(c) Utility poles, structures and wireless equipment in a public right-of-way are subject to the following regulations:
(1) Utility poles and structures in a public right-of-way shall not be more than 40 feet in height above ground level.
(2) Wireless equipment shall not extend more than five (5) feet above the top of a utility pole or structure it is attached to in a
public right-of-way.
Sec. 38-186. Continued conformance with regulations.
The maintenance of yards, open spaces, lot areas, height and bulk limitations, fences, walls, clear vision areas, parking and loading
spaces, and all other requirements for a building or use specified within this chapter shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such
building or property on which such building or use is located.
IV-21
ARTICLE IV
Sec. 38-187. Garage sales, rummage sales, yard sales, moving sales, and similar activities.
Garage sales, rummage sales, yard sales, moving sales, and similar activities shall be considered temporary accessory uses within any
residential zoning district, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Any garage sale, rummage sale, or similar activity shall be allowed without a building and land use permit for a period not to
exceed four (4) days within a six (6) month period. Such activities in operation for a period of time in excess of four (4) days
shall require a building and land use permit from the Zoning Administrator or designee. In no instance shall more than two (2)
garage sales, rummage sales, or similar activities be held in any one (1) location within any twelve (12) month period.
(2) All such sales shall be conducted in a manner so as not to create a traffic hazard or a nuisance to neighboring properties.
(3) All such sales shall be conducted a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the front lot line of the premises upon which such sale is
conducted.
(4) Overnight outside storage of goods or merchandise offered at such sale is prohibited.
(5) No sign advertising a garage sale or similar activity shall be placed upon public property. Two (2) signs advertising a garage
sale are permitted to be placed upon private property with the consent of an owner of such property and shall be removed
within one (1) business day of the conclusion of such garage sale or similar activity.
Sec. 38-188. Seasonal sales.
The sale of Christmas trees and other seasonal items shall be considered temporary accessory uses within RF, RE, and all nonresidential
zoning districts, subject to the following conditions:
(1) A temporary building and land use permit, renewable on an annual basis, shall be secured from the Zoning Administrator or
designee.
(2) All such sales shall be conducted in a manner so as not to create a traffic hazard or a nuisance to neighboring properties.
(3) Adequate parking and ingress and egress to the premises shall be provided.
(4) Upon discontinuance of the seasonal use, any temporary structure shall be removed.
(5) Signs shall conform to the provisions of the district in which the seasonal use is located.
(6) Any lighting shall be directed and controlled so as not to create a nuisance to neighboring property owners.
Sec. 38-189. Unsafe buildings.
Nothing within this chapter shall be construed to prevent compliance with an order by the appropriate authority to correct, improve,
strengthen, or restore to a safe or healthy condition any part of a building or premises declared unsafe or unhealthy.
Sec. 38-190. Structural damage.
Any structure or building which may be, in whole or in part, destroyed by fire, windstorm, or other such cause, if rebuilt, shall be rebuilt
in accordance with this chapter, Chapter 6, Article III, pertaining to dangerous buildings, and other pertinent codes and ordinances, or
shall be restored to a safe and healthy condition with all debris removed from the site within ninety (90) days from the occurrence of such
damage.
Sec. 38-191. Industrial building construction.
(a) Any building constructed in an LI, GI, or RO district shall be located no closer than one hundred (100) feet from any boundary
adjoining property zoned for single-family residential use.
IV-22
ARTICLE IV
(b) The front walls of any building in an LI, GI, or RO district shall be constructed or faced with stone, brick, decorative block, or
material approved by the Planning Commission.
Sec. 38-192. Trash.
Trash containers in all zoning districts, other than single-family districts, shall be screened on four (4) sides with an opaque fence or wall
at least as high as the trash container and shall be constructed of material which is compatible with the architectural materials used in
the site development. Gates which provide access to the container for maintenance shall be made of an opaque material also compatible
with the architectural materials used in the site development. The location of the dumpster or other trash container, unless a specific
exception is provided by the Planning Commission, shall be adjacent to the building. The Planning Commission may further require
internal storage and/or the use of trash compactors where, in the determination of the Planning Commission, the public health, safety,
and welfare is served. A temporary trash and construction debris storage area shall be required to be located on the site of all construction
and renovation projects for the duration of the project. All trash and debris shall be removed from the property and disposed of properly.
Sec. 38-193. Street, alley, railroad right-of-way, and abandoned railroad right-of-way.
All streets, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, and abandoned railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed
to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such streets, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, and abandoned railroad
rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street, alley, railroad right-of-way, or abandoned railroad right-of-way serves as a district
boundary, the zoning of such street, alley, railroad right-of-way, or abandoned railroad right-of-way, unless otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. No building or structure may be
erected, constructed, or altered upon any right-of-way unless appurtenant to the right-of-way.
Sec. 38-194. Home occupations.
Home occupations which are clearly incidental to the principal residential use are permitted in any residential district. The following
conditions for home occupations shall be met:
(1) The home occupation shall utilize no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor area of any one (1) story of the
residential structure used for such home occupation.
(2) The home occupation shall involve no employees, other than members of the immediate family residing on the premises.
(3) All home occupation activities shall be conducted indoors, except gardening.
(4) No structural alterations or additions which will alter the residential character of the structure shall be permitted to
accommodate a home occupation.
(5) Only customary domestic or household equipment, or equipment judged by the Zoning Administrator or designee not to be
injurious or a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood, shall be permitted.
(6) There shall be no external evidence of such occupation, except a small announcement sign not exceeding two (2) square feet
and conforming to provisions of Article IX of this chapter, pertaining to signs, may be permitted.
(7) No unrelated commodity shall be sold on the premises in connection with a home occupation.
(8) No home occupation shall be permitted which is injurious to the general character of the residential district and which creates
a congested or otherwise hazardous traffic or parking condition.
Sec. 38-195. Livestock and farm animals.
The raising or keeping of animals which are normally part of the livestock maintained on a farm is prohibited, except in the RE and the
RF zoning districts. Such restriction shall not apply to the raising or keeping of horses, which is regulated under Sections 38-135(2)a.4.,
38-135(5)b.5 and 38-196(18), or the raising and keeping of domesticated household pets. IV-23
ARTICLE IV
Sec. 38-196. Site design conditions.
The permitted or special approval uses permitted in any given zoning district and listed in this section shall be subject, unless otherwise
required by the Planning Commission, to all of the following conditions and regulations regarding site development:
(1) Churches.
a. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
b. The minimum lot area shall be two (2) acres.
c. For every foot of height by which the building, exclusive of the spire, exceeds the maximum height limitation for the
district, an additional (to the minimum) foot of front, side, and rear yard setback shall be provided.
d. The lot location shall be such that at least one (1) property line abuts a collector street, secondary thoroughfare, or
primary thoroughfare.
(2) Restaurants, including drive-in and fast food.
a. The main and accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of sixty (60) feet from any adjacent right-of-way line or
residential property line.
b. Public access to the site shall be located at least seventy-five (75) feet from any intersection, as measured from the
nearest right-of-way line to the edge of such access and, provided further, that an access road shall lead in and out of the
establishment parking area and onto the main thoroughfare.
c. A six (6) foot high masonry obscuring wall, landscaped along both sides, shall be provided adjacent to residential
districts.
d. Parking may be located in the front yard in the case of fast food or carryout restaurants only.
(3) Junkyards, salvage yards, and used material yards.
a. The minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres.
b. The setback from the front property line to the area upon which salvageable materials are stored shall not be less than
one hundred and fifty (150) feet and such area shall be screened from the roadway and any adjoining residential or
business uses by an obscuring fence of not less than eight (8) feet, nor more than twelve (12) feet in height. Such fence is
to be painted and neat in appearance.
c. The area upon which salvageable materials are stored, including the main and accessory buildings, shall be located not
closer than five hundred (500) feet to any public building, church, hospital, sanitarium, convalescent home, child day care
facility, or school.
d. All buildings shall be set back not less than fifty (50) feet from any street or highway.
e. Material shall not be stored in a manner which exceeds the height of the obscuring fence.
(4) Hospitals.
a. The minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres.
b. The lot location shall be such that at least one (1) property line abuts a major thoroughfare. The ingress and egress for
off-street parking facilities for guests and patients shall be directly from such major thoroughfare.
c. The minimum main and accessory building setback shall be one hundred (100) feet.
d. Ambulance and emergency entrance areas shall be visually screened from the view of adjacent residential uses by a
structure or a masonry wall of six (6) feet or more in height.
(5) Hotels, motels, and motor courts.
a. Public access to the principal business shall be located so as not to conflict with access to adjacent uses or adversely affect
traffic flow on adjacent streets. Only one (1) exit to the major thoroughfare shall be permitted.
b. Where the front yard is used to provide access, a greenbelt shall be provided along the front property line, as provided in
Section 38-177(d).
c. Each unit of commercial occupancy shall contain a minimum of two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of gross floor
area.
IV-24
ARTICLE IV
d. When adjacent to a residential district, a chainlink fence or masonry wall four (4) to six (6) feet in height shall be erected
on the common property line, plus a greenbelt shall be planted and continually maintained parallel to both the inside
and outside of such fence or wall in accordance with Section 38-177.
e. A minimum lot size of one (1) acre, and a minimum lot width of two hundred (200) feet shall be maintained.
(6) State licensed day care and foster care facilities. All day care facilities indicated as special uses in Section 38-135(2) and
defined in Section 38-1 (State Licensed Day Care Facilities) shall meet the following standards:
a. Child care and adult day care centers. Child care centers and adult day care facilities shall be subject to the following
minimum standards:
1. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Section 38-71, shall be required to be submitted.
2. Outdoor play areas shall be required as follows:
i. For each child or adult cared for there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of outdoor recreation area.
ii. The required outdoor play area shall have a total minimum area of not less than three thousand (3,000) square
feet.
iii. The outdoor play area shall be located in the side or rear yard, shall be fenced, and shall be made and kept
secure by the care-givers.
b. Adult and child group day care homes. Adult and child group day care homes are subject to the following minimum
standards:
1. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Section 38-71, shall be required to be submitted.
2. A group day care home shall not be located closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to any of the
following:
i. A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to seven (7) or more people licensed by
the State of Michigan.
ii. A community correction center, resident home, halfway home, or other similar facility that houses an inmate
population under the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections.
c. Adult foster care group homes. Adult foster family small and large group homes are subject to the following minimum
standards:
1. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Section 38-71, shall be required to be submitted.
2. A minimum outdoor area of five hundred (500) square feet shall be provided on the same premises as the facility
shall be provided. This open space shall be securely fenced and screened, located in the side or rear yard, and shall
be made and kept safe by the care-givers.
d. Adult foster care congregate facilities. Adult foster care congregate facilities are subject to the following minimum
standards:
1. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Section 38-71, shall be required to be submitted.
2. Parking requirements as required for convalescent homes and similar facilities, set forth in Section 38-312, shall be
met.
3. All landscape requirements set forth in Section 38-177 shall be met.
4. Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained.
(7) Mortuaries.
a. A well designed and landscaped off-street vehicle assembly area shall be provided to be used in support of funeral
procession activity. Such area shall be in addition to the required off-street parking area or its related maneuvering space.
b. A caretaker’s residence may be provided with the main building.
(8) Bowling alleys, indoor skating, and similar uses.
a. Public access to the site shall be located at least seventy-five (75) feet from any intersection, as measured from the
nearest right-of-way line to the edge of such access.
IV-25
ARTICLE IV
b. The main and accessory buildings shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any residential use.
(9) Open air businesses, except seasonal produce stands.
a. The minimum area for the open air business portion of the lot shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred (100) feet.
c. A five (5) foot fence or wall shall be constructed along the rear and sides of the lot and shall be capable of keeping trash,
paper, and other debris from blowing off the premises, except as otherwise provided.
(10) Animal hospitals, veterinary offices, and clinics.
a. The minimum main and accessory building setback shall be seventy-five (75) feet from the front property line and fifty
(50) feet from all other property lines.
b. All principal use activities shall be conducted within a totally enclosed main building.
c. No boarding of animals shall be permitted, except as required for medical treatment.
(11) Campgrounds and travel trailer parks.
a. The minimum lot size shall be ten (10) acres. The lot shall provide direct vehicular access to a public street or road. For the
purposes of this subsection, the term “lot” means a campground or travel trailer park.
b. Each site on a lot designated for camping use may accommodate a travel trailer, tent, or recreation vehicle and shall be
provided with individual electrical outlets. Animal proof waste containers shall be provided at each site.
c. Adequate public sanitary facilities, housed in all-weather structures containing an adequate water outlet, toilet, and
waste containers, shall be uniformly provided throughout the lot, at a ratio of not less than one (1) such station per each
twenty (20) sites.
d. Each lot containing more than sixty (60) sites shall provide a masonry building containing a machine laundry (wash and
dry facilities) and showers.
e. No commercial enterprises shall be permitted to operate on the lot, except that a convenience goods shopping building
may be provided on a lot containing more than eighty (80) sites.
f. Each lot shall provide a hard surfaced, dust-free vehicle parking area for site occupant and guest parking. Such parking
area shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of the site it is intended to serve, except in the case of sites
specifically designated only for tent camping. Each parking space shall be two hundred (200) square feet in area and
guest parking shall be provided at the ratio of not less than one (1) space per each two (2) sites. Occupant parking space
for two (2) vehicles shall be provided on each site.
g. Each site shall contain a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, except that the minimum size for
sites specifically designated for tents shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet. Each site shall be set back at least
seventy-five (75) feet from any right-of-way or property line, and at least forty (40) feet from any private street.
h. A common use area shall be provided on each lot at a ratio of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of such
area per each site. Such common area shall be developed by seeding and landscaping, and shall be provided with picnic
tables, barbecue stands, and passive recreation equipment (i.e., swings, horseshoe pits, shuffleboard courts, etc.) for the
general use of all occupants of the entire lot.
i. Each travel trailer site shall have direct access to a hard surfaced, dust-free roadway at least twenty-four (24) feet in
width for two (2) way traffic and twelve (12) feet in width for one (1) way traffic. Parking shall not be allowed on any
roadway. Public streets shall be paved with asphaltic concrete. Sites specifically designated, and only used, for tent
camping need not have direct vehicular access to any street or road, but shall be provided with adequately cleared and
marked pedestrian pathway access, which originates at a point on a street or road within two hundred (200) feet of the
parking area as set forth in subsection (11)g. of this section.
j. Any open drainageway must have seeded banks, sloped at least three to one (3:1), and designed to properly drain all
surface waters into the county drain system, subject to approval by the county drain commission.
k. All sanitary facilities shall be designed and constructed in strict conformance with all applicable county health
regulations.
IV-26
ARTICLE IV
l. The development of the entire lot is subject to all applicable requirements of the MDEQ.
m. A minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided between all travel trailers, tents, or recreational vehicles.
n. Fences and greenbelts may be required by the Planning Commission. The location of common use areas, roadways,
streets, and buildings shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission.
(12) Confined animal feedlots.
a. The minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres.
b. A site shall have direct access to a county primary road or a state or federal highway.
c. There shall be provided at least a one hundred (100) foot setback from the property line that abuts the primary
thoroughfare or state or federal highway.
d. Such use shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any residence.
e. No use shall be located within a flood hazard area.
f. A management plan for stormwater and animal waste shall have been approved by the MDEQ prior to submittal.
(13) Housing for senior citizens.
a. The minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres.
b. Accessory services in common use shall include, but not be limited to, the provision of central dining facilities, indoor and
outdoor recreational facilities, lounge areas, and workshops.
c. Each dwelling unit shall contain at least three hundred and fifty (350) square feet of area, not including kitchen and
sanitary facilities.
(14) Convalescent homes.
a. The minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres or two thousand (2,000) square feet per bed, whichever is the greater.
b. The lot location shall be such that at least one (1) property line abuts a collector street, secondary thoroughfare, or
primary thoroughfare. More than one (1) point of vehicle ingress and egress shall be provided directly from such
thoroughfare and shall meet county road commission requirements for off-street parking areas for guests and patients.
c. The main and accessory buildings shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from all property lines.
d. The facility shall be designed to provide a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of open space for
every bed used or intended to be used. Such open space shall include landscaping and may include off-street parking
areas, driveways, required yard setbacks, and accessory uses.
e. An area for access of emergency vehicles shall be provided for each primary building entrance.
(15) Roadside stands.
a. There shall be a temporary structure only, and the gross floor area of such structure shall not be more than two hundred
and fifty (250) square feet.
b. Suitable containers for rubbish shall be placed on the premises for public use.
c. The temporary building or structure shall be located not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the public road right-ofway.
The height of such building or structure shall be no more than one (1) story.
d. Off-street parking shall be provided and may be in the required front yard setback area. Such parking area shall be
constructed in accordance with this chapter, except hard surfacing shall not be required.
(16) Automobile service stations, public garages, and filling stations.
a. No automobile service station, public garage, or filling station existing on the effective date of the Ordinance from which
this chapter is derived shall be structurally altered so as to provide a lesser degree of conformity with the provisions of
this section than existed on such date.
b. The minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet for an automobile service station or public garage,
and twelve thousand (12,000) square feet for a filling station.
c. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred and twenty (120) feet for a public garage or automobile service station,
and one hundred (100) feet for a filling station.
IV-27
ARTICLE IV
d. An automobile service station shall be located not less than forty (40) feet from any right-of-way line and not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from any side or rear lot line abutting residentially used property.
e. Ingress and egress drives shall not be more than thirty (30) feet wide, as measured at the property line.
f. No more than one (1) curb opening shall be permitted for every fifty (50) feet of frontage, or major fraction thereof,
along any street.
g. No drive or curb opening shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any intersection or adjacent residential
property line. No drive shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet, as measured along the property line, to any other drive
on the premises. Curb cuts shall not be permitted where, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator or designee, it may
produce a safety hazard to adjacent pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
h. A raised curb of six (6) inches in height shall be constructed along all street frontages at the right-of-way line, except for
drive openings.
i. The entire lot, excluding the area occupied by a building, shall be hard surfaced with concrete or a plant mixed
bituminous material, except desirable landscaped areas, which shall be separated from all paved areas by a low barrier or
curb.
j. All lubrication equipment, motor vehicle washing equipment, and hydraulic hoists shall be entirely enclosed within a
building.
k. All gasoline pumps shall be located not less than fifteen (15) feet from any lot line, and shall be arranged so that motor
vehicles shall not be supplied with gasoline or serviced while parked upon or overhanging any public sidewalk, street, or
right-of-way.
l. Storage items shall not exceed the height of the wall. All outside storage areas for trash, used tires, auto parts, and
similar items shall be enclosed by a five (5) foot masonry wall. Outside storage or parking of disabled, wrecked, or
partially dismantled vehicles shall not be permitted for a period exceeding ten (10) days.
m. The sale or rental of new or used cars, trucks, trailers, and any other vehicles on the premises is expressly prohibited.
n. The lot shall be located so that it is at least five hundred (500) feet from an entrance or exit to any property on which a
public library, public school, private school, playground, playfield, park, church, or hospital is situated.
o. On a corner lot, both street frontage sides shall be subject to all of the applicable front yard provisions of this chapter.
p. All repair and maintenance activities are to be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
q. All uses shall comply with the flammable liquid regulations promulgated by the fire safety board by authority conferred
by Section 3c of Public Act No. 207 of 1941 (MCL 29.3c).
r. Tow trucks or other commercial vehicles that are on the premises for reasons other than typical customer activity shall be
parked in nonrequired parking spaces and should not be parked in such a manner to be used as an advertisement.
s. The outdoor display and sale of merchandise shall generally be prohibited, unless specifically approved by the Planning
Commission as a condition of the special land use permit.
t. The exterior of the main building shall be harmonious with its surroundings and shall include some brick, stone, wood,
or other masonry finished building materials other than glass and metal. The canopies shall be designed within a
minimum height of twelve (12) feet, and a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, and the building design, including
finished construction shall be related to or directly match the finish building materials and architectural style of the main
building.
u. The outdoor use of any electronic or enhanced sound or public announcement system shall be limited to the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Such a system shall not be directed toward adjacent residentially zoned or used property, and shall
generally not present an unreasonable disturbance to the neighborhood in which it is located.
v. All restroom entrances shall be situated either to the side, to the rear, or within the main building.
w. Landscaping shall be at least fifteen percent (15%) of the site, and should be designed in such a manner as to provide
proper screening of on-site vehicles and paved surfaces and provide beautification on the site. The landscaping should
include acceptable live plant, shrub, and tree specimens that will mitigate the view of headlight glare and as permitted in
Section 38-177.
IV-28
ARTICLE IV
x. The installation and use of an oil-water separator with monitoring capabilities in the facility’s stormwater management
system shall be required, as well as the use of best management practices for pollution prevention for automobile filling/
service operations, in order to protect surface water and groundwater quality.
(17) Golf courses and country clubs.
a. The minimum lot sizes are as follows:
1. County club, forty (40) acres.
2. Eighteen (18) hole, par 3 golf course, twenty (20) acres.
3. Nine (9) hole, par 3 golf course, ten (10) acres.
4. Golf driving ranges, ten (10) acres.
b. A shelter building with toilet facilities shall be provided, which meets all requirements of the county health department.
c. The main and accessory buildings shall be set back at least seventy-five (75) feet from all property lines.
(18) Horse stables, commercial and private.
a. The minimum lot size shall be five (5) net acres for the first two (2) horses and one (1) acre for each horse thereafter.
b. Stable buildings shall not be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to any property line and one hundred and fifty
(150) feet from any dwelling off the premises.
c. The animals shall be confined in a suitably fenced area or paddock, which shall not be located closer than one hundred
(100) feet to any dwelling off the premises.
d. Odor, dust, noise, drainage, or insects resulting from the facility shall not constitute a nuisance to any adjoining premises.
(19) Kennels.
a. All kennels shall be operated in accordance with all applicable county and state regulations.
b. A minimum lot size of five (5) acres shall be required.
c. Up to ten (10) animals shall be permitted for the first five (5) acres. Thereafter, one-half (½) acre shall be required for
each additional dog.
d. Buildings wherein animals are kept, runs, and other exercise areas shall not be located in any front, side, or rear yard
setback and not closer than one hundred (100) feet to any off-premises dwelling or other building used by the public.
e. Such facilities shall be under the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission and subject to other requirements of the
Planning Commission as deemed necessary to ensure against the occurrence of any possible nuisance to surrounding
properties.
f. It shall be required that a location sketch be included, showing any other kennels within a one-half (½) mile radius. If
such kennels exist, approval shall be conditioned upon on-site inspection by the Planning Commission.
(20) Planned commercial shopping centers.
a. There shall be a minimum lot size of one (1) acre and a lot width of one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
b. The minimum setback for any building shall be twenty-five (25) feet from any property line.
c. The building composition shall be such as to be characterized as an architectural unit.
(21) Mini-storage.
a. The minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres, located on either a primary or secondary thoroughfare designated by the
Master Plan.
b. The minimum lot width shall be two hundred (200) feet.
c. A six (6) foot screen, fence, berm, or other appropriate method of screening shall be constructed around the perimeter of
the development, as approved by the Planning Commission.
d. The minimum distance between buildings shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
e. A front yard setback of not less than fifty (50) feet shall be maintained in landscaped open space. Side yard setbacks shall
not be less than twenty-five (25) feet and the rear yard setback shall not be less than forty (40) feet.
f. All areas intended for vehicle travel shall be paved with asphalt or concrete.
g. Exterior walls of all storage units shall be of masonry construction.
h. Site development shall be compatible with the surrounding area.
IV-29
ARTICLE IV
(22) Reserved.
(23) Plant nurseries.
a. Outdoor display areas shall meet all applicable setback requirements.
b. The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or any other material shall be contained to prevent any adverse affect on neighboring
properties.
c. A building of not less than five hundred (500) square feet shall be constructed in conjunction with the plant nursery.
(24) Vehicle wash establishments.
a. A minimum lot size of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and a lot width of one hundred and fifty (150) feet shall be
required.
b. All washing activities must be carried on from within a building.
c. Vacuum islands shall be placed in the rear yard and a minimum of fifty (50) feet from adjacent property boundaries.
d. Overnight parking or storage of vehicles is prohibited.
(25) Airports, helicopters, and other vertical landing and takeoff craft landing ports on land.
a. The site shall be on a primary thoroughfare.
b. The site shall contain at least twenty (20) acres.
c. The site shall be approved by the Federal Aviation Authority and the state department of transportation.
(26) Commercial recreation.
a. The sites shall require a minimum of twenty (20) acres.
b. All activities or facilities shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from the property lines or no closer than
two hundred and fifty (250) feet between the activity and the nearest residence.
c. Activities or facilities shall not be permitted within the natural river overlay zone.
d. All off-road vehicles are prohibited, except for vehicles used for event control and administration.
e. The assembly of more than two hundred and fifty (250) people at any given time shall be subject to Chapter 24,
pertaining to outdoor assemblies. Total attendance at any time shall not be more than five (5) persons per acre gross
average density. This subsection shall permit up to ten (10) persons per acre for one (1) event per calendar year. The
annual event shall not exceed more than three (3) consecutive days and two (2) nights.
f. Outdoor recreation activities shall be subject to lighting and noise regulations as contained in Article VIII of this chapter.
g. Parking shall be provided at a rate of one (1) parking space per two (2) contestants anticipated during peak recreational
activities. Parking shall be prohibited on county or private roads or rights-of-way. The Planning Commission may allow a
waiver of hard surface paving and parking requirements set forth in Section 38-313(1) for those situations where parking
is used on a periodic basis for all or part of the parking requirements.
h. The Planning Commission shall be authorized to establish hours of operation.
i. All sites or facilities shall comply with food and water supply regulations, health and sanitation regulations, or other
regulations necessary to protect health, safety, or welfare as established by the county health department or the
appropriate state agency.
j. Activities are for the enjoyment of contestants. The special use does not provide for the sale of admission tickets, nor
assemblage of spectators and contestants in excess of the number of attendees specified in subsection (26)e. of this
section.
k. There shall be no commercial events involving the discharge of firearms, except paint ball.
l. Camping permits will be allowed at a ratio of one (1) site per two (2) acres (maximum of six (6) persons per site). The
location of any site shall be a minimum of four hundred (400) feet from any property line. Camping is limited to one (1)
event per year. The time period for camping shall be limited to not more than three (3) days and two (2) nights.
m. The site shall maintain free and clear access for emergency service vehicles during all activities. Site access shall be
reviewed during the special use permit process and shall be monitored by Township enforcement officials.
(27) Agricultural and commercial composting.
IV-30
ARTICLE IV
a. The minimum lot area shall be twenty (20) acres.
b. For commercial composting, the main facility access must be from a paved county arterial or paved county major collector
road.
c. For agricultural composting or commercial composting, there shall be provided at least a two hundred (200) foot setback
for compost windows or compost stockpiles from adjoining property lines and public rights-of-way.
d. Runoff from composting shall not be allowed to directly flow into streams, ditches, ponds, lakes, or wetlands, but shall
be directed to a retention or holding pond. Management of runoff shall follow the guidelines published by the state
department of agriculture.
e. Composting operations shall not accept or use plastic bags or other nonbiodegradable wrappings.
f. Total land area used in the composting operation shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage area as noted in Section
38-136 for the applicable zoning district, excluding the disposal of finished compost material which has been tilled into
the soil for on-site enrichment.
g. Noise from machinery associated with composting activities shall be in conformance with noise limit regulations set forth
in Section 38-357.
h. Management of odor associated with composting shall conform to the best management practices for agriculture as
outlined by the state department of agriculture and/or air pollution control rules as enforced by the MDEQ.
(28) Dry cleaning facilities.
a. Storage areas for dry cleaning chemicals shall employ secondary containment, and shall be isolated from floor drains
leading to septic systems, sanitary or storm sewers or dry wells.
b. Spent dry cleaning chemicals shall be disposed of in an environmentally sound fashion, in accordance with MDEQ
requirements.
c. Prior to the issuance of building permits, the applicant shall submit evidence that all necessary MDEQ permits have been
issued for chemical storage and disposal as well as air quality.
(29) Elder Cottage Housing Opportunities (ECHO) shall be permitted as a special use within the Village Mixed Use District, subject to
the following regulations:
a. Dwelling unit shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet.
b. The ECHO unit shall be occupied by either a senior person (over sixty-five (65) years of age), handicapped or disabled
person, or an individual(s) related to the occupants by blood, marriage, or adoption.
c. The ECHO unit shall be occupied by no more than two (2) people.
d. The ECHO unit shall be connected to sanitary sewers and central water.
e. The ECHO unit shall comply with all Building and Fire Codes and shall have separate cooking facilities.
f. The ECHO unit shall be located in the side or rear yard or shall be located above an attached garage or detached garage.
g. The ECHO unit shall be subject to time limitations and inspection requirements as determined by the Township and
specified as part of the conditions of special use approval.
Sec. 38-197. Adult regulated uses.
(a) General requirements for Regulated Uses.
(1) It is recognized that there are some uses, which because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics,
particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances thereby having a deleterious effect upon the
adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the
blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this Section.
Prior to adopting these regulations, the Township reviewed studies prepared on these uses, reviewed ordinances and regulations
IV-31
ARTICLE IV
prepared by other municipalities, and reviewed applicable federal and state case law, including the following: Pap’s AM v City
of Erie, 529 US 277 (2000); Deja Vu of Nashville v Metropolitan Government of Nashville & Davidson County, 466 G3d 391 (6th
Cir 2006); Sensations, Inc. v City of Grand Rapids, 2006 WL 2504388 (WD MI 2006); Van Buren Township v Garter Belt, 258
Mich App 594; 673 NW2d 111 (2003); Bronco’s Entertainment v Charter Township of Van Buren, 421 F3d 440 (6th Cir 2005),
Thomas v Chicago Park District, 122 S Ct 775 (2002), City of Renton v Playtime Theatres Inc, 475 US 41 (1986), Young v American
Mini Theatres, 426 US 50 (1976), Barnes v Glen Theatre Inc, 501 US 560 (1991); California v LaRue, 409 US 109 (1972); DLS
Inc v City of Chattanooga, 107 F3d 403 (6th Cir 1997); East Brooks Books Inc v City of Memphis, 48 F3d 2200 (6th Cir 1995);
Broadway Books v Roberts, 642 F Supp 4867 (ED Tenn 1986); Bright Lights Inc v City of Newport, 830 F Supp 378 (ED Ky 1993);
Richland Bookmart v Nichols, 137 F3d 435 (6th Cir 1998); Richland Bookmart v Nichols, 278 F3d 570 (6th Cir 2002); Déjà vu of
Cincinnati v Union Township Board of Trustees, 411 F3d 777 (6th Cir 2005);Déjà vu of Nashville v Metropolitan Government of
Nashville, 274 F3d 377 (6th Cir 2001); Bamon Corp v City of Dayton, 7923 F2d 470 (6th Cir 1991); Threesome Entertainment
v Strittmather, 4 F Supp 2d 710 (ND Ohio 1998); JL Spoons Inc v City of Brunswick, 49 F Supp 2d 1032 (ND Ohio 1999); Triplett
Grille Inc v City of Akron, 40 F3d 129 (6th Cir 1994); Nightclubs Inc v City of Paducah, 202 F3d 884 (6th Cir 2000); O’Connor v
City and County of Denver, 894 F2d 1210 (10th Cir 1990); Deja Vu of Nashville Inc et al v Metropolitan Government of Nashville
and Davidson County, 2001 USA App LEXIS 26007 (6th Cir Dec 6, 2001); ZJ Gifts D-2 LLC v City of Aurora, 136 F3d 683 (10th Cir
1998); Connection Distribution Co v Reno, 154 F3d 281 (6th Cir 1998); Sundance Associates v Reno, 139 F3d 804 (10th Cir1998);
American Library Association v Reno, 33 F3d 78 (DC Cir 1994); American Target Advertising Inc v Giani, 199 F3d 1241 (10th Cir
2000); ZJ Gifts D-2LLC v City of Aurora, 136 F3d 683 (10th Cir 1998); ILQ Investments Inc v City of Rochester, 25 F3d 1413 (8th Cir
1994); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales Inc v Montgomery County, 2002 US Dist LEXIS 1896 (D Md Feb 6 2002); Currence v
Cincinnati, 2002 US App LEXIS 1258 (3rd Cir Jan 24, 2002); and other cases; and on testimony to Congress in 136 Cong Rec S 8987;
135 Cong Rec S 14519; 135 Cong Rec S 5636; 134 Cong Rec E 3750; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around
sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona - 1979; Minneapolis, Minnesota-1980; Houston,
Texas - 1997; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Austin,
Texas - 1986; Seattle, Washington - 1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Cleveland, Ohio - and Dallas, Texas - 1997; St. Croix
County, Wisconsin - 1993; Bellevue, Washington, - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square 1993; Bellevue,
Washington, - 1998; Newport news, Virginia - 1996; new York Times Square study - 1994; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98; and also
on findings from the paper entitled “Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence, “ by Kelly Holsopple,
Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and from “Sexually Oriented
Businesses: An Insider’s View,” by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law,
Jan 12, 2000, and the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group On the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June
6, 1989, State of Minnesota).
(2) Based on the evidence of adult uses presented in hearings and in the aforementioned reports made available to the Township
Board, the Township Board finds that sexually oriented businesses as a category of establishments are correlated with harmful
secondary effects, and that the foregoing reports and cases are reasonably believed to be relevant to the problems that Green
Oak Charter Township is seeking to abate and prevent in the future. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of
preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area which would create such adverse effect(s). It is further the intent these
regulations that these uses only be permitted as special land uses.
(3) Uses (collectively “Regulated Uses”) subject to these controls are as follows:
a. Sexually oriented business as defined in Sec. 38-1, Definitions.
b. Body art establishments.
c. Pawnshops or collateral loan or exchange establishments.
IV-32
ARTICLE IV
(b) Locational requirements for Regulated Uses. Regulated uses shall only be permitted in the LI, Limited Industrial, zoning district
and only after special land use approval is obtained. The Planning Commission must find that there is not presently more than one
(1) such Regulated Use within one thousand (1,000) feet of the boundaries of the site of the proposed Regulated Uses. The Planning
Commission may not waive this location provision for sexually oriented businesses as defined by this Ordinance. The Planning
Commission may waive this locational requirement for tattoo establishments and body art establishments if the following findings
are made:
(1) That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties and that the spirit and intent
of the Section will be observed.
(2) That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a “skid-row” area in which the homeless, unemployed,
transients or others may loiter or congregate for no gainful purpose.
(3) That the establishment of any additional Regulated Use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood
conservation nor will it interfere with any plans for future development of the area according to the Township’s Master Plan.
(4) That all applicable regulations of this Ordinance will be observed.
(c) Conditions of approval. The Planning Commission may recommend that the Township Board impose such conditions or limitations
upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of the Regulated Uses, as shall, in its judgment, considering
the standards set forth in Sec. 38-44, Special Approval Use Permits, be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, welfare
and interest, except that any conditions imposed on a sexually oriented business shall be limited to those conditions necessary to
assure compliance with the standards and requirements of Section 38-197 H, Requirements For Sexually Oriented Businesses. Any
evidence and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection with the establishment, maintenance
and operation of a sexually oriented business shall be fulfilled.
(d) Time limits for review. An application for special land use approval of a Regulated Use shall proceed before the Planning Commission
for recommendation, and then the Township Board for final decision. Applications for special use approval of a Regulated Use, with
the exception of a sexually oriented business, shall be processed in the normal course. The following time limits shall apply to the
review of an application by the Planning Commission and Township Board for special approval of a sexually oriented business:
(1) The Planning Commission will publish notice and hold a public hearing as required for special land use approval review within
sixty (60) days of receiving a complete and technically compliant special land use approval and site plan application, as required
by Sec. 38-43, 38-44 and 38-71, for a sexually oriented business.
(2) The Planning Commission will make its recommendation regarding the special approval application for a sexually oriented
business at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission following the public hearing held to review
the application, unless additional information is required from the applicant, or to a later date if agreed to by the applicant. If
additional information is required, the Planning Commission will make its recommendation at the next regularly scheduled
meeting after receipt of the requested additional information, provided the additional information is received no later than
fifteen (15) days prior to the meeting, unless a later date is agreed to by the applicant.
(3) The recommendation of the Planning Commission will be forwarded to the Township Board within sixty (60) days of the meeting
at which Planning Commission issues its recommendation, unless a later date is agreed to by the applicant. The Township Board
IV-33
ARTICLE IV
will render its decision to grant or deny special approval of the sexually oriented business or to grant approval with conditions,
as stipulated by the Zoning Ordinance at this meeting, unless a later date is agreed to by the applicant.
(4) Failure of the Township to act within the above specified time limits shall not be deemed to constitute the grant of special
approval to the sexually oriented business.
(e) Effect of denial. No application for a Regulated Use which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one
(1) year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions.
(f) Revocations. In any case where a building permit for a Regulated Use is required and has not been obtained within six (6) months
after the granting of the special approval by the Township Board, the grant of special approval shall become null and void.
(g) Reconstruction of damaged Regulated Uses. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the reconstruction, repairing or rebuilding
and continued use of any building or structure, the use of which makes it subject to the controls of this Section, which is damaged
by fire, collapse, explosion or act of God, provided that the expense of such reconstruction does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
reconstruction cost of the building or structure at the time such damage occurred, provided that where the reconstruction repair or
rebuilding exceeds the above-stated expense, the re-establishment of the use shall be subject to all provisions of this Section.
(h) Requirements for sexually oriented businesses.
(1) Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote and protect the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the Green Oak Charter Township and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent a concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Township. These regulations are
intended to control the negative secondary impacts such businesses have been documented to have on the surrounding area
and the community. The provisions of this Section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on
the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect
of this Section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Likewise, it is not the
intent of this Ordinance to legitimize activities which are prohibited by Township ordinance or state or federal law.
(2) Definitions. Sexually oriented businesses are defined in Sec. 38-1, Definitions.
(3) Location of sexually oriented business.
a. A sexually oriented business shall not be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to the property line of any of the
following:
i. a building used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;
ii. a public or private elementary or secondary school, vocational school, special education school, junior college or
university;
iii. a residential zoning district;
iv. a parcel in residential use;
IV-34
ARTICLE IV
v. a public or private park;
vi. an existing sexually oriented business; and
i. a child day care facility, nursery or preschool.
b. A sexually oriented business site shall not be located closer than three hundred (300) feet to the right-of-way of a major
thoroughfare within the Green Oak Charter Township.
c. Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion
of the property site boundary of a sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the premises of any use,
district or right-of-way listed in Sub-section (1) above or public right-of-way listed in Sub-section (2) above. The distance
between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects from the site or property boundary in which each business is located. Access easements or portions
of the parcel that are exclusively used to provide access to the site of the sexually oriented business shall be excluded from
the parcel boundary in determining whether the site complies with the required separation. The intent of this exclusion is
to allow sexually oriented businesses to comply with the separation requirement from major thoroughfares by means of
an access easement or access strip of land from the site to the thoroughfare.
d. A person is in violation of this Ordinance if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement,
or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually
oriented business.
e. A person is in violation of this Ordinance if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more
than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof or the substantial enlargement of
any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
f. All off-street parking areas and entry door areas of a sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk until the
closing time. This requirement is to ensure the personal safety of patrons and employees, and to reduce the incidence of
vandalism and other criminal conduct.
g. Any business now classified as a sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date of adoption of the Ordinance
that is in violation of this Section shall be deemed a non-conforming use.
(4) Nude entertainment prohibited in alcoholic commercial establishment.
Refer to the Green Oak Charter Township Code of Ordinances for additional regulations.
(5) Exterior display and signs.
a. A sexually oriented business is in violation of this Section if:
i. the merchandise or activities of the establishment are visible from any point outside the establishment; or
ii. the exterior portions of the establishment or signs have any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawing
IV-35
ARTICLE IV
or pictorial representatives of any specified anatomical area or sexually explicit activity as defined in this
Ordinance.
(6) Enforcement. A violation of the provisions of this Section shall result, in addition to the remedies provided herein, possible
criminal violations consisting of a fine of five hundred ($500.00) dollars or a jail term of ninety (90) days, or both.
Sec. 38-198. Traffic impact studies.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Average day means a Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday for most uses. The average day may be a Saturday for uses that have higher peak
hour traffic volumes on a Saturday rather than midweek.
Development means a site plan, subdivision tentative preliminary plat, condominium project, mobile home park, redevelopment, reuse,
or expansion of a use or building.
Gap (critical gap) means the median time headway, in seconds, between vehicles in a major traffic system which will permit side street
vehicles at a stop or yield controlled approach to cross through, or merge with, the major traffic stream under prevailing traffic and
roadway conditions.
Level of service means a qualitative measure describing operational conditions within a traffic stream, and is generally described in
terms of such factors as speed and travel time, delay, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions, comfort and convenience, and safety.
Master Plan means the Plan adopted by the Township Planning Commission, which illustrates the intended future land use pattern and
may also describe roadway functional classifications and intended improvements to the transportation system (i.e., the comprehensive
plan, future land use plan, thoroughfare plan, etc.).
Peak hour means a one (1) hour period representing the highest hourly volume of traffic flow on the adjacent street system during
the morning (a.m. peak hour), during the afternoon or evening (p.m. peak hour), or representing the hour of highest volume of traffic
entering or exiting a site (peak hour of generator).
Regional traffic impact study means a traffic impact study for uses that are projected to generate over five hundred (500) peak hour
directional trips, or will generate significant traffic volumes impacting the transportation network over a wide geographic area.
Rezoning traffic impact study means a traffic impact study that may be required for rezonings or Master Plan amendment requests
when certain criteria are met, such as when a proposed amendment would generate higher traffic volumes.
Study area means the geographic area containing the critical arterial intersections and connecting roadway segments which are
expected to be affected by the site traffic generated by a development.
Traffic impact assessment means a traffic impact study for relatively low traffic generating uses, which focuses on the impacts at
proposed site access points.
IV-36
ARTICLE IV
Traffic impact statement means a traffic impact study which evaluates the impacts on roadways adjacent to the study site and specified
nearby intersections, and is the most common type of impact study.
Traffic impact study means the analysis of the potential traffic impacts generated by a proposed project. Such type of study and level
of analysis will vary, dependent upon the type and size of the project (i.e., traffic impact assessment, rezoning traffic impact study, traffic
impact statement and regional traffic impact study).
Trip (i.e., directional trip) means a single or one (1) direction vehicle movement with either the origin or the destination (exiting or
entering) inside a study site.
(b) Intent. The Township recognizes the direct correlation between land use decisions and traffic operations. The intent of this section
is to permit accurate evaluation of expected impacts of proposed projects to assist in decision-making. This section is further
intended to help achieve the following objectives:
(1) Provide a standard set of analytic tools and format for preparing traffic impact studies.
(2) Allow the community to assess the effects that a proposed project may have on the community by outlining information
needed and evaluation procedures to be used.
(3) Help ensure safe and reasonable traffic operating conditions on streets and intersections after development of the proposed
use.
(4) Reduce the negative traffic impacts created by individual developments, and which may negatively impact such
developments, by helping to ensure the transportation system can safely and efficiently accommodate the expected traffic.
(5) For rezonings, evaluate if the rezoning is timely and, if inconsistent with the Master Plan, if it would be a logical alternative to
the Master Plan.
(6) Realize a comprehensive approach to the overall impacts of various developments along a corridor or within part of a
community, rather than a piecemeal approach.
(7) Provide direction to community decision-makers, road agencies and developers of expected impacts of a project.
(8) Alert the community, transportation agencies and developers of improvements or modifications needed to the roadway,
access, or site design.
(9) Protect the substantial public investment in the existing street system.
(c) Applicability. A traffic impact study shall be required and submitted by a petitioner for a rezoning, site plan, or subdivision plan
under any of the following situations. The type of study required shall be dependent upon the type and scale of the proposed use
and existing traffic conditions.
(1) Rezoning traffic impact study.
a. A rezoning traffic impact study shall be required for the following rezonings and Master Plan amendment requests:
1. A proposed rezoning consistent with the community’s long-range land use plan, but when the timing of the change
may not be appropriate due to traffic issues. Such threshold applies when a rezoning would permit uses that could
generate one hundred (100) or more directional trips during the peak hour, or at least one thousand (1,000) more
trips per day, than the majority of the uses that could be developed under current zoning.
2. A proposed rezoning which is inconsistent with the community’s Master Plan when permitted uses could generate
at least one hundred (100) directional trips during the peak hour of the traffic generator or the peak hour on the
adjacent streets or over seven hundred and fifty (750) trips in an average day.
3. A site along any corridor identified as a critical/congested/safety management corridor in the Master Plan or longrange
transportation plan.
4. Proposed amendments to the Master Plan which would recommend uses which would generate higher traffic
volumes.
IV-37
ARTICLE IV
b. The requirements of the rezoning traffic impact study may be waived or modified by the Planning Commission in
accordance with subsection (e) of this section.
(2) Regional traffic impact study.
a. A regional traffic impact study or analysis shall be required for projects that generate over five hundred (500) peak hour
directional trips or significant traffic volumes impacting a wide geographic area.
b. A regional traffic impact study may be required for projects that are located along a “critical,” “safety management,” or
“congested corridor,” as defined by the metropolitan planning organization, or as identified in the Master Plan or longrange
transportation plan.
(3) Development proposals for site plans, plats, mobile home parks, and condominium projects.
a. A traffic impact statement shall be required for any proposed development which would be expected to generate over
one hundred (100) directional trips during the peak hour of the traffic generator or the peak hour on the adjacent streets,
or seven hundred and fifty (750) trips in an average day.
b. A traffic impact assessment shall be required for projects which could generate fifty (50) to ninety-nine (99) directional
trips during a peak hour.
c. A traffic impact statement shall be required for any proposed development along a corridor identified in the Master Plan
or long-range transportation plan as a critical, congested, or safety management corridor (segments which currently
experience, or are projected to experience, significant congestion or relatively high crash rates) which would be expected
to generate over fifty (50) directional trips during the peak hour of the traffic generator on the adjacent streets, or over
five hundred (500) trips in an average day.
d. A traffic impact statement or assessment, based on the thresholds set forth in subsections (c)(3)a. and b. of this section,
shall be required for new phases or changes to a development where a traffic study is more than two (2) years old and
roadway conditions have changed significantly (volumes increasing more than two percent (2%) annually).
e. A traffic impact assessment shall be required for a change or expansion at an existing site where the increased land use
intensity is expected to increase traffic by at least fifty (50) directional trips in a peak hour or result in at least seven
hundred and fifty (750) vehicle trips per day for the entire project. A traffic impact statement shall be required if the
traffic is expected to increase by over one hundred (100) directional trips in the peak hour.
f. A development proposal shall be required for special (conditional) land uses, planned unit developments, and other uses
which are specifically required to provide a traffic impact study in this chapter. The type of study shall be based on the
thresholds set forth in subsections (c)(3)a. and b. of this section.
g. A development proposal shall be required for a change in a planned unit development (PUD) to a more intense use (Note:
on a case-by-case basis or using thresholds similar to set forth in subsections (c)(3)a. and b. of this section).
h. A development proposal shall be submitted where required by the road agency to evaluate access issues.
(d) Contents. The traffic impact study shall contain the following:
(1) Description of the site, surroundings, and study area. Illustrations and a narrative should describe the characteristics
of the site and adjacent roadway system (functional classification, lanes, speed limits, etc.). Such description should include
surrounding land uses, expected development in the vicinity which could influence future traffic conditions, special site
features, and a description of any committed roadway improvements. The study should define and justify the study area
selected for analysis.
(2) Description of the requested zoning or use.
a. A traffic study for a rezoning or Master Plan amendment request shall contain a description of the potential uses which
would be allowed, compared to those allowed under current zoning. If the use is not consistent with the community’s
Master Plan, an explanation of the difference should be provided.
b. A traffic study for a site plan review, mobile home park, condominium project, or subdivision tentative preliminary plat,
or specified special land uses shall contain a description of such factors as the number and types of dwellings units, the
IV-38
ARTICLE IV
gross and usable floor area, the number of employees, and shift change factors. Intended phasing or future expansion
should also be noted.
(3) Description of existing traffic conditions.
a. Traffic counts.
1. Traffic counts shall include existing conditions, including existing peak hour traffic volumes and daily volumes, if
applicable, on streets adjacent to the site. Existing counts and levels of service for intersections in the vicinity which
are expected to be impacted, as identified by the community at a preapplication conference or discussion, should be
provided for projects requiring a traffic impact statement or regional traffic analysis. Traffic count data shall not be
over two (2) years old, except the community or road agency may permit twenty-four (24) hour counts up to three
(3) years old to be increased by a factor supported by documentation or a finding that traffic has increased at a rate
less than two percent (2%) annually in the past three (3) to five (5) years.
2. Traffic counts shall be taken on Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday of nonholiday weeks. Additional counts (i.e.,
on a Saturday for a proposed commercial development) may also be required in some cases. The individual or
firm performing the impact study shall obtain the traffic counts during average or higher than average volume
conditions (i.e., regarding weather or seasonal variations and in consideration of any construction or special events)
for the area under study.
b. Roadway characteristics. Roadway characteristics shall be described and illustrated, as appropriate. Features to be
addressed include lane configurations, geometrics, signal timing, traffic control devices, posted speed limits, average
running speeds, and any sight distance limitations. Existing levels of service shall be calculated for intersections included
within the study area.
c. Existing driveways and potential turning movement conflicts. Existing driveways and potential turning movement
conflicts in the vicinity of the site shall be illustrated and described.
d. Existing rights-of-way. The existing right-of-way shall be identified, along with any planned or desired expansion of
the right-of-way requested by the applicable road agency.
e. Traffic crash data and analysis. Traffic crash data and an analysis covering the most recent three (3) years for the study
area or proximity to site access points may be required by the community, particularly for sites along roadways identified
as critical or congested corridors. (Note: crash analyses are not generally appropriate for a rezoning traffic study or a
traffic impact assessment.)
(4) Background traffic growth. For any project requiring a traffic impact statement with a completion date beyond one (1) year
at the time of the traffic study, the analysis shall also include a scenario analyzing forecast traffic at the date of completion
along the adjacent street network using a forecast based on a network traffic assignment model, if available, historic annual
percentage increases and/or future development in the area which has been approved. For a project requiring a regional traffic
analysis, available long-range traffic projections shall be used.
(5) Trip generation.
a. Forecasted trip generation of the proposed use for the a.m., if applicable, and p.m. peak hour and average day shall
be required. The forecasts shall be based on the data and procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the trip
generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). The applicant may use other commonly accepted
sources of data or supplement the standard data with data from at least three (3) similar projects in the state.
b. For rezoning requests where a traffic study is required, the study should contrast the traffic impacts of typical uses
permitted in the requested zoning district with uses permitted in the current zoning district. The determination of typical
uses shall be made by the Planning Commission. For traffic impact assessments, statements or regional traffic analyses,
the rates for the specific uses proposed shall be used.
c. Any trip reduction for pass-by trips, transits, ride sharing, other modes, internal capture rates, etc., shall be based both on
ITE findings and documented survey results acceptable to the agency reviewers. The community may elect to reduce the
trip reduction rates used.
IV-39
ARTICLE IV
d. For projects intended to be developed in phases, the trip generation by phase shall be described.
(6) Trip distribution. The projected traffic generated shall be distributed (inbound v. outbound, left turn v. right turn) onto the
existing street network to project turning movements at site access points and nearby intersections, where required. Projected
turning movements shall be illustrated in the report. A description of the application of standard engineering procedures
for determining the distribution should also be attached (i.e., trip distribution model, market studies, counts at existing
driveways, etc.). For projects requiring a regional traffic analysis, use of a network traffic assignment model projection, if
available, may be required to help evaluate impacts.
(7) Impact analysis.
a. A level of service or “capacity” analysis at the proposed access points shall be required using the procedures outlined in
the most recent edition of the highway capacity manual published by the transportation research board. For projects
requiring a traffic impact statement or regional traffic analysis, before and after capacity analyses shall also be performed
for all street intersections where the expected traffic generated at the site will comprise at least five percent (5%) of the
existing intersection capacity, and/or for roadway sections and intersections experiencing congestion or a relatively high
crash rate, as determined by the community or applicable road agency.
b. In lieu of the analysis required by subsection (d)(7)a. of this section, a level of service analysis for intersections identified
at the preapplication conference may be submitted.
c. Gap studies for unsignalized intersections, where applicable, shall be required.
d. The community may require a regional traffic analysis which evaluates the impact on the street network over a wide area
and/or for up to twenty (20) years for a project of regional significance, if a network model is available.
(8) Access design and access management standards. The report shall include a map and description of the location and
design of proposed access (i.e., driveways or new street intersections), including any sight distance limitations, dimensions
from adjacent driveways and intersections within two hundred and fifty (250) feet on either side of the main roadway, data to
demonstrate that the number of driveways proposed is the fewest necessary and support that the access points will provide
safe and efficient traffic operation and be in accordance with the standards of the Township and the applicable road agency,
but shall not be required for a rezoning traffic study.
(9) Miscellaneous study items. The traffic impact study shall also include the following:
a. The need for, or provision of, any additional right-of-way where planned or desired by the applicable road agency.
b. Changes which should be considered to the plat or site plan layout.
c. A description of any needed nonmotorized facilities.
d. An evaluation of the adequacy of the queuing/stacking area, if the use involves a drive-through facility.
e. Provision of a separate analysis, if a median crossover is desired.
f. The relationship of anticipated traffic to traffic signal warrants in the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
if a traffic signal is being requested. An analysis should also be provided on the impacts to traffic progression along the
roadway through coordinated timing, etc.
g. Descriptions of site circulation and available sight distances at site driveways.
(10) Mitigation/alternatives. The study shall outline mitigation measures and demonstrate any changes to the level of service
achieved by the measures. Any alternative or suggested phasing of improvements should be described. The mitigation
measures may include items such as roadway widening, need for bypass lanes or deceleration tapers/lanes, changes to
signalization, use of access management techniques or a reduction in the proposed intensity of use. Proposed mitigation
measures should be discussed with the applicable road agency. The responsibility and timing of roadway improvements shall
be described.
(11) Qualifications.
a. Preparer.
1. The preparation of a thorough traffic impact study requires an extensive background and experience in traffic related
analyses; therefore, the experience of the preparer best defines his or her ability to provide a technically sound
IV-40
ARTICLE IV
analysis. The person responsible for the preparation of the study shall meet the following requirements:
i. He or she shall have three (3) or more years of recent experience in the preparation of traffic impact studies.
ii. The development of impact studies and similar intersection and/or corridor analyses shall comprise a major
component of the preparer’s recent professional experience, including ongoing experience and familiarity with
the highway capacity manual techniques, as well as the computer software (highway capacity software and
others) that provide level of service results and other analysis findings needed to fully assess potential impacts.
iii. He or she shall have specific education, training and/or professional coursework in traffic impact analysis from
an accredited college or university or other professional transportation training organization (i.e., National
Highway Institute, Northwestern University Traffic Institute, etc.).
iv. He or she shall be an associate, or higher, member of one (1) or more professional transportation related
organizations, particularly the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or the transportation research board
(TRB), to help ensure that the preparer is maintaining his or her knowledge as new research is published and
analysis techniques are changed or refined.
2. In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection (d)(11)a.1. of this section, the preparer should have one of
the following professional qualifications:
i. A registered engineer (PE).
ii. A community planner with AICP or PCP certification.
iii. A trained professional transportation planner.
3. Any study involving roadway or traffic signal design work shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a
registered engineer (PE) with specific training in traffic engineering.
4. The study should include a resume of the preparer responsible for the report. The study may also include relevant
experience of the preparer’s firm. The study should also be signed by the preparer, with full recognition of potential
liability for the results and recommendations outlined in the report.
b. Reviewers. Review of the study is important to ensure that the analysis and recommendations are based on accepted
practices. The ITE recommends that the traffic impact study be reviewed by trained traffic engineers or transportation
planners. The qualifications of the reviewers should parallel the qualifications of the preparers as outlined in subsection
(d)(11)a. of this section.
1. The applicant shall discuss or meet with Township representatives to determine if a study is needed, what type of
study is needed, and specific items to be addressed.
2. The applicant shall submit the traffic impact study to the community with the request for rezoning or development
proposal. A revised study may be required as the scope and details of the request change.
3. The community shall distribute the traffic impact study to the appropriate road agencies, and adjacent community,
if appropriate. A copy may also be submitted to the metropolitan planning organization, transit agency, etc., as
appropriate for projects of regional significance or along critical corridors.
4. Road and other review agencies shall provide the community with comments prior to any action on the project.
(e) Waiver of requirements. The requirement for a traffic impact study or the study elements listed in subsection (d) of this section
may be waived or modified by the Planning Commission. Reasons for the waiver or modification shall be documented and may
include one (1) or more of the following factors:
(1) Roadway improvements are scheduled which are expected to mitigate any impacts associated with the proposed project.
(2) The existing level of service along the roadway is not expected to drop below C due to the proposed project.
(3) The existing level of service is not expected to be significantly impacted by the proposed project due to specific conditions at
the location.
(4) A similar traffic study was previously prepared for the site or an adjoining parcel and is still considered applicable.
(5) Other reasons and factors identified by the Planning Commission.
IV - 41
ARTICLE IV
Sec. 38-199. Wireless communication facilities.
(a) Purpose and intent. It is the general purpose and intent of the Township to carry out the will of the United States Congress by
authorizing communication facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems. However, it is the further purpose and
intent of the Township to provide for such authorization in a manner which will protect the public health, safety and welfare
and retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community at large.
In fashioning and administering the provisions of this section, attempt has been made to balance these potentially competing
interests.
Recognizing the number of providers authorized to establish and operate wireless communication services and coverage, and
changes in State and Federal legislation, it is the further purpose and intent of this section to:
(1) Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for wireless communication facilities and ensure that wireless
communication facilities are situated in appropriate locations and relationships to other land uses, structures and buildings.
(2) Establish predetermined districts in the location considered best for the establishment of wireless communication facilities,
subject to applicable standards and conditions.
(3) Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system may require the establishment of facilities in locations not
within the predetermined districts. In such cases, it has been determined that it is likely that there will be greater adverse
impact upon neighborhoods and areas within the community. Consequently, more stringent standards and conditions should
apply to the review, approval, and use of such facilities.
(4) Limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land use activities and avoid adverse impact upon existing
population, transportation systems, and other public services and facility needs.
(5) Provide for adequate information about plans for wireless communication facilities in order to permit the community to
effectively plan for the location of such facilities.
(6) Minimize the adverse• impacts of technological obsolescence of such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused
and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner.
(7) Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication facilities on neighborhoods, community land marks, hist01ic
sites and buildings, natural beauty areas and public rights-of-way. This contemplates the establishment of as few structures as
reasonably feasible, the use of structures which are designed for compatibility, and the use of existing structures.
(8) Implement and provide for compliance with State and Federal legislation through new and amended application, review, and
decision standards, requirements and procedures for wireless communication facilities requests.
(b) Authorization.
(1) As a Permitted Use Subject to Site Plan Approval.
In all Zoning Districts, a wireless communication facility described in this subsection (b)(l) shall be a permitted use subject
to the standards and conditions set forth in subsection (c), the application requirements in subsection (d), the collocation
requirements in subsection (e), the procedures in subsection (g), and any prior special land use or site plan approval
conditions.
a. Wireless communications equipment attached to an existing structure not previously approved and used as a wireless
communications support structure and located within a nonresidential zoning district, where there will be no substantial
change in physical dimensions of the existing structure.
IV - 42
ARTICLE IV
b. A proposed collocation upon a wireless communication support structure which has been approved by the Township for
such collocation but which is not permitted by administrative review under subsection (b)(3).
c. Wireless communication equipment on an existing utility pole structure located within a right-of-way and not previously
approved and used as a wireless communications support structure, where there will be no substantial change in physical
dimensions of the existing pole. Wireless communication facilities in a public right-of-way are subject to Sec. 38-185(c).
d. Attached wireless communication facilities that are not permitted by administrative review under subsection (b)(3).
(2) As a Special Land Use.
Unless pe1mitted under subsections (b)(l) or (b)(3), wireless communication facilities require approval as a special land use,
which shall be subject to the standards and conditions in subsection (c), the application requirements in subsection (d), the
collocation requirements in subsection (e), the procedures in subsection (g), and a demonstration of the need for the proposed
facility based on one or more of the following factors:
i. Proximity to an interstate or major thoroughfare.
ii. Areas of population concentration.
iii. Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business centers.
iv. Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions.
v. Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities with which the proposed facility is to
operate.
vi. Other specifically identified reason creating facility need.
a. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a wireless communication facility necessary to providing services cannot be
established as pem1itted under subsection (b)(1), wireless communication facilities may be pe1mitted as a special land
use in the LI and GI zoning districts.
b. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a wireless communication facility necessary to providing services cannot be
established as permitted under subsection (b)(1) or in a zoning district identified in subsection (b)(2)a, such wireless
communication facility may be considered and permitted elsewhere in the Township as a special land use, subject to the
following:
1. In the application, the applicant shall demonstrate that no existing structure identified in subsection (b)(1) or
location in a zoning district identified in subsection (b)(2)a, above can reasonably meet the specifically disclosed
service, coverage and/or capacity needs of the applicant. Such demonstration requires identification of all structures
and prope1ties considered and a factual explanation of why they are not feasible in terms of availability, suitability,
or otherwise.
2. Wireless communication facilities shall be of a “stealth” design such as, without limitation, a steeple, bell tower, tree,
or other form which is located and compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood and
general area, as approved by the Township taking into account any alternative designs submitted by the Applicant or
identified during the review and decision process.
3. Locations outside the zoning districts identified in subsection (b)(2)a, shall be limited to the following sites:
i. Municipally-owned sites.
ii. Other governmentally owned sites.
iii. Religious or other institutional sites.
iv. Public or private school sites.
IV - 43
ARTICLE IV
v. Other sites if: (i) not located in an Rl, R2, R2A, or R3 zoning district, and (ii) no sites identified in i - iv, above are
available and suitable, as demonstrated in the application and determined by the Planning Commission.
4. The applicant’s demonstration of good faith efforts to identify and evaluate alternate sites, locations, designs,
placements, or features for the proposed facility that would or could be more consistent with the ordinance purposes
stated in subsection (a).
5. For each alternate site, location, design, placement, or feature for the proposed facility identified by the applicant or
otherwise, the applicant’s demonstration that the proposed facility is more consistent with the ordinance purposes
stated in subsection (a), and/or that such alternate is not feasible.
(3) Wireless Communication Equipment as a Permitted Use Subject to Administrative Review.
A proposal for attached wireless communication facilities that satisfies the following criteria does not require special land
use or site plan approval. Confirmation that these criteria are satisfied shall be determined by an administrative review and
written certification by the Zoning Administrator to the construction code building official prior to issuance of any construction
code permits. Such proposals shall also be reviewed for compliance with the standards and conditions in subsection (c), with
the certification to identify any items of noncompliance.
a. The existing wireless communications suppo1t structure and/or wireless communications equipment compound are in
compliance with this ordinance, and if not, are in compliance with a prior approval under this ordinance.
b. The proposal complies with the terms and conditions of any prior final approval under this ordinance of the wireless
communications support structure and/or wireless communications compound.
c. The proposal will not increase the height of the wireless communications support structure by more than 20 feet or 10%
of its original height (as first erected without any later additions), whichever is greater.
d. The proposal will not increase the width of the wireless communications support structure by more than necessary to the
stated and documented purpose of the increase.
e. The proposal will not increase the area of the existing wireless communications equipment compound to more than
2,500 square feet.
(c) Review Standards and Conditions.
All applications for wireless communication facilities shall be reviewed in accordance with the following standards and conditions,
and, if approved, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards and conditions.
(1) Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to neighborhoods or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare.
(2) Facilities shall be located and designed to be compatible with the existing character of the proposed site and harmonious with
surrounding areas.
(3) Facilities shall comply with applicable federal and state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions.
(4) Applicants shall demonstrate an engineering justification for the proposed height of the support structure, and an evaluation
of alternative designs and locations which might result in lower heights. Support structures shall not exceed the minimum
height necessary for collocation by at least two (2) providers, or by a larger number of providers identified and disclosed in
the application as contracted or otherwise committed to use of the structure. Except as needed for essential services, and
regardless of the number of collocators, wireless communication support structures shall not exceed a height of 140 feet in
the Rl, R2, R2A and R3 districts, 160 feet in the RM and RMH districts, and 180 feet in all other districts. The accessory building
IV - 44
ARTICLE IV
contemplated to enclose such things as switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures
within the respective district.
(5) The minimum setback of the supp6rt structure and equipment compound from an adjacent boundary of any prope1ty shall be
equal to 125% of the height of the support structure.
(6) There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure and equipment compound, for police, fire and emergency vehicles,
and for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided through or over an easement.
(7) The division of property for the purpose of locating a wireless communication facility is prohibited unless all zoning
requirements and conditions are met.
(8) The equipment enclosure may be located within the principal building, an accessory building, or in an equipment compound
upon a demonstration by the applicant, and approval by the Township, that placement of the equipment inside a building
is not practical due to site or equipment conditions or constraints. Equipment compounds shall include landscaping and
screening approved by the Township along the perimeter of the compound, exclusive of a singular entry point, that at time
of initial installation shall have a minimum height equal to the height of the tallest building or piece of equipment located
within the equipment compound, but in no case less than eight (8) feet in height, exclusive of the support structure. If
proposed as an accessory building or equipment compound, it shall conform to all district requirements for principal buildings,
including yard setbacks. Where a wireless communication facility is proposed on the roof of a building, any equipment
enclosure proposed as a roof appliance or penthouse on the building, shall be designed, constructed and maintained to be
architecturally compatible with the principal building. Wireless communication facilities mounted upon the side of a building
shall be attached flush against the building surface, and shall not be allowed to protrude more than the depth of the antenna.
Such facilities shall blend into the design; contour and color scheme of the building.
(9) The Township shall review and approve the architecture and color of the supp01t structure and all accessory buildings and
structures so as to minimize distraction, reduce visibility, maximize aesthetic appearance, and ensure compatibility with
surroundings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the wireless communication facility in a neat and
orderly condition. Lighting is only allowed if required by, and in compliance with the standards of, the Federal Aviation
Administration, Federal Communications Commission, Michigan Aeronautics Commission, other governmental agencies, or
the Township as a special land use approval condition. Any such requirements and standards shall be documented by the
Applicant.
(10) The support structure and system shall be designed to support, or capable of supporting the proposed wireless
communication equipment, which shall be demonstrated by a structural analysis and certification from a registered
professional engineer that identifies any modifications to an existing structure necessary to such capability.
(11) Support structures shall be constructed, and maintained in accordance with all applicable building codes. Any approval or
certification under this ordinance shall be subject to and conditioned on the construction code building official’s authority to
require and be provided with a soils report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan, based on actual
soil borings and certifying the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use, and a written engineering certification from
the manufacturer or designer of the support system that the support system can safely accommodate attached antennas
under expected weather conditions.
(12) A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall be presented and approved as part of the site plan for
the proposed facility. Such plan shall be designed to ensure the long term, continuous maintenance to a reasonably prudent
standard. Such plans shall include the names, pager number and email addresses, if any, business and home telephone
numbers, mobile telephone numbers, if any, and identity of no fewer than two persons who can be contacted at any hour of
the day or night that have full authority to act on behalf of the applicant in the event of a malfunction or emergency. Such list
of persons shall be kept current by immediate written notice to the Township of any changes.
IV - 45
ARTICLE IV
(d) Application Requirements.
All of the following information and documents shall be required for a special land use, site plan, or administrative review application to be
considered complete:
(1) A site plan prepared in accordance with Article II, Division II, shall be submitted, showing the location, size, screening, lighting and
design of all buildings and structures.
(2) The site plan shall also include a detailed landscape plan prepared in accordance with Section 38-177. The purpose of landscaping is
to provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory building(s) or enclosure. In all cases, fencing of a
minimum height equal to the tallest building or piece of equipment located within the equipment compound, but in no case less than
eight (8) feet in height exclusive of the support structure, shall be required for protection of the support structure and security from
children and other persons who may othe1wise access the facilities.
(3) The application shall include a description of security to be posted at the- time of receiving a building pe1mit to ensure removal of the
facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in Subsection (f). In this regard, the security shall be posted and
maintained in the form of: (1) cash; (2) irrevocable letter of credit; or, (3) other security arrangement accepted by the Township Board.
(4) A map or plan showing the locations and heights of existing wireless communications support structures in the Township and
communities adjoining the Township, and which identifies structures the Applicant is using or has the right to use and the heights at
which its antennas are or may be installed.
(5) The name, address identity, home and business telephone numbers, pager number and email addresses, if any, and mobile phone
number, if any, of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes . This information shall be kept current
by immediate written notice of the Township of any changes.
(6) An application fee in an amount established by Resolution of the Township Board.
(7) Identification of the dates, nature and conditions of any prior zoning approvals or permits for the property.
(8) If the application is for a new wireless communication support structure or to place or install additional wireless communications
equipment on an existing suppo1t structure, a structural analysis and certification to the Township by a registered professional
engineer that the structure is designed to support, or capable of supporting the proposed wireless communications equipment. Any
modifications necessary to a structure being capable of supporting the proposed equipment shall be specifically identified in the
analysis and certification.
(9) If modifications to a wireless communications support structure are identified in a structural analysis under subsection (8) above,
a written determination by the Township construction code building official that, subject to review of an actual building permit
application and plans, the identified modifications would be allowed and that with the modifications, the structure would meet
construction code requirements.
(10) If the application is for a new wireless communications support structure or to increase the height of an existing structure, a written
analysis and justification by a registered engineer that the proposed height is the minimum necessary for the provision of personal
wireless services and one colocation.
(11) If the application is for a new wireless communications support structure, identification of all other structures and properties
considered for the proposed use and a factual explanation of why they are not feasible in terms of availability, suitability, or otherwise.
(12) If the application is for a new wireless communications support structure, identification of possible alternative locations, designs, or
features, whether those alternatives were considered, and if so, a factual explanation of why those alternatives are not proposed.
(13) If the application is for a new wireless communications support structure outside the L1 and Gl zoning districts, identification and
submission in written form of the evidence and arguments the Applicant will rely on in claiming that those restrictions prohibit or
have the effect of prohibiting it from providing personal wireless services and that its proposal is more consistent with the ordinance
purposes stated in subsection (a), than alternate sites, locations, designs, placements and features.
(14) Disclosure and copies of all other required governmental permits or approvals and the status and copies of pending applications for
those permits or approvals.
IV - 46
ARTICLE IV
(15) If the application is for a special land use approval, the name, expertise, and relationship to applicant of each licensed or
registered professional that has or willprovide evidence to support the application, with a summary of that evidence that
includes any opinions expressed and the bases for such opinions.
(16) For each professional opinion disclosed by the applicant as supporting the application, a statement of whether the applicant
agrees that it should be subject to separate review by or .for the Township, and if so, the type, scope, time, and cost of such a
separate review that applicant believes would be reasonable.
(17) The Applicant ‘s email address, fax number or address to which the Township should direct notices regarding the Application.
(e) Collocation.
(1) Statement of Policy.
It is the policy of the Township to minimize the overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication
facilities and Wireless Communication Support Structures within the community, and encourage the use of existing structures for
Attached Wireless Communication Facility purposes, consistent with the statement of purpose and intent, set fo1ih in Subsection
(a), Purpose and Intent, above. Each licensed provider of a wireless communication facility must, by law, be permitted to locate
sufficient facilities in order to achieve the objectives promulgated by the United States Congress. However, particularly in light
of the dramatic increase in the number of wireless communication facilities reasonably anticipated to occur as a result of the
change of federal law and policy in and relating to the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the Township
that all users should collocate on Attached Wireless Communication Facilities and Wireless Communication Support Structures
in the interest of achieving the purposes and intent of this section, as stated above, and as stated in Subsection (a), Purpose and
Intent. If a provider fails or refuses to permit collocation on a facility owned or otherwise controlled by it, where collocation is
feasible, the result will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be compelled, in direct violation of and in direct
contradiction to the basic policy, intent and purpose of the Township. The provisions of this subsection are designed to carry out
and encourage conformity with the policy of the Township.
(2) Feasibility of collocation.
Collocation shall be deemed to be “feasible” for purposes of this section where all of the following are met:
a. The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for collocation will undertake to pay market rent or
other market compensation for collocation.
b. The site on which collocation is being considered, taking into consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a
facility, is able to provide structural support.
c. The collocation being considered is technologically reasonable, e.g., the collocation will not result in unreasonable
interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustment in relation to the structure, antennas, and the like.
d. The height of the structure necessary for collocation will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by
the Township, taking into consideration the several standards contained in Subsections (b) and (c), above.
(3) Requirements for Collocation.
a. The construction and use of a new wireless communication facility shall not be granted unless’ and until the applicant
demonstrates that a feasible collocation is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs.
b. All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall be designed and constructed so as to accommodate
collocation.
IV - 47
ARTICLE IV
c. The policy of the community is for collocation. Thus, if a party who owns or otherwise controls a facility shall fail or refuse
to alter a structure so as to accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible collocation, such facility shall thereupon and
thereafter be deemed to be a non-conforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any
respect.
d. If a party who owns or othe1wise controls a facility shall fail or refuse to permit a feasible collocation, and this requires
the construction and/or use of a new facility, the party failing or refusing to permit a feasible collocation shall be
deemed to be in direct violation and contradiction of the policy, intent and purpose of the Township, and, consequently
such party shall take responsibility for the violation, and shall be prohibited from receiving approval for a new wireless
communication support structure within the Township for a period of five years from the date of the failure or refusal
to permit the collocation. Such a party may seek and obtain a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals if and to
the limited extent the applicant demonstrates entitlement to variance relief which, in this context, shall mean a
demonstration that enforcement of the five year prohibition would unreasonably discriminate among providers of
functionally equivalent wireless communication services, or that such enforcement would have the effect of prohibiting
the provision of personal wireless communication services.
(f) Removal.
(1) A wireless communication facility must furnish reasonable evidence of ongoing operation at any time after construction.
(2) A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility shall be removal of all or part of the facility by users and
owners when the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or
other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be
considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse.
(3) The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in paragraph
(4) (2) above, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility no longer being used, by written application to and approval of
the Zoning Administrator.
(5) If removal of all or part of a facility is required, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall immediately
apply or secure the application for any required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete
the demolition/removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as reasonably determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
(6) The required removal of a facility or a portion thereof shall be lawfully completed within 60 days of the period of nonuse under
paragraph (2) above. If removal is not completed within that time, after at least 30 days written notice, the Township may
remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative
charge to be drawn or collected from the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the facility.
(g) Procedures.
(1) Review and administrative actions on special land use and site plan approval applications.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly review special land use and site plan approval applications to determine if they
are administratively complete by inclusion of all information required in subsection (d). If the application is not complete,
no later than 14 business days after receiving it, the Zoning Administrator shall provide a written or electronic notice to
the Applicant specifying the information necessary to complete the application. Such initial review for completeness by
the Zoning Administrator shall be on behalf of the Planning Commission for special land use and site plan approvals.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall review supplemental information submitted in response to an incomplete application
notice and notify the Applicant of any remaining deficiencies.
IV - 48
ARTICLE IV
c. An application shall be administratively complete upon the Zoning Administrator’s determination or the expiration of 14
business days from receipt of the application without a notice to the Applicant of deficiencies.
d. Upon a special land use or site plan approval application being administratively complete, the Zoning Administrator shall
promptly schedule it for a Planning Commission meeting that will allow for a Planning Commission site plan decision or
special land use decision after the required public hearing within the time periods in subsection (2) below.
e. If the application has disclosed professional op1mons supporting the application and the Zoning Administrator or
Planning Commission has determined that independent professional review for the Township of any such opinion should
be performed, the reasonable costs of such review may be assessed to the Applicant by a written notice from the Zoning
Administrator, as a professional review cost to be paid in accordance with the notice.
(2) Decisions on special land use and site plan approval applications.
a. The Planning Commission shall approve or deny a special land use application for a new wireless communications
support structure not more than 90 days after it is administratively complete.
b. For all special land use and site plan applications other than new wireless communications support structures, the
Planning Commission shall approve or deny the application not more than 60 days after it is administratively complete.
(3) Post-approval costs, fees and administrative actions.
Zoning permits to implement and grant the authority allowed by a special land use or site plan approval for wireless
communication facilities, and zoning certificates of use and occupancy for such facilities shall be issued subject to and
conditioned on all of the following:
a. Any conditions of the special land use or site plan approval.
b. Payment of any outstanding professional review costs as described in subsection (g)(1)e.
c. Payment of a permit fees in an amount established by or in accordance with a Resolution of the Township Board.
Secs. 38-200. Wind Energy Conversion Systems.
(a) Intent. It is the intent of Green Oak Charter Township to promote the effective and efficient use of Wind Energy Conversion Systems
(WECS) by regulating the siting, design, and installation of such systems to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. In no case
shall this ordinance guarantee the wind rights or establish access to the wind.
(b) Approval Required. Except where noted in this Section, it shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter, or locate any WECS
project within Green Oak Charter Township unless approval for a:
(1) Private WECS. A permit has been obtained from the Building Department as an accessory use and subject to Section 38-171
and the height restrictions of Section 38-185 and this Section. Only one (1) Private WECS shall be pe1mitted per lot, and the
private WECS shall not be allowed within either a required or non-required front yard area. Two (2) Private WECS shall be
permitted on a lot if the lot is greater than forty (40) acres in size and meets all requirements of this Ordinance.
(2) Commercial WECS. A special land use has been obtained pursuant to Section 38-44 and this Section.
(3) Temporary WECS. A permit has been obtained from the Building Department.
(c) General Standards. The following standards shall apply to wind energy conversion systems in Green Oak Charter Township:
IV - 49
ARTICLE IV
IV - 50
(1) Design Safety Certification. The safety of the design of all WECS structures shall comply with all current applicable State of
Michigan guidelines and standards.
(2) Setbacks. All private and commercial WECS structures (Horizontal axis or vertical axis wind turbines) must be setback from
property lines at a distance equal to or greater than the height of the structure, measured from the base of the structure to the
highest reach of its blade. (See Figure 38-200-1)
(3) Utility Notification. No grid-tied WECS shall be installed until evidence has been submitted that the applicant’s utility company
has been info1med of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
(4) Construction Code. All WECS shall meet or exceed all requirements of the State of Michigan Construction Codes.
(5) Applications for roof-mounted (or other non-traditionally mounted) WECS must include a wet stamped structural engineering
analysis for the roof WECS mounting system and for the suitability of the building to which the WECS is to be mounted.
Figure 38-200A
Figure 38-200B
(6) Interference. All WECS structures shall be certified by the manufacturer to minimize or mitigate interference with existing
electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwave or television signals.
(7) Noise. The sound pressure level shall not exceed 60 dB(A) (A-weighted Decibels) at the property line closest to the wind
energy system. This sound pressure level may be exceeded during short-term events such as utility outages and/or severe
wind storms. If the ambient sound pressure level exceeds 60 dBA, the standard shall be ambient dBA plus 5 dBA.
(8) Safety. All moving parts including blades or rotating cylinders shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet above ground for
ARTICLE IV
horizontal axis wind turbines (Figure 38-200A) and ten (10) feet above ground for vertical axis wind turbines (Figure 38-200B)
in order to provide a safe distance from human interference. The support system, footings and tower shall be constructed in
accordance with all applicable building codes governing structural integrity and wind loads.
(9) Height. All private and commercial WECS structures shall be subject to the height restrictions of this Section and Section 38-
185.
(d) Additional Standards for Commercial WECS Structures. The following additional standards shall apply to all commercial wind
energy conversion systems in Green Oak Charter Township:
(1) Color. Towers and blades shall be a non-reflective, non-obtrusive neutral color such as white, off-white, or gray.
(2) Controls and Brakes. All commercial WECS structures shall be equipped with manual and automatic controls to limit rotation of
blades to a speed below the designed limits of the WECS. Wind cut out speed rotation governors are required. The Professional
Engineer must certify that the rotor and over speed control design and fabrication conform to applicable design standards. No
changes or alterations from certified design shall be permitted unless accompanied by a Professional Engineer’s statement of
certification.
(3) Compliance with FAA. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain the appropriate FAA permits for the WECS
structure, or to obtain a determination of no significant impact to air navigation from the FAA.
(4) Climb Prevention. All commercial WECS structures must be protected by anti-climbing devices.
(5) Shadow Flicker. The facility owner or operator shall mm1m1ze shadow flicker by orienting and placing a commercial WECS
away from occupied buildings. The Planning Commission may require a shadow flicker analysis and methods of mitigation
such as revised location, landscape buffer, or other methods to minimize adverse impacts.
(6) Warnings. A visible warning sign of High Voltage as required by the State Construction Code shall be placed at the base of all
commercial WECS structures. The sign must have at a minimum six-inch letters with %-inch stroke. Such signs shall be located
a maximum of three hundred (300) feet apart and at all points of site ingress and egress.
(7) Performance Guarantee. All commercial WECS shall include a description of security to be posted at the time of receiving a
building permit to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed. The security shall be
posted and maintained in the f01m of: (1) cash; (2) irrevocable letter of credit; or (3) other security arrangement accepted by
the Township Board.
(8) Removal. A condition of every approval of a commercial WECS shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the
facility by users and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events:
a. When the facility has not been used for one hundred and eighty (180) days or more. For purposes of this section, the
removal of equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission of electrical power or prolonged
periods of no movement of the WECS) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse.
b. The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, may be applied and
limited to portions of a facility.
c. Upon the occurrence of one (1) or more of the events requiring removal, the property owner or persons who had used
the facility shall immediately apply for any required demolition or removal permits, proceed with, and complete the
demolition/removal.
d. If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within sixty (60) days of the
applicable deadline, and after at least thirty (30) days written notice, the Township may remove or secure the removal of
the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn, collected
and/or enforced from or under the security posted (Section 38-200(d)7) at the time of application.
IV - 51
ARTICLE IV
Secs. 38-201. Medical Marihuana Activities.
Medical marihuana activities shall be subject to the following limitations:
(a) Medical marihuana activities are permitted in the RF (Residential/Farming), RE (Residential Rural Estate), LA, R-1, R-2, R-2A
and R-3 (Residential Single-Family districts), RM (Residential multiple-family) and RMH (Residential mobile home park) zoning
districts. Medical marihuana activities are expressly prohibited in all other zoning districts.
(b) All medical marihuana activities shall be conducted in full compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, PA 2008, Initiated
Law No. 1, as amended.
(c) All medical marihuana activities shall be conducted in full compliance with all applicable building and fire codes.
(d) Medical marihuana provisioning centers, safety compliance facilities, dispensaries, cooperatives, or other shared growing facilities
or any other operation or facility similar in nature are expressly prohibited.
(e) Medical marihuana activities shall not be conducted in accessory structures.
Secs. 38-202 - 38-230. Reserved.
IV - 52
ARTICLE V
ARTICLE V. OPEN SPACE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 38-231. Intent.
(a) An open space planned unit development may be applied for in any zoning district, except the PL public lands district or other
districts as may be restricted in this Ordinance. The grant of an open space community development application shall require
a rezoning by way of amendment to this chapter upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval of the
Township Board.
(b) It is the intent of this article to offer an alternative to traditional subdivisions, site condominiums, or other developments through
the use of planned unit development legislation, in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006
as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq., for the purpose of:
(1) Encouraging the use of Township land in accordance with the land’s character and adaptability.
(2) Assuring the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural lands, and other natural resources.
(3) Providing recreational facilities within a reasonable distance of all residents of the open space planned unit development.
(4) Allowing innovation and greater flexibility in the design of residential, commercial, and industrial developments.
(5) Facilitating the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities, and public services in a more economical and efficient
manner.
(6) Ensuring compatibility of design and use between neighboring properties and encouraging a less sprawling form of
development, thereby preserving open space as developed or undeveloped land.
(c) The regulations set forth in this article are intended to preserve a traditional rural character to the land use pattern in the Township
through the creation of small residential nodes or other developments contrasting with open space and less intensive land uses.
This article is not intended as a device for disregarding the zoning regulations of the Township, the standards set forth in this
chapter, nor the planning concepts upon which this chapter has been based.
(d) The regulations set forth in this article are intended to result in a specific development substantially consistent with the standards
of this chapter, yet allowing for modifications from the general standards to ensure appropriate, fair, and consistent decision
making and to achieve the objectives set forth in this section. Requirements stated in this article are development guidelines
that planning officials will use to determine the merits of a particular application. The Planning Commission may recommend
variations from such guidelines when an application has demonstrated that doing so will result in corresponding benefit to the
community.
(e) In recognizing the importance of adequate housing on social equity and economic prosperity, the open space planned unit
development option is also intended to encourage and allow for affordable housing. Provision of affordable housing should be
consistent with guidelines and standards set forth by the county housing growth alliance.
Sec. 38-232. Scope.
For the purposes of this article, the term “open space planned unit development” means a development in which the units are placed
together into one (1) or more groupings within a defined project area. The units are separated from adjacent properties or other
groupings of buildings by substantial open space that is perpetually protected from development. Commercial and multiple-family uses
which are components of open space residential projects as stated in Section 38-236 may be allowed within open space communities of
fifteen (15) acres or more. Smaller commercial and industrial developments without associated residential development may be allowed
on sites of at least one (1) acre in size. V-1
ARTICLE V
Sec. 38-233. Eligibility criteria.
To be eligible for open space planned unit development consideration, the applicant must present a proposal for development that meets
each of the following:
(1) Recognizable benefits. An open space planned unit development shall result in a recognizable and substantial benefit, both
to the residents of the property and to the overall quality of life in the Township. The benefits can be provided through site
design elements in excess of the requirements of this chapter, such as high quality architectural design, extensive landscaping,
provision of transition areas from adjacent residential land uses, unique site design features, unified access, preservation of
woodlands and open space, particularly along major thoroughfares, and buffering development from lakes, rivers, streams,
and wetlands. The benefit should accrue in spite of any foreseeable detriments of the proposed development.
(2) Minimum project size. The minimum project size of an open space planned unit development shall adhere to the following
schedule:
a. Single-family, five (5) acres minimum.
b. Single-family with a commercial component, twenty (20) acres minimum (see Section 38-236).
c. Stand-alone commercial and/or industrial, one (1) acre minimum (Section 38-236 does not apply and there is no density
bonus).
(3) Open space. The proposed development shall provide at least one (1) of the following open space benefits:
a. Significant natural assets. The site contains significant natural assets, such as woodlands, individual trees over twelve
(12) inches in diameter when measured at breast height, rolling topography with grades exceeding fifteen percent
(15%), significant views, natural drainageways, waterbodies, stormwater management, floodplains, regulated or
nonregulated wetlands, or natural corridors that connect quality wildlife habitats which would be in the best interest
of the Township to preserve, and which might be negatively impacted by conventional residential development. Such
determination shall be made by the Planning Commission after review of a site investigation report, as outlined in
Section 38-72, prepared by the applicant that inventories the features. If animal or plant habitats of significant value
exist on the site, the Planning Commission, as a condition of approval, may require that the open space planned unit
development plan preserve such areas in a natural state and adequately protect them as nature preserves or limited
access areas.
b. Low Impact Development. Innovative stormwater management techniques shall be considered. These techniques shall
be in accordance with the Best Management Practices identified in the Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan and
in accordance with the Green Oak Charter Township Stormwater Management Ordinance. Refer to Figure 38-366-1 for
representative LID techniques.
c. Recreation facilities. If the site lacks natural features, it may still qualify for open space planned unit development
treatment if the development will preserve an existing recreation facility or provide usable recreation facilities to
which all residents of the development shall have reasonable access. Such recreation facilities include areas such as
neighborhood parks, golf courses, passive recreational facilities, soccer fields, ballfields, bike paths, or similar facilities
which provide a feature of communitywide significance and enhance residential development.
d. Creation of natural features. If the site lacks existing natural features, it can also qualify for open space planned unit
development treatment if the development will create significant woodland features. For the purposes of this subsection,
the term “create significant woodland features” means providing perimeter buffer plantings and interior street tree
plantings significantly in excess of, but at least twice what is required by this chapter.
(4) Guarantee of open space. The applicant shall guarantee to the satisfaction of the Township Planning Commission that all
open space portions of the development will be maintained in the manner approved. Documents shall be presented that bind
all successors and future owners in fee title to commitments made as a part of the proposal. This provision shall not prohibit
a transfer of ownership or control, provided, notice of such transfer is provided to the Township and the land uses continue as
approved in the open space planned unit development plan.
V-2
ARTICLE V
(5) Cohesive development. The proposed development shall be designed to create a cohesive community/development through
common open space areas for passive or active recreation and resident/tenant interaction. All open space areas shall be
equally available to all residents of the open space planned unit development.
(6) Unified control. The proposed development shall be under single ownership or control, such that there is a single person
or entity having proprietary responsibility for the full completion of the project. The applicant shall provide sufficient
documentation of ownership or control in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants and/or deed restrictions that indicate
that the development will be completed in its entirety as proposed.
(7) Density impact. The proposed type and density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the need for, or
impact to, public services, facilities, roads, and utilities in relation to the uses otherwise permitted by this chapter, and
shall not place an unreasonable impact to the subject site, surrounding land, property owners and occupants, and/or the
natural environment. The Planning Commission may require that the applicant prepare an impact statement documenting
the significance of any environmental, traffic, or socio-economic impacts resulting from the proposed open space planned
unit development. An unreasonable impact shall be considered an unacceptable significant adverse effect on the quality
of the surrounding community and the natural environment in comparison to the impacts associated with conventional
development. The Planning Commission may require that the applicant prepare a quantitative comparison of the impacts
of conventional development and the open space planned unit development plan to assist in making such determination,
such as an overlay of conceptual development plans, on a natural features map, illustrating other site development options
to demonstrate the impacts have been minimized to the extent practical. If the cumulative impact creates or contributes to a
significant problem relative to infrastructure demand and services or environmental degradation, mitigation shall be provided
to alleviate the impacts associated with the open space planned unit development.
(8) Master Plan. The proposed development shall be consistent with, and further the implementation of, the Township Master
Plan. If the proposed development is not consistent with the Master Plan, but there has been a change in conditions in
the area which will explain why the proposed open space planned unit development is a reasonable use of the land, the
Planning Commission can concurrently consider an amendment to the Master Plan and a rezoning to open space planned unit
development for the proposed development in question.
Sec. 38-234. Project design standards.
A proposed open space planned unit development shall comply with the following project design standards:
(1) Location. An open space planned unit development may be applied for within any zoning district, except the PL public lands
district.
(2) Minimum lot size without public sewer and water. The minimum single-family residential lot size of any open space
planned unit development that is not served by sanitary sewer and central water is one-half (½) acre.
(3) Permitted uses.
a. An open space planned unit development is permitted for the following types of uses:
1. Single-family detached;
2. Attached residential dwellings;
3. Commercial uses;
4. Industrial uses; and
5. Mixed use projects of the land uses stated in subsections (3)a.1.--3. of this section. (Refer to Section 38-236 for open
space planned unit developments that propose to mix residential and commercial or multiple-family components.)
b. Unless modified by the Planning Commission, all residential dwellings and nonresidential buildings and structures shall
meet the yard, lot width, and bulk standards required by Section 38-136, except that single-family attached dwellings
may have zero (0) side lot lines for yards that abut interior lots.
V-3
ARTICLE V
c. Single-family projects that will contain a commercial or multiple-family component may be allowed by the Planning
Commission and must qualify under the standards of Section 38-236.
(4) Plan submittal. Any application for open space planned unit development shall be accompanied by a plan based on existing
zoning at the time of application, a density plan prepared in accordance with this subsection, and a planned unit development
plan. The density allowable within an open space planned unit development shall be determined through preparation of the
density plan, which shall have the following requirements:
a. The applicant shall prepare, and present to the Planning Commission for review, a density plan for the project that is
consistent with state, county, and township requirements and design criteria for a tentative preliminary plat or site
condominium, whichever is appropriate. The density plan shall meet all standards for lot size as set forth in subsection (4)
b. of this section, lot width and setbacks as normally required under Section 38-136, public roadway improvements and
private parks, and contain an area which conceptually would provide sufficient area for stormwater detention. Lots in the
density plan shall provide sufficient building envelope size without impacting wetlands regulated by the MDEQ.
b. The density plan shall be drawn to a scale of not greater than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, and shall
contain the following:
1. Layout of roads and rights-of-way.
2. Lot lines.
3. Wetland boundaries and submerged lands.
4. Floodplains.
5. Lot numbers and a schedule of lot areas.
6. Areas proposed for stormwater management.
c. The density plan shall be prepared with the following minimum lot areas. The density plan is only used to determine
allowable density for an open space planned unit development project. A density bonus may be granted in addition to
the provisions of this subsection, if the development qualifies under Section 38-236(2)a., with the exception of standalone
commercial and industrial projects.
Underlying/Existing Zoning District Zoning Ordinance Minimum Lot Size Density Plan Minimum Lot Size
RF 5 acres 2.5 acres
RE 2 acres 1.5 acres
R-3 1 acre 40,000 square feet
R-2A 32,670 square feet 25,000 square feet
R-2** 21,750 square feet 20,000 square feet**
R-1* 12,000 square feet 10,000 square feet
LA 7,200 square feet 6,000 square feet
RM --
RMH --
LB 20,000 square feet 20,000 square feet
GB 20,000 square feet 20,000 square feet
HC 20,000 square feet 20,000 square feet
LI 1 acre 40,000 square feet
GI 2 acres 1.5 acres
RO 1 acre 40,000 square feet
* The open space planned unit development shall be served by a public sanitary sewer and water.
** The minimum lot size for all single-family residential lots within an open space planned unit development shall be one-half (½) acre when not
served by a public sewer and central water services.
V-4
ARTICLE V
d. The Planning Commission shall review the design and determine the number of lots that could be feasibly constructed.
Such number, as determined by the Planning Commission, shall be the maximum number of dwelling units allowable for
the open space planned unit development project, and shall be shown on the planned unit development plan. Regardless
of the lot sizes used in the density plan, the planned unit development plan may contain lots as small as one-half (½)
acre in size, if not served by a public sanitary sewer and water, provided that the total number of lots shall not exceed
that which the density plan yields. The Planning Commission may grant a density bonus for exemplary projects that meet
the conditions outlined in Section 38-236.
e. Overall density shall be determined by use of the density plan, using the underlying/existing zoning and corresponding
lot sizes set forth in the table in subsection (4)c. of this section. The applicant may propose other underlying zoning
categories for the consideration of density in such chart. Such consideration shall be limited to an adjustment of not
more than one (1) category. For example, a density plan designed with an underlying/existing zoning district of RF
may request a zoning category shift on the chart of not more than one (1) zoning category, using the RE district. In
determining if a category shift shall be granted, the Township shall consider the following:
1. Conformance with the Master Plan.
2. Community Benefit.
3. Preservation of natural resources.
(5) Water and sewer service. If there is public water or sewer service available to the site on which an open space planned unit
development is proposed, the Planning Commission may require connection into the system.
(6) Base zoning regulations. Unless specifically waived or modified by the Planning Commission and Township Board, all
requirements of this chapter for the underlying zoning district, except minimum lot area and other Township regulations, shall
remain in full force.
(7) Regulatory flexibility.
a. To encourage flexibility and creativity consistent with the open space planned unit development concept, the Planning
Commission may recommend, and the Township Board may grant, specific departures from the requirements of this
chapter as a part of the approval process as follows:
1. Yard, lot width, minimum lot size, density, and bulk standards may be modified, provided that such modifications
results in enhanced buffering from adjacent land uses or public right-of-ways, or preservation of natural features.
Any modification to the natural river overlay zone standards must also be approved by the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources, if required.
2. Standards that apply to entryway features, such as decorative gates (nonclosable), walls, and signs, may be
modified, provided that the overall entranceway design is reviewed by the Planning Commission and found to be
consistent with the proposed open space planned unit development and the character of the surrounding area in
terms of size, materials, color, lighting, and landscaping.
b. Any regulatory modification shall be approved through a finding by the Planning Commission and Township Board that
the deviation shall result in a higher quality of development than would be possible using conventional zoning standards.
Regulatory modifications are not subject to variance approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals. No part of an open space
planned unit development plan may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals. This provision shall not preclude
an individual lot owner from seeking a dimensional variance following final approval of the open space planned unit
development, provided, such variance does not involve alterations to open space areas as shown on the approved open
space planned unit development site plan.
c. A table shall be provided on the site plan which specifically details all deviations from the established zoning area,
height, and setback regulations, off-street parking regulations, general provisions, or subdivision regulations which
would otherwise be applicable to the uses and development proposed in the absence of this article. This specification
should include Ordinance provisions from which deviations are sought, and the reasons and mechanisms to be utilized for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare in lieu of the regulations from which deviations are sought. Only
deviations consistent with the intent of this chapter shall be considered.
V-5
ARTICLE V
(8) Open space requirements.
a. All land within a development that is not devoted to a residential unit or a principal commercial or industrial building, an
accessory use, vehicle access, vehicle parking, a roadway, an approved land improvement, or a commercial or multiplefamily
component as part of a residential project shall be set aside as common land for recreation, conservation, or
agricultural uses, or preserved in an undeveloped state. Grading in the open space shall be minimal, with the intent of
preserving existing topography.
b. An open space planned unit development shall maintain a minimum of forty percent (40%) of the buildable area of
the site as dedicated open space held in common ownership. Buildable area shall not include existing lakes on the
property. Wetlands, lakes, or submerged lands may occupy up to one-half (½) of the required open space. The Planning
Commission may reduce open space requirements for commercial and industrial projects; however, adequate open space
shall still be provided so as to provide appropriate setbacks, preserve natural features, and buffer the proposed uses from
incompatible adjacent uses. Such open space may be reduced in residential projects to thirty percent (30%) for lower
density projects as described in subsection (8)j. of this section. Except as noted in subsection (8)c. of this section, any
undeveloped land area within the boundaries of the site meeting the open space standards of this subsection (8) may be
included as required open space.
c. The following land areas are not included as dedicated open space for the purposes of this article:
1. The area of any street right-of-way proposed to be dedicated to the public. This subsection shall not preclude the
future dedication of a private road easement to a public road agency.
2. Wetlands, lakes or submerged lands above and beyond those that occupy up to one-half (½) of the required open
space, as per subsection (8)b. of this section.
3. The required setbacks surrounding any structure, residential or otherwise, that is not located on an individual lot or
condominium site.
d. The common open space may be centrally located along the road frontage of the development, located to preserve
significant natural features or located to connect open spaces throughout the development. Any open space provided
along the exterior public roads shall generally have a depth of at least one hundred (100) feet, and either landscaped
or preserved in a natural wooded condition. The open space along the exterior public roads shall be landscaped with a
minimum of one (1) evergreen tree or canopy tree for each twenty (20) feet of road frontage. Such plantings shall be
planted in staggered rows or clustered into groupings to provide a natural appearance. Preservation of existing trees may
be credited towards meeting such frontage landscaping requirement.
e. Connections with adjacent open space, public land, or existing or planned pedestrian/bike paths may be required by the
Planning Commission.
f. The dedicated open space shall be set aside by the developer through an irrevocable conveyance that is found acceptable
to the Planning Commission and Township Board, such as:
1. Recorded deed restrictions;
2. Covenants that run perpetually with the land; or
3. A conservation easement established pursuant to part 21, subpart 11 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.2140 et
seq.).
g. Such conveyance shall assure that the open space will be protected from all forms of development, except as shown on an
approved site plan, and shall never be changed to another use. Such conveyance shall:
1. Indicate the proposed allowable uses of the dedicated open space. The Planning Commission and Township Board
may require the inclusion of open space restrictions that prohibit the following:
i. Dumping or storing of any material or refuse;
ii. Activity that may cause a risk of soil erosion or threaten any living plant material;
iii. Cutting or removal of live plant material, except for removal of dying or diseased vegetation;
iv. Use of motorized off-road vehicles;
V-6
ARTICLE V
v. Cutting, filling or removal of vegetation from wetland areas; and
vi. Use of pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers within or adjacent to wetlands.
2. Require that the dedicated open space be maintained by parties who have an ownership interest in the open space.
3. Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space.
4. Provide for maintenance to be undertaken by the Township if the dedicated open space is inadequately maintained,
or is determined by the Township to be a public nuisance, with the assessment of costs upon the property owners.
h. The dedicated open space shall forever remain open space, subject only to uses approved by the Township on the
approved site plan. Further subdivision of open space land or its use for other than recreation, conservation, or
agricultural purposes, except for easements for utilities and septic systems, shall be strictly prohibited. Open space may
include a golf course area, provided that it forever remains outdoor recreation or natural undeveloped land.
i. Any structure or building accessory to a recreation, conservation, or agriculture use may be erected within the dedicated
open space, subject to the approved open space plan. Such accessory structure or building shall not exceed, in the
aggregate, one percent (1%) of the required open space area.
j. The Planning Commission and Township Board has the discretion to allow lower density open space planned unit
developments with larger lots and less open space. For such large lot open space planned unit developments, the
required minimum open space area may be reduced from forty percent (40%) to thirty percent (30%) where the total
number of units, determined under subsection (4) of this section, is reduced by at least ten percent (10%).
(9) Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed location of accessory uses or structures that are of a significantly different
scale or character than abutting residential districts, such as access drives, parking areas, solid waste pickup points, swimming
pools, tennis courts, and facilities of a similar nature, shall not be located near the boundary of the development or so as to
negatively impact the residential use of adjacent lands.
(10) Transition areas. Where the open space planned unit development abuts a single-family residential district, the Planning
Commission and Township Board may require a transition area. Grading within the transition area shall be minimal unless
needed to provide effective buffering or accommodate drainage. If the grade change adjacent to a single-family residential
district is to be varied by more than three (3) feet, the site plan shall include cross sections illustrating existing and proposed
grades in relation to existing and proposed building heights. Perspective renderings from adjacent residential units are
encouraged. The Planning Commission may review the proposed transition area to ensure compatibility. The Planning
Commission and Township Board may require that the transition area consist of one or more of the following:
a. A row of single-family lots or condominium sites similar to adjacent single-family development in terms of density, lot
area, lot width, setbacks, and building spacing.
b. Woodlands, natural features, or a landscaped greenbelt sufficient to provide an obscuring effect.
c. Open or recreation space.
d. Significant changes in topography, which provide an effective buffer.
(11) Architectural and site element design.
a. Residential facades shall not be dominated by garages. At least fifty percent (50%) of residential units shall have side
entry garages, or recessed garages where the front of the garage is at least five (5) feet behind the front line of the living
portion of the principal dwelling. The intent of encouraging recessed or side entry garages is to enhance the aesthetic
appearance of the development and minimize the visual impact resulting from the close clustering of units allowed
under these regulations. Building elevations shall be required for all structures, other than single-family dwellings.
b. Signage, lighting, entryway features, landscaping, building materials for the exterior of all structures, and other features
of the project shall be designed and completed with the objective of achieving an integrated and cohesive development
consistent with the character of the community, surrounding development and natural features of the area. The Planning
Commission and Township Board may require street or site lighting, where appropriate.
(12) Access. Direct access onto a county road or state highway shall be required for an open space planned unit development. The
nearest edge of any entrance or exit drive shall be located no closer than two hundred (200) feet from any existing street or
road intersection, as measured from the nearest intersection right-of-way line.
V-7
ARTICLE V
(13) Internal roads.
a. Internal roads within an open space planned unit development may be public or private.
b. Construction of private roads as a means of providing access and circulation is encouraged. Private roadways within an
open space planned unit development must meet the design requirements of Article X of this chapter. The Planning
Commission and Township Board may modify such requirements if all of the following findings are made:
1. There is no potential for the road to connect with abutting land or be extended to serve additional land in the future.
2. Significant natural features, such as mature trees, natural slopes, wetlands or other waterbodies, would be
preserved through allowing a modification to the private road standards set forth in Article X of this chapter.
c. Where private roads are developed, a maintenance plan, including a means of guaranteeing maintenance assessments
from the affected property owners, shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Planning Commission and Township
Board.
d. Both sides of all internal roads shall be landscaped with street trees. For road frontages of individual lots or condominium
sites, a minimum of two (2) canopy trees shall be provided per residential dwelling. For sections of road that do not abut
lots or condominium sites, one (1) canopy tree shall be provided on each side for every fifty (50) feet of road. Existing
trees to be preserved within five (5) feet of the road right-of-way or easement may be credited towards meeting such
requirement.
e. Additional requirements for buffering/screening, greenbelts, and parking lot trees for nonresidential projects may be
required by the Planning Commission and Township Board and can be found in Section 38-176, pertaining to walls and
screens and Section 38-177, pertaining to landscaping and screening.
(14) Pedestrian circulation. The open space planned unit development plan shall provide pedestrian access to all open space
areas from all residential/development areas, connections between open space areas, public thoroughfares, and connections
between appropriate on-site and off-site uses. Trails within the open space planned unit development may be constructed
of gravel, wood chips, or other similar material, but the Planning Commission and Township Board may require construction
of eight (8) foot wide asphalt bike paths through portions of the development or along any public right-of-way abutting the
open space planned unit development. Locations for school bus stops shall be provided on the site plan, if applicable.
(15) Natural features. The development shall be designed to promote the preservation of natural features. If animal or plant
habitats of significant value exist on the site, the Planning Commission and Township Board, as a condition of approval, may
require that the open space planned unit development plan preserve such areas in a natural state and adequately protect the
areas as nature preserves or limited access areas. The Planning Commission and Township Board may also require a minimum
of a twenty-five (25) foot wide undisturbed open space setback from the edge of any lake, pond, river, stream, or wetland,
provided that the Planning Commission and Township Board may permit trails, boardwalks, observation platforms, or other
similar structures that enhance passive enjoyment of the site’s natural amenities within the setback.
(16) Existing structures. When a tract contains structures or buildings deemed to be of historic, cultural, or architectural
significance, as determined by the Planning Commission and Township Board, and if suitable for rehabilitation, the structures
shall be retained. Adaptive reuse of existing structures for residential or nonresidential use or permitted accessory uses shall
be permitted.
Sec. 38-235. Nonresidential project design standards (commercial and industrial).
(a) All design standards contained in Section 38-234 are applicable under this section, where appropriate.
(b) Nonresidential uses shall always be separated and buffered from residential units in a manner consistent with good land use and
community planning principles.
V-8
ARTICLE V
(c) For nonresidential developments, minimum lot area, height and placement shall be negotiated by the Township Board, after
review and recommendation of the Planning Commission. The Master Plan, the character of the area and the previous zoning
classification shall be reviewed before the open space planned unit development concept plan, density, setbacks, parking
requirements, etc., are approved.
(d) The Master Plan shall be reviewed to determine the overall lot density on the property and a compatible zoning district standard
may be selected to set forth proper setbacks, lot coverage, and lot widths. For all special uses, regulations applicable to the
respective uses shall apply. The Township Board, in its discretion, shall resolve all ambiguities as to applicable regulations.
Notwithstanding the immediately preceding provision of this subsection, deviations with respect to such regulations may be
granted as part of the overall approval of the planned unit development, provided, there are features or elements, deemed
adequate by the Township Board, that are designed into the project plan for the purpose of achieving the objectives of this article.
(e) To the maximum extent feasible, the development shall be designed to preserve natural resources and natural features. In the
interpretation of this subsection, natural resources and natural features may be impaired or destroyed only if it is clearly in
the public interest to do so. In determining whether an action is in the public interest, the benefit which would reasonably be
expected to accrue from the proposal shall be balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the activity, taking into
consideration the local, state and national concern for the protection and preservation of the natural resources or features. To
accomplish the desired balance, the following criteria shall be applied:
(1) The availability of feasible and prudent alternative methods of completing the development;
(2) The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects of the proposed activity; and
(3) The size, quality, and rarity of the natural resources or natural features which would be impaired or destroyed.
(f) There shall be a perimeter setback and berming, as found to be necessary by the Township Board, for the purpose of buffering the
development in relation to surrounding properties. If the open space planned unit development project includes nonresidential
uses adjacent to a district authorizing residential uses, a perimeter setback shall be established with a dimension from the property
line of up to one hundred (100) feet, at the discretion of the Planning Commission and Township Board, taking into consideration
the uses in and adjacent to the development. The setback distance need not be uniform at all points on the perimeter of the
development.
(g) Thoroughfare, drainage, and utility design shall meet or exceed the standards otherwise applicable in connection with each of the
respective types of uses served.
(h) Where feasible, there shall be underground installation of utilities, including electricity and telephone.
(i) In all cases, where separation can be accomplished without significantly reducing the kind and density of uses, the pedestrian
circulation system, and its related walkways and safety paths, shall be separated from vehicular thoroughfares and ways.
(j) Signage, lighting, landscaping, building materials for the exterior of all structures, and other features of the project shall be
designed and completed with the objective of achieving an integrated and controlled development, consistent with the character
of the community, surrounding developments, and natural features of the area.
(k) In all cases where nonresidential uses adjoin off-site residentially zoned property, noise reduction and visual screening
mechanisms, such as earthen and/or landscape berms and/or decorative walls, shall be employed. The Planning Commission and
Township Board, at their discretion, shall review and approve the design and location of such mechanisms in regard to maximizing,
to a reasonable extent, the achievement of the screening objectives.
V-9
ARTICLE V
Sec. 38-236. Optional provisions for exemplary projects.
The Planning Commission and Township Board may allow an exemplary open space planned unit development to include one (1) or more
of the following optional provisions. In order to qualify for an optional provision, the applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of
the Planning Commission and Township Board, that the proposed project exceeds the minimum standards for open space planned unit
development eligibility as set forth in Section 38-233. In order to qualify for development under the optional provisions of this section,
architectural standards shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission and Township Board. Buildings shall be harmonious with
adjacent uses in terms of texture, materials, peaked rooflines, and massing, but there shall be a variation of front façade depth and
rooflines to avoid monotony. Building elevations shall be required for all structures.
(1) Density bonus. A variable density bonus of up to fifteen percent (15%) may be allowed, at the discretion of the Planning
Commission and Township Board, based upon a demonstration by the applicant of design excellence in the open space
planned unit development. Projects qualifying for a density bonus shall include no less than two (2) of the following
elements:
a. A high level of clustered development where a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the open space planned unit
development is common open space.
b. Inclusion of greenbelts, greenways, and/or bikeways, if provided with at least one (1) other element.
c. Providing perimeter transition areas around all sides of the development that are at least one hundred and fifty (150)
feet in depth.
d. Provisions or components of the proposed plan that show a sensitivity to the Huron River Watershed and is designed to
enhance surface water and groundwater quality.
e. Provisions and design that preserve natural features.
f. Donation or contribution of land or amenities that represent significant community benefit, such as for a school,
community center, fire hall, nature preserve, safety paths, etc.
g. Other similar elements, as determined by the Planning Commission and Township Board.
(2) Multiple-family component. In an open space community with a gross area of fifteen (15) acres or more, up to fifty percent
(50%) of the dwelling units may be other than single-family dwellings. Such units shall meet the following design standards:
a. Front yard. The minimum building setback from an internal road shall be twenty-five (25) feet from the public street
right-of-way or private road easement. The Planning Commission and Township Board may reduce the setback, based
upon a determination that off-street parking will be adequate and that the modification will preserve natural features or
that the rear yard buffer will be increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of reduction in the front yard setback. In
no instance shall the front yard setback be reduced below a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. Buildings that front on two (2)
streets must provide the required front yard setback from both streets.
b. Rear yard. A thirty-five (35) foot rear yard shall be maintained for all buildings. Where the rear of a building abuts the
side or rear of another residential structure, the minimum spacing between the structures shall be the combined total of
the two (2) setback requirements.
c. Side yards. A ten (10) foot setback shall be maintained to the side of all residential buildings. Where two (2) buildings
are located side-by-side, a thirty-five (35) foot spacing shall be maintained between apartment buildings.
d. Off-street parking lots. Off-street parking lots serving three (3) or more dwelling units shall provide a ten (10) foot
wide open green space area around the perimeter of the parking lot.
The building setback requirements may be varied, provided such variances are specifically indicated on the open space
community plan, and the Planning Commission and Township Board determines the variation does not negatively impact
adjacent properties and provides a recognizable benefit. Building setback requirements on the perimeter of the development
shall not be reduced below thirty-five (35) feet.
(3) Commercial component. An open space community with a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more may incorporate a
commercial land use component, provided that all of the following requirements are met:
V-10
ARTICLE V
a. The commercial component shall be located on a lot of sufficient size to contain all commercial structures, parking and
landscape buffering. The total area occupied by the commercial land uses may not exceed five percent (5%) of the gross
area of the open space community or five (5) acres, whichever is less.
b. All commercial uses shall be compatible with the residential area.
c. The Planning Commission finds that the architectural design of the structures is compatible with the balance of the
development.
d. All commercial structures are connected to a pedestrian access system servicing the project.
e. All parking and loading areas serving the commercial uses shall be to the rear or side of the structure and fully screened
from view of any public roadway, except that the Planning Commission and Township Board may allow up to twenty-five
percent (25%) of the minimum number of required parking spaces in the front yard. Employee and customer parking in
PL, LI, and GI zoning districts may be in the front yard per Section 38-313. Where the parking lot is visible from residential
units or open space, it shall be planted with a landscape buffer consisting of evergreen trees spaced no more than ten
(10) feet on center.
Sec. 38-237. Project standards.
In considering any application for approval of an open space planned unit development site plan, the Planning Commission and Township
Board shall make their determinations on the basis of the standards for site plan approval set forth in Article II, Division 2 of this chapter,
pertaining to site plans, as well as the following standards and requirements:
(1) Compliance with concept. The overall design and land uses proposed in connection with an open space planned unit
development shall be consistent with the intent of the open space planned unit development concept, as well as with specific
design standards set forth in this article.
(2) Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed open space planned unit development plan shall set forth, in detail, all
specifications with respect to height, setbacks, density, parking, circulation, landscaping, views, and other design features that
exhibit due regard for the relationship of the development to surrounding properties, the character of the site and the land
uses. In determining whether such requirement has been met, consideration shall be given to the:
a. Bulk, placement, and materials of construction of the proposed structures.
b. Pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
c. Location and screening of vehicular use or parking areas.
d. Provision of landscaping and other site amenities.
(3) Impact of traffic. The open space planned unit development shall be designed to minimize the impact of traffic generated
by the proposed development on surrounding uses.
(4) Protection of natural environment. The proposed open space planned unit development shall be protective of the
natural environment, and shall comply with all applicable environmental protection laws and regulations. Stormwater
management techniques as identified in the Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan shall be employed. PUD projects
shall also comply with the Green Oak Charter Township Stormwater Management Ordinance. Refer to Figure 38-366-1 for
representative LID techniques.
(5) Compliance with applicable regulations. The proposed open space planned unit development shall comply with all
applicable federal, state, and local regulations.
(6) Master Plan. The proposed open space planned unit development shall be consistent with, and further the implementation
of, the Township Master Plan.
V-11
ARTICLE V
Sec. 38-238. Review and approval procedures.
(a) Preapplication conference. Prior to the submission of an application for an open space planned unit development approval, a
preapplication conference will be held. The purpose of the conference shall focus on the open space planned unit development
process and required information, as outlined in this article, and shall not constitute any form of official review and approval
of the open space planned unit development project, nor shall the conference in any way circumvent, replace, or supersede
the review and approval powers of the Township Planning Commission and Township Board regarding the open space planned
unit development application. The building department shall contact the preapplication conference committee, which shall be
composed of a Township Board representative, Planning Commission representative, Township planner, and building department
representative. At least two (2) committee members shall meet with the applicant for the preapplication conference. At such
conference, the applicant shall present at least a sketch plan of the proposed open space planned unit development, as well as the
following information:
(1) Total size of the project.
(2) A statement of the number of residential units, if any.
(3) The number and type of nonresidential uses.
(4) The size of the area to be occupied by each type of use.
(5) The known deviations from Ordinance regulations to be sought.
(6) The number of acres to be preserved as open or recreational space.
(7) All known natural or historic features to be preserved.
(b) Approval procedures. The procedures for planned unit development approval are summarized in the planned unit development
process flow chart which is on file in the Township clerk’s office.
(c) Preliminary site plan.
(1) Submission. Following the preapplication conference, the applicant shall submit a preliminary site plan of the proposed
open space planned unit development. A narrative report shall accompany the site plan and shall provide a description of the
project, discuss the market concept of the project, and explain the manner in which the criteria set forth in Section 38-235 has
been met.
(2) Information required. The preliminary site plan for an open space planned unit development shall contain, at a minimum,
the following information. Any of the following requirements may be waived by the Planning Commission when determined
to be unnecessary, not applicable or premature at this stage of review, given the nature, size, and scope of the project.
a. Sheet size of submitted drawings shall be no greater than thirty (30) inches by forty (40) inches, with graphics and a
scale.
b. Plans providing the following information:
1. Applicant’s name;
2. Name of the development;
3. Preparer’s name and the name of the engineer, surveyor or landscape architect;
4. Date of preparation and any revisions;
5. North arrow;
6. Property lines and dimensions;
7. Complete and current legal description and size of property, in acres;
8. Small location sketch of the subject site and area within one-half (½) mile, at a scale of no less than one (1) inch
equals one thousand (1,000) feet;
9. Zoning and current land use of the applicant’s property, the property owner’s name and address, and zoning and
land use of all abutting properties and properties across any public or private street from the open space planned
unit development site;
V-12
ARTICLE V
10. Lot lines and all structures on the property and within one hundred (100) feet of the open space planned unit
development property lines;
11. Location of any access points on both sides of the street within one hundred (100) feet of the open space planned
unit development site along streets where access to the open space planned unit development is proposed;
12. Existing locations of significant natural, historical, and architectural features, existing drainage patterns, surface
waterbodies, floodplain areas, MDEQ designated or regulated wetlands, with supporting documentation, and a tree
survey indicating the location of tree groupings;
13. Existing and proposed topography, at one (1) foot or two (2) foot contour intervals, and a general description of
grades within one hundred (100) feet of the site;
14. Dimensions of existing and proposed right-of-way lines, street widths, names of abutting public streets, proposed
access driveways, and parking areas, and existing and proposed pedestrian and/or bicycle paths;
15. Existing buildings, existing or proposed public utility services, with sizes, and any public or private easements, with a
notation of those which will remain and which are to be removed;
16. Layout and typical dimensions of proposed lots, footprints, and dimensions of proposed buildings and structures,
and uses, with the acreage allotted to each use. For residential developments, the number, type, and density of
proposed housing units shall be indicated;
17. General location and type of landscaping proposed (i.e., evergreen, deciduous, berm, etc.), with a notation of the
existing trees and landscaping to be retained;
18. Size, type, and location of proposed identification signs;
19. Size, type, and location of proposed detention basins;
20. If a multiphase planned unit development is proposed, identification of the areas included in each phase. For
residential uses, the number, type, and density of proposed housing units within each phase shall be identified;
21. Any additional graphics or written materials requested by the Planning Commission or Township Board to assist the
Township in determining the appropriateness of the open space planned unit development, such as, but not limited
to, aerial photography; market studies; impact on public primary and secondary schools and utilities; traffic impacts,
using trip generation rates recognized by the Institute of Transportation Engineers for an average day and peak hour
of the affected roadways; turning movement analysis, acceleration/deceleration analysis, and passing lane analysis;
impact on significant natural, historical, and architectural features and drainage; impact on the general area and
adjacent property; description of how property could be developed under the regulations of the underlying district;
and preliminary architectural sketches; and
22. An explanation of why the submitted planned unit development plan is superior to a plan which could have been
prepared under strict adherence to related sections of this chapter.
(3) Review; hearing date. The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary planned unit development plan in accordance
with this article and set a date for the public hearing.
(4) Notice of public hearing. The preliminary plan shall be noticed for public hearing before the Planning Commission in
accordance with the Township zoning act, Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended (MCL 125.3503 et seq.).
(5) Density determination. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall establish density, as provided by the
yield calculated by the density plan, in accordance with Section 38-234(4)d.
(6) Action of Planning Commission. Following the public hearing or at a subsequent Planning Commission meeting, the
Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plan and shall take one of the following actions:
a. Approval. Upon finding that the preliminary plan meets the criteria set forth in Sections 38-231--38-236, if applicable,
the Planning Commission shall recommend preliminary approval to the Township Board. Approval by the Township Board
shall constitute approval of the uses, density, and design concept as shown on the preliminary plan, and shall confer
upon the applicant the right to proceed to preparation of the final plan. A recommendation of approval of the preliminary
plan by the Planning Commission shall not bind the Township Board to approval of the final plan.
V-13
ARTICLE V
b. Approval with changes or conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend conditional approval to the
Township Board, subject to modifications as performed by the applicant.
c. Postponement of action. Upon finding that the preliminary plan does not meet the criteria set forth in Sections 38-
231--38-236, if applicable, but could meet such criteria if revised, the Planning Commission may recommend to postpone
action to the Township Board until a revised preliminary plan is submitted.
d. Denial. Upon finding that the preliminary plan does not meet the criteria set forth in Sections 38-231--38-236, if
applicable, the Planning Commission shall recommend denial of the preliminary approval to the Township Board.
(7) County Planning Commission action. The Township Planning Commission, having recommended either approval,
approval with changes or conditions, or denial, shall forward the application for open space planned unit development, in
accordance with the Township zoning act, Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended (MCL 125.3503 et seq.), to the County Planning
Commission for their review and recommendation.
(8) Township Board action. If the preliminary plan has been approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the Township
and County Planning Commissions, the Township Board may, upon finding that the Planning Commission has issued a
recommendation on the preliminary plan, approve, approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary plan. The applicant may
still submit a final planned unit development plan in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, regardless of action taken
by the Township Board on the preliminary planned unit development plan.
(d) Final plan. Following receipt of the Township Planning Commission’s comments on the preliminary plan, the County Planning
Commission’s recommendation and preliminary action by the Township Board, the applicant shall submit a final plan and
supporting materials conforming with this subsection. If a final plan is not submitted by the applicant for final approval within
twelve (12) months of the Township Board’s approval of the preliminary planned unit development plan, the preliminary plan
approval becomes null and void. The Planning Commission may, however, issue a waiver for greater periods of time, if it is
determined to be appropriate, as a condition of preliminary open space planned unit development approval. Such extension and
request of waiver must be made prior to expiration of the preliminary plan approval.
(1) Information required. A final site plan and application for a open space planned unit development shall contain the
following information:
a. A site plan meeting all of the requirements of Article II, Division 2 of this chapter, pertaining to site plans, shall be
required unless the applicant desires a phased approval whereby open space planned unit development zoning is
considered at the final plan stage and detailed site plans meeting the requirements of Article II, Division 2 of this chapter
are submitted for each phase of the open space planned unit development.
b. A utility master plan for the entire open space planned unit development site must be provided, which includes the
location and size of all public and private utilities, utility services, storm sewers, basins, and necessary easements.
c. A separate delineation of all deviations from this chapter which would otherwise be applicable to the uses and
development proposed in the absence of this article.
d. A specific schedule of the intended development and construction details, including phasing or timing.
e. A specific schedule of the general improvements to constitute a part of the development, including, without limitation,
lighting, signage, the mechanisms designed to reduce noise, utilities, and visual screening features.
f. A specification of the exterior building materials for the structures proposed in the project.
g. Signatures of all parties having an interest in the property.
(2) Final action of Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the final site plan and shall take one of the
following actions:
a. Approval. Upon finding that the final open space planned unit development plan meets the intent and criteria
established in this article and other sections of this chapter, the Planning Commission may recommend final approval to
the Township Board.
b. Approval with changes or conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend to the Township Board conditional
approval, subject to modifications as performed by the applicant.
V-14
ARTICLE V
c. Postponement of action. Upon finding that the final plan does not meet the intent and criteria set forth in this article
and other sections of this chapter, the Planning Commission may postpone action until a revised plan is submitted.
d. Denial. Upon finding that the final plan does not meet the intent and criteria set forth in this article and other sections
of this chapter, the Planning Commission shall recommend denial to the Township Board.
(3) Final action of Township Board. If the proposed development has been approved, approved with conditions, or denied by
the Planning Commission, the Township Board may, upon finding that the Planning Commission has issued a recommendation
on the final plan, approve, approve with conditions, or deny the final plan.
(4) Statement of reasons for actions. All actions on the preliminary plan or final plan by the Planning Commission and the
Township Board shall state the reasons for approval, conditional approval, postponement, or denial within the body of the
motion.
(5) Final approval. A preliminary plan approved in conformance with subsection (c) of this section shall be granted final open
space planned unit development plan approval if it meets the applicable standards of this article and is substantially in
conformance with the approved preliminary plan.
Sec. 38-239. Permit conditions.
(a) Reasonable conditions may be required by the Planning Commission and Township Board before the approval of a planned unit
development, to the extent authorized by law, for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed
land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity,
protecting the natural environment and conserving natural resources and energy, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of
land, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Permit conditions may be drafted in writing,
specifying conditions of approval and use. Conditions may stipulate that the open space planned unit development may only be
used for selective land uses, provided the restraints:
(1) Advance, rather than injure, the interests of adjacent landowners;
(2) Are a means of harmonizing private interests in land, thereby benefiting the public interest;
(3) Are for the purposes of ensuring that the open space planned unit development fulfills the purposes and intent of this article
and, thereby, benefit the public interest; and/or
(4) Possess a reasonable relationship to the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.
(b) Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and the public health, safety, and welfare of individuals in the
project and those immediately adjacent thereto, and the community as a whole, reasonably related to the purposes affected by the
planned unit development, and necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this article, and be related to the objective of ensuring
compliance with the standards of this article. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of the written record of the approved
planned unit development, which shall include a site plan and written open space planned unit development permit conditions
signed by the Township and the applicant.
(c) If conditions set forth in this section are not complied with, then the supervisor shall have the right to compel a show cause
hearing by the Planning Commission or issue a violation pursuant to Section 38-46(a). At the show cause hearing, additional
conditions may be imposed by the Planning Commission or the Township may require submittal of a new open space planned unit
development application.
V-15
ARTICLE V
Sec. 38-240. Phasing and commencement of construction.
(a) Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the planning and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each
phase shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open space, and shall contain the
necessary components to ensure protection of natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the planned unit
development and the residents of the surrounding area. In addition, in developments which include residential and nonresidential
uses, the relative mix of uses and the scheduled completion of construction for each phase shall be disclosed and determined to be
reasonable, in the discretion of the Township Board, after recommendation from the Planning Commission.
(b) Construction shall be commenced within one (1) year following final approval of an open space planned unit development and
shall proceed substantially in conformance with the schedule set forth by the applicant and in accordance with this article. If
construction is not commenced within such time, any approval of a site plan on the project shall expire and be null and void,
provided an extension for a specified period may be granted by the Planning Commission, upon good cause shown, if such request
is made to the Planning Commission prior to the expiration of the initial period. If a site plan has expired, the Planning Commission
shall be authorized to rezone the property in any reasonable manner, and, if the property remains classified as planned unit
development, a new application shall be required, and shall be reviewed according to existing and applicable law and ordinance
provisions at the time of any subsequent submission.
Sec. 38-241. Effect of approval.
When approved, the planned unit development amendment, with all conditions imposed, if any, shall constitute the land use
authorization for the property, and all improvement and use shall be in conformity with such amendment. Notice of adoption of the final
open space planned unit development site plan and open space planned unit development permit conditions shall be recorded with the
county register of deeds, at the applicant’s expense.
Sec. 38-242. Deviations from approved final site plan.
Deviations from the approved final open space planned unit development site plan may occur only in accordance with the following:
(1) Deviations shall be reviewed by an open space planned unit development committee, comprised of the building and zoning
official, Township planner, and Planning Commission chairperson or designee.
(2) An applicant or property owner who has been granted final open space planned unit development site plan approval shall
notify the open space planned unit development committee of any proposed amendment to such approved site plan or open
space planned unit development conditions.
(3) Minor changes to the final open space planned unit development site plan may be approved by the open space planned
unit development committee upon certification in writing to the Planning Commission that the proposed revision does not
alter the basic design, nor any conditions of the plan imposed upon the original approval by the Planning Commission. In
considering such a determination, the open space planned unit development committee shall consider the following to be
minor changes:
a. For residential buildings, the size of structures may be reduced or increased by five percent (5%), provided that the overall
density of units does not increase;
b. Square footage of nonresidential buildings may be decreased or increased by up to five percent (5%) or ten thousand
(10,000) square feet, whichever is smaller;
c. Horizontal and/or vertical elevations may be altered by up to five percent (5%);
d. A building may be moved by no more than ten (10) feet;
V-16
ARTICLE V
e. Designated areas not to be disturbed may be increased;
f. Plantings approved in the final open space planned unit development landscape plan may be replaced by similar types of
landscaping on a one-to-one (1:1) or greater basis;
g. Improvements may be made to site access or circulation, such as inclusion of deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing,
pedestrian/bicycle paths, etc.;
h. Changes of building materials to another of higher quality may be made, as determined by the open space planned unit
development committee;
i. Changes may be made in floor plans, which do not alter the character of the use;
j. Slight modifications of sign placement or reduction of size may be made;
k. Relocation of sidewalks and/or refuse storage stations may be made;
l. Internal rearrangement of a parking lot may be made, which does not affect the number of parking spaces or alter access
locations or design;
m. Changes required or requested by the Township for safety reasons may be made.
(4) Should the open space planned unit development committee determine that the requested modification to the approved final
open space planned unit development site plan is not minor, or if a change in land use has occurred which is different than
land uses previously approved, resubmittal to the Planning Commission and Township Board shall be necessary and a new
public hearing and notification under Section 38-238 shall be required. After the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall refer the revised open space planned unit development plan to the Township Board, with a recommendation from the
Planning Commission.
(5) Should the Planning Commission’s plan significantly alter the intent of the preliminary open space planned unit development
site plan, a new submittal, illustrating the modification, shall be required.
(6) Any deviation from the approved open space planned unit development site plan, except as authorized in this section, shall be
considered a violation of this article and treated as a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to Section 38-46(a). Further, any such
deviation shall invalidate the open space planned unit development designation.
(7) Approved plans for an open space planned unit development that do not qualify as minor under subsection (3) of this section
may be revised by resubmitting a final open space planned unit development site plan for approval following the procedures
of this article.
Secs. 38-243 - 38-270. Reserved.
V-17
ARTICLE V
V-18
This page is left intentionally blank.
ARTICLE VI
ARTICLE VI. RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT OPTION*
Sec. 38-271. Intent.
(a) It is the intent of this article to promote the goals of the Township’s Master Plan to permit, by means of a special use permit in
accordance with procedures specified in Section 38-44, the development of single-family dwellings in patterns which will:
(1) Protect productive agricultural lands and preserve open space.
(2) Minimize the demand for public services.
(3) Encourage a more creative approach to rural residential development, rather than conventional land division, and allow
greater flexibility in the siting of units.
(4) Provide a more desirable living environment through the preservation and conservation of natural features, such as
topography, wetlands, woodlands, water bodies, and other natural assets.
(5) Reduce the number of driveways accessing county primary and local roads.
(b) It is further the intent of this article to address the open space preservation zoning requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling
Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq.
Sec. 38-272. Eligibility criteria.
To be eligible for residential cluster development consideration, the applicant must present a special use permit proposal for a residential
cluster development that meets each of the following requirements:
(1) Recognizable benefits. A residential cluster development shall result in a recognizable and substantial benefit both to the
residents of the property and to the preservation of open space or agriculture in the Township. Such benefit should accrue in
spite of any foreseeable detriments of the proposed development.
(2) Open space.
a. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the parent parcel may be developed as a cluster residential development. A
minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the gross buildable area of the parent parcel shall be preserved as open space. For the
purposes of this subsection, the term “gross buildable area” means the portion of the gross site area not containing open
bodies of water, streams, floodplains, and wetlands, as defined by the MDEQ. The preserved buildable area of the site
shall remain as a single contiguous parcel and be designated as an open space preservation area. For the purposes of this
requirement, preserved buildable areas of the site may be considered contiguous when they are linked via unbuildable
areas.
b. The proposed development shall be under single ownership and/or control so that there is a single person or
entity having proprietary responsibility for the full completion of the project. The applicant shall provide sufficient
documentation of ownership and/or control in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants, and/or deed restrictions
that indicate that the development will be completed in its entirety as proposed.
(3) Guarantee of maintenance of open space. The applicant shall guarantee to the satisfaction of the Township Planning
Commission that all open space portions of the development will be maintained in the manner approved. Documents shall be
presented that bind all successors and future owners in fee title to commitments made as part of the proposal. Such provision
shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership or control, provided notice of such transfer is provided to the Township and the land
uses continue as approved in the residential cluster development plan.
(4) Zoning. The Residential Cluster Development Option may only be considered for the following zoning districts:
a. Residential Farming (RF);
b. Residential Rural Estate (RE);
VI-1
ARTICLE VI
c. Residential Single Family (R-3);
d. Residential Single Family (R-2A);
e. Residential Single Family (R-2).
Sec. 38-273. Project design standards.
A proposed residential cluster development shall comply with the following project design standards:
(1) Location. A residential cluster development may be approved as a special use in accordance with Section 38-44 in the zoning
districts listed in Section 38-272(4).
(2) Density without public utilities. The minimum lot size of any residential lot or condominium unit within a cluster
development that is not served by central sanitary sewer and central water shall generally be one-half acre, unless the county
health department determines that the minimum lot size must be greater.
(3) Open space requirements.
a. A residential cluster development shall maintain a minimum of fifty (50%) percent of the gross buildable area of the site
as dedicated open space held in common ownership as noted in Section 38-272(2) and (3).
b. All land within a development that is not devoted to a lot of record, including a residential lot or condominium unit, an
accessory use, vehicle access, vehicle parking, or a recorded roadway right-of-way, shall be set aside as common land for
recreation, conservation, agricultural uses, or preserved in an undeveloped state.
c. The dedicated open space shall be set aside by the developer through an irrevocable conveyance that is acceptable
to the Planning Commission, such as a recorded deed restriction, covenants that run perpetually with the land, or a
conservation easement established per the State Conservation and Historic Preservation Act, part 21, subpart 11, Public
Act 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.2140 et seq.). Such conveyance shall assure that the open space will be protected from all
forms of development, except that which is consistent with the definition of the term “undeveloped state,” and is shown
on an approved site plan, and shall never be changed to another use. Such conveyance shall:
1. Indicate the proposed allowable uses of the dedicated open space.
2. Require that the dedicated open space be maintained by parties who have an ownership interest in the open space.
3. Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space.
(4) Areas not considered open space. The following land areas are not to be counted toward satisfying the open space
preservation requirement of subsection (3) of this section:
a. The area of any street right-of way proposed to be dedicated to the public.
b. The area of any lot or unit.
c. Unbuildable land, including wetlands, floodplain areas, open bodies of water, and streams.
d. Golf courses.
(5) Continuing obligation. The dedicated open space shall forever remain open space, subject to development with only the
uses approved by the Township on the approved site plan. Further subdivision of open space land or its use for other than
recreation, conservation, or agricultural purposes, except for easements for utilities and septic systems, shall be strictly
prohibited.
(6) Allowable structures. Only structures that would be consistent with an “undeveloped state” as defined herein may be
erected within the dedicated open space, subject to the approved open space plan. This may include recreational trails, picnic
area, children’s play area, greenway, or linear park. Such accessory structures shall not exceed, in the aggregate, one percent
(1%) of the required open space area. Buildings and structures not consistent with such definition of the term “undeveloped
state” may not be constructed within the dedicated open space.
(7) Common areas. No lot or parcel shall have direct driveway access to a county designated primary or local road. All lots
or parcels shall have frontage on, and direct access to, a newly constructed public or private road which meets one of the
following conditions:
VI-2
ARTICLE VI
a. A public street which has been accepted for maintenance by the county road commission;
b. A permanent and unobstructed private road approved by the Township Board and built in accordance with the Township
standards for private roads.
(8) Setback. All residential structures within a residential cluster development shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet
from a public road right-of-way.
(9) Density plan.
a. The density allowable within a residential cluster development shall be determined through preparation of a density
plan.
b. The applicant shall prepare, and present to the Planning Commission for review, an alternate design for the project, or
“density plan,” employing a conventional lot layout. The density plan shall contain the following elements:
1. Layout of roads and rights-of-way;
2. Lot lines;
3. Boundaries of wetlands, streams and open bodies of water;
4. Floodplain boundaries;
5. Lot numbers and a schedule of lot areas;
6. Areas proposed for stormwater management.
c. A residential cluster development may be developed as: 1) an acreage parcel division, subject to the limitations of the
Michigan Land Division Act; 2) a subdivision plat; or 3) a site condominium. All acreage parcels or site condominium
developments proposed under this section shall be subject to site plan review (Article II). All subdivisions shall be subject
to subdivision plat review. Unbuildable areas, including open bodies of water, streams, floodplains, and wetlands (as
defined by the MDEQ), shall be excluded from the density plan for purposes of calculating maximum allowable density.
d. The density plan shall be prepared with the following minimum lot areas and shall be only used to determine allowable
density for a residential cluster development:
Zoning District
Underlying Zoning
Minimum Lot Size
Density Plan
Minimum Lot Size
RF 5 acres 2.5 acres
RE 2 acres 2 acres
R-3 1 acre 1 acre
R-2A 32,670 square feet 32,670 square feet
R-2 21,750 square feet 21,750 square feet
e. The density plan shall meet all standards for lot size as shown in subsection c. above, and shall meet lot width and yard
setback requirements required by Section 38-136.
Sec. 38-274. Project standards and requirements.
In considering any application for approval of a residential cluster development, the Planning Commission shall make determinations on
the basis of the standards for special use permits (see Section 38-44), as well as the following standards and requirements:
(1) Compliance with Master Plan. The overall design and land uses proposed in connection with a residential cluster
development shall be consistent with the intent of the residential cluster development, as well as the Township Master Plan.
(2) Specifications and design features. The proposed residential cluster development plan shall set forth in detail all
specifications with respect to setbacks, density, and other design features. Such specifications and design features shall exhibit
due regard for the relationship of the development to surrounding properties, the character of the site, and the proposed land
uses. In determining whether this requirement has been met, consideration shall be given to:
VI-3
ARTICLE VI
a. Placement of proposed structures, as well as lot layout and design.
b. Vehicular circulation, road layout, and configuration.
c. Location of agricultural operations.
d. Preservation of natural resources, including protection of woodlands, wetlands, and floodplains.
e. Stormwater management and compliance with Low Impact Development Standards Manual for Michigan and the Green
Oak Charter Township Stormwater Management Ordinance. Refer to Figure 38-366-1 for representative LID techniques.
(3) Environmental protection laws and regulations. The proposed residential cluster development shall be protective of the
natural environment and shall comply with all applicable environmental protection laws and regulations.
(4) Compliance with applicable regulations. The proposed cluster development community shall comply with all applicable
federal, state, and local regulations.
Sec. 38-275. General requirements.
(a) Application. The application for a residential cluster development shall be made according to procedures and guidelines adopted
by resolution of the Planning Commission and Section 38-44. The required materials shall be submitted to the building department
office, with all required fees.
(b) Recording of action. The applicant shall record an affidavit with the register of deeds containing the full legal description of the
project site, specifying the date of final Township approval and declaring that all improvements and open space dedication will be
carried out in accordance with the approved residential cluster development plan, unless a subsequent amendment is adopted by
the Township. In addition, all deed restrictions and easements shall be duly filed with the register of deeds of the county and copies
of recorded documents shall be presented to the Township.
(c) Permits. Following final approval of the residential cluster development, and presentation of evidence of the required recording as
set forth in subsection (b) of this section, a land use permit may be obtained. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain
all other applicable township, county, state, or federal permits.
(d) Failure to maintain approved site design. Any property owner who fails to maintain the approved site design shall be deemed
in violation of the use provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties for such violation.
(e) Performance guarantee. The Planning Commission may require that a performance guarantee, in accordance with Section 38-
47, be deposited with the Township to ensure completion of applicable proposed improvements.
Sec. 38-276. Revisions.
Approved plans for a residential cluster development may be revised in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter or as
approved by the Planning Commission.
Sec. 38-277. Minor changes.
Notwithstanding Section 38-276, minor changes to an approved residential cluster development plan may be permitted by the building
department and Planning Commission chairperson or designee, subject to the finding of all of the following:
(1) Such changes will not adversely affect the initial basis for granting approval;
(2) Such minor change will not adversely affect the overall open space community, in light of the intent and purpose of such
development as set forth in this article; and
VI-4
ARTICLE VI
(3) Such changes shall not result in the reduction of the open space area as required in this article.
Secs. 38-278 - 38-310. Reserved.
VI-5
ARTICLE VI
VI-6
This page is left intentionally blank.
ARTICLE VII
ARTICLE VII. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING*
Sec. 38-311. Parking requirements generally.
(a) Facilities required. In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles
for the use of occupants, employees, and patrons of the buildings erected, altered, or extended after the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived shall be provided as prescribed in this article. Such space shall be maintained and
shall not be encroached upon as long as the main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are
provided elsewhere in conformance with this article.
(b) Parking lot area. For the purpose of this article, two hundred and eighty (280) square feet of parking lot area shall be deemed a
parking area space for one (1) vehicle, including the access aisle.
(c) Fractional requirements. When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (½) may be disregarded and fractions over one-half
(½) shall require one (1) parking space.
(d) Location for one-family and two-family dwellings. The off-street parking facilities required for one-family and two-family
dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building such facilities are intended to serve, but shall not be
considered a parking lot under the provisions of Section 38-313.
(e) Location for multiple-family dwellings. The off-street parking facilities for multiple-family dwellings shall be located on the
same lot or plot of ground as the dwellings such facilities are intended to serve, and shall consist of a parking lot, as set forth in
Section 38-313. In no event shall any uncovered parking space be located closer than ten (10) feet to any main building.
(f) Location for other uses. The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or within five
hundred (500) feet of the permitted uses requiring such off-street parking, and such distance is to be measured along lines of
public access to the property between the nearest point of the parking facility to the building to be served. In districts other than
PL, LI, and GI the front setback area shall remain as open space, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for
landscaping, plant materials, or vehicle access drives. In the PL, LI, and GI district, parking for employees and customers may be
located within the front yard with a minimum setback of 20 feet to allow for Landscaping adjacent to roads per Section 38-177(c)
(2). A fully executed parking easement agreement for all off-site parking shall be signed by all parties involved and recorded for all
off-street parking intended to service the main facility.
(g) Seating capacity. As used in this article to determine parking requirements, the term “seat” means that each twenty-four (24)
inches of seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat, except that where specifications and plans filed with the administrator
specify a certain seating capacity for a particular building, such specified seating capacity shall be used as the basis for determining
required parking spaces.
(h) Similar uses and requirements. In the case of a use not specifically listed in this article and which is similar to another use listed,
the requirements for off-street parking facilities for the similar use shall apply.
(i) Floor area. For the purpose of this article, the floor area used to determine the required number of parking spaces shall be as
defined in Section 38-1.
VII-1
ARTICLE VII
(j) Existing off-street parking. Off-street parking existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived,
which serves an existing building or use, shall not be reduced in size to less than that required under the terms of this article.
(k) Collective provisions. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent collective provision of off-street parking facilities for
two (2) or more buildings or uses, provided such facilities collectively shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the
various individual uses computed separately in accordance with Section 38-312. A fully executed parking easement agreement for
all off-site parking intended to service the main facility shall be signed by all parties involved and recorded.
(l) Parking time limit. Except when land is used as storage space in connection with the business of a repair or service garage, a
twenty-four (24) hour time limit for parking in nonresidential off-street parking areas shall prevail. It is the purpose and intent
of this article that the requirement of maintaining vehicle storage or parking space is to provide for the public safety in keeping
parked cars off the streets. Such requirement is not designed or intended to provide, and shall not permit, the storage or prolonged
parking of wrecked or junked cars on any such parking area in any such district, or for creating a junkyard or a nuisance in such
areas.
(m) Parking on private property restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any private property,
use such private property for vehicle storage or use any portion of any private property as a parking space, without the express or
implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of such property. A complaint
for the violation of this subsection shall be made by the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of such property.
Sec. 38-312. Off-street parking space requirements.
The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings as
specified in Section 38-311 shall be determined in accordance with the following table, and the space so required shall be stated in the
application for a building and land use permit and shall be irrevocably reserved for such use and/or shall comply with Section 38-311:
USE
REQUIRED NUMBER OF
PARKING SPACES
UNIT OF MEASURE
Residential
Single-family or two-family dwellings 2 Per each dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwellings
2 Per each dwelling unit, plus
1 Per each ten (10) dwelling units
Senior citizen housing
1 Per each dwelling unit, plus
1 Per each ten (10) dwelling units
Institutional
Churches 1
Per each three (3) seats, based on maximum seating capacity in the main place
of assembly therein
Private clubs and lodges 1
Per each three (3) individual members allowed within the maximum occupancy
load as established by local county, state, fire, health, or building codes
Hospitals
1 Per each two (2) beds, plus
1 Per staff doctor, plus
1 Per each two (2) employees
VII-2
ARTICLE VII
Convalescent homes, homes for the aged, nursing
homes, and children’s homes
1 Per each four (4) beds, plus
1 Per each staff doctor, plus
1 Per each two (2) employees
High schools
1 Per each teacher, plus
1 Per each ten (10) students, plus
1 Per each employee or administrator, plus
Requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall therein
Elementary and junior high schools, and trade
schools
1 Per each teacher, plus
1 Per each employee or administrator, plus
Requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall therein
Child care centers, day nurseries, or nursery
schools
1 Per each four hundred (400) square feet of UFA, plus
1 Per each employee
Stadiums and sports arenas 1 Per each four (4) seats or eight (8) feet of bench
Commercial
Retail stores, except as otherwise specified in this
table
1 Per each two hundred (200) square feet of GFA, plus
1 Per each three (3) employees
Furniture, appliances, and household equipment,
repair shops, hardware stores, and other similar
uses
1 Per each eight hundred (800) square feet of UFA, plus
1 Per each two (2) employees
Auto salesroom, wholesale stores, machinery
sales, and other similar uses
1 Per each one thousand (1,000) square feet of UFA, plus
1 Per each employee
Medical clinics and dental clinics
3 Per each staff or visiting doctor, plus
1 Per each employee
Business and professional offices 1 Per each three hundred (300) square feet of GFA
Motels, hotels, and tourist homes
1 Per each guest bedroom, plus
1 Per each employee, plus amount required for accessory uses
Banks (other than drive-in) and post offices
1 Per each two hundred (200) square feet of UFA, plus
1 Per each employee
Banks, drive-in 4 Per each teller window
Barbershops and beauty shops 3 Per each operator
Bowling alleys
6 Per bowling lane, plus
Amount required for accessory uses
Drive-in restaurants
1 Per each fifty (50) square feet of GFA, plus
1
Per each two (2) employees, with a minimum total of twenty-five (25) parking
spaces
Fast food drive-in restaurants
1 Per each one hundred and twenty-five (125) square feet of GFA, plus
1
Per each two (2) employees, with a minimum total of twenty-five (25) parking
spaces
VII-3
ARTICLE VII
Establishments (other than drive-in restaurants)
in which is conducted the sale and consumption
on the premises of food, beverages, or refreshments
1
Per each three (3) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as
established by local, state, or county fire, health, or building codes, plus
1 Per each three (3) employees, or
1 Per each one hundred (100) square feet of UFA, plus
1 Per each three (3) employees (whichever is greater)
Private tennis, swim, or golf clubs, or other similar
uses
1 Per each two (2) member family or individual, plus
Amount required for accessory uses
Golf courses, open to the general public
5 Per each hole, plus
1 Per each employee, plus
Amount required for accessory uses
Filling stations and automobile service stations
2 Per each service stall, plus
1 Per each employee, plus
1 Per each service vehicle
Motor vehicle wash establishments (self-serve) 4 Per each wash stall
Motor vehicle wash establishments (other than
self-serve)
4
Per each unit which represents the establishment’s maximum capacity as computed
by dividing the linear dimensions of the mechanical wash/dry operation
by twenty (20) feet, plus
1 Per each employee
Service garages, auto repair shops, collision or
bump shops, and other similar uses
1 Per each eight hundred (800) square feet of UFA, plus
1
Per each two (2) employees computed on the basis of the maximum number of
employees on duty at any one (1) time, plus
2 Per each stall or service area
Open air business (not otherwise provided for in
this table)
1 Per each eight hundred (800) square feet of lot area used for such business
Personal service establishments (not otherwise
provided for in this table)
1 Per each three hundred (300) square feet of UFA, plus
1 Per each two (2) employees
Theaters, auditoriums, and assembly halls
2
Per each five (5) seats, based on the maximum seating capacity in the main
place of assembly therein, plus
1 Per each two (2) employees
Industrial
Industrial or manufacturing establishments and
research establishments
1
Per each one and one-half (1½) employees computed on the basis of the greatest
number of persons employed at any one (1) time, day or night, or
1 Per each two thousand (2,000) square feet of UFA (whichever is greater)
Warehouses and storage buildings
1
Per each two (2) employees computed on the basis of the greatest number of
persons employed at any one (1) time, day or night, or
1 Per each two thousand (2,000) square feet of GFA (whichever is greater)
VII-4
ARTICLE VII
Sec. 38-313. Parking lot construction and operation.
The construction of any parking lot shall be in accordance with the requirements of this section and such construction shall be completed
and approved by the administrator and the Township engineer before actual use of the property as a parking lot and before a certificate
of use and occupancy is issued. Plans for the development of any parking lot must be submitted to the administrator, prepared at a
scale of not less than fifty (50) feet equals one (1) inch and indicating existing and proposed grades, drainage, pipe sizes, dimensions
of all parking, type of curbing, drive and aisle dimensions, lighting, adjacent main buildings, sidewalls, landscaping, surfacing and base
materials to be used, and the layout of the proposed parking lot. The plans are to be prepared in a presentable form by persons competent
in such work and shall reflect conformance with the following provisions:
(1) Surfacing. All such parking lots, driveways, or loading areas required for uses other than single-family or two-family
residential shall be hard surfaced with a pavement having an asphalt or concrete binder, or if using LID technique, other hardsurfaced
permeable materials, shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate within
or upon such area, and shall be completely constructed prior to a certificate of use and occupancy being issued. No surface
water from such parking lot area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining private property or regulated wetlands without
first flowing into a sedimentation management facility. Under certain conditions, the Planning Commission shall have the
discretion of waiving certain hard surface paving requirements where:
a. Driveways, loading, or turnaround or storage areas receive only limited use and are not used for employee parking,
customer parking, or primary access.
b. Gravel surfacing and potential problems arising from dust or scattered gravel will not impact neighboring properties.
c. Hard surfacing will significantly increase stormwater runoff and create a potential for flooding and/or soil erosion.
(2) Illumination. All illumination for or on all such parking lots shall be designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with
Section 38-364.
(3) Front yard setback. The depth of the front yard setback line from the street as established for houses in any block in any
given residential area shall be continuous and made applicable to parking space in such residential area and it shall be
unlawful to use the space between such setback line and the sidewalk for the parking of motor vehicles except for parking
in driveways for single-family and duplex homes. For PL, LI, and GI districts the front setback for parking lots for shall be a
minimum of twenty (20) feet from the property line.
(4) Rear yard setback. When a required nonresidential parking lot or parking area is situated on a parcel which adjoins a
residential district or a residential use abutting directly or across a roadway, the respective side or rear yard setback in which
such parking is located shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet, of which the fifteen (15) feet nearest the respective property
line is developed as a greenbelt, extending from the front yard setback to the rear yard setback in the case of side yard parking
adjoining the residential use, or the width of the rear of the lot in the case of rear yard parking adjoining the residential use.
The greenbelt may be, upon Planning Commission approval, replaced by an eight (8) foot wide strip of lawn containing a five
(5) foot masonry wall located within two (2) feet of the respective property line.
(5) Ingress and egress. Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot, by means of limited and clearly defined drives, shall be
provided for all vehicles. The minimum paving width of ingress/egress lanes shall be as follows:
a. One (1) way traffic, fifteen (15) feet;
b. Two (2) way traffic, twenty-four (24) feet.
(6) Wheel chocks. Wheel chocks shall be provided and located so as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over the lot or setback
lines.
(7) Backing onto roadway. Backing onto a public or private roadway from an off-street parking space shall be prohibited.
(8) Layout plans. Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the minimum regulations set
forth in the following table. The minimum parking space dimensions for a layout not provided for in the following table shall
be nine and one-half (9 ½) feet in width, eighteen (18) feet in length and one hundred and seventy-one (171) square feet in
area.
VII-5
ARTICLE VII
Parking Pattern
(degrees)
Maneuvering Lane Width
Parking Space Width Parking Space Length (feet)
One-Way (feet) Two-Way (feet)
0 (parallel) 12 20 9 feet 20
30 - 53 12 20 9 feet 20
54 - 74 15 24 9 feet 20
75 - 90 15 24 9 feet 6 inches 18
(9) Handicapped parking facilities. All parking facilities shall conform to all state and federal regulations, particularly the
Americans with Disabilities Act. Handicapped parking shall be clearly designated and provided according to the following
schedule:
Accessible Parking Spaces (Required Minimum)
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Accessible Spaces
1 - 25 1
26 - 50 2
51 - 75 3
76 - 100 4
101 - 150 5
151 - 200 6
201 - 300 7
301 - 400 8
401 - 500 9
501 - 1,000 2*
1,001 and over 20**
* Percent of total
** Plus one (1) space for each one hundred (100) over one thousand (1,000)
a. One (1) in eight (8) accessible spaces shall have an access aisle that is eight (8) feet wide and shall be signed as “van
accessible.”
(10) Stormwater management. The design of parking lots and associated stormwater drainage shall be in compliance with the
Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan and the Green Oak Charter Township Stormwater Ordinance. Refer to Figure
38-366-1 for representative LID techniques.
VII-6
ARTICLE VII
Sec. 38-314. Parking and storage of commercial and recreational vehicles.
(a) Parking and storage of commercial vehicles and equipment.
(1) Commercial vehicles and equipment shall include, but shall not be limited to, tractors (excluding lawn tractors), bulldozers,
earth carriers, drag lines, cranes, back hoes, dump trucks, stake trucks, flatbed trucks, panel trucks, cube vans, wreckers, septic
tank pumpers, semi-tractors, tanker trucks, well-drilling rigs, welding trucks, semi-trailers, and any other type of commercial
or construction equipment, as well as any other motor vehicles not customarily used for passenger transport.
(2) The open storage or outdoor parking of commercial vehicles or equipment in residentially-zoned or used areas of the Township
shall be prohibited, with the following exceptions:
a. The open storage and outdoor parking of panel trucks, cube vans, and/or trailers is permitted provided that the following
standards are adhered to:
1. Panel trucks and cube vans shall not exceed twenty eight (28) feet in length, nor have more than two (2) axles (one
(1) steering and one (1) drive).
2. Trailers shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in bed length, exclusive of the tongue, nor have more than two (2) axles
(tandem).
3. No more than three (3) trailers shall be stored outdoors in residentially zoned or used lots.
4. All such vehicles parked or stored on residentially zoned or used property shall be owned by the current owner or
occupant of the subject property, and shall be properly licensed.
5. All such vehicles shall adhere to the standards set forth in Section 38-314(b) for recreational vehicles.
b. For the purposes of this section, motor vehicles customarily used for passenger transport (i.e. sedans, coupes, hatchbacks,
station wagons, minivans, vans, pick-up trucks, sport utility vehicles, etc.) shall not be considered commercial vehicles,
even when used for a commercial purpose.
(3) The open storage or outdoor parking of commercial vehicles and/or equipment shall be allowed in any zoning district where
such parking or storage is limited to vehicles or equipment engaged in the performance of a service on the adjacent or
underlying property, for the period of time reasonably necessary to complete the service. Utility service vehicles, emergency
service vehicles, and vehicles engaged in agricultural activities are also exempt from these provisions.
(b) Parking and storage of recreational vehicles on residentially zoned or used property.
(1) Recreational vehicles shall include, but shall not be limited to, campers, motor homes, travel trailers, boats, jet skis and other
personal watercraft, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), and associated trailers.
(2) The outdoor parking and open storage of recreational vehicles shall be allowed on residentially zoned or used property,
subject to the following provisions:
a. Such parking and storage shall be prohibited within any public road right-of-way or private road easement.
b. When recreational vehicles are parked or stored on non-waterfront lots, such parking or storage shall be prohibited
within the required front yard setback.
c. When recreational vehicles are parked or stored on waterfront lots, such parking or storage shall be prohibited within a
twenty (20) foot setback from road right-of-way or private road easement.
d. In no case shall a recreational vehicle be parked or stored less closer than five (5) feet from the principal building on a
residential lot or parcel.
e. Recreational vehicles parked or stored on a residential lot or parcel shall not be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping
purposes.
f. The repair, refurbishing, or reconstruction of licensed and operable recreational vehicles on residential property shall be
subject to the following:
VII-7
ARTICLE VII
1. Recreational vehicles being worked on shall be on an improved driveway surface.
2. Procedures exceeding forty-eight (48) hours in duration or which require the vehicle to be inoperable in excess of
forty-eight (48) hours shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
3. Inoperable vehicles and vehicle parts shall be stored inside an enclosed building.
Sec. 38-315. Parking and storage of personal recreational vehicles on unbuildable lots.
(a) Recreational vehicles, as defined in Section 38-314, may be parked or stored on lots or parcels of land determined to be unbuildable
by the building official or Zoning Board of Appeals, subject to the provisions of subsection (b), below. In determining whether a
property is unbuildable, the property’s size, shape, existence of wetlands, floodplain condition, or presence of easements or deed
restrictions shall be taken into consideration.
(b) The outdoor parking and open storage of recreational vehicles on unbuildable lots or parcels, as permitted in subsection (a), above,
shall be subject to the following provisions:
(1) Only those recreational vehicles owned by the owner of the unbuildable property shall be stored on said property. Storage of
recreational vehicles belonging to those other than the property owner, whether in exchange for some form or remuneration
or not, shall be prohibited.
(2) Such vehicle storage shall only be permitted on property within one hundred (100) feet of the lot or parcel containing the
vehicle owner’s residence.
(3) Such parking and storage shall be prohibited within any public road right-of way or private road easement, and within any
wetland area.
(4) Such parking and storage shall be prohibited within the following setbacks:
a. Front: Twenty (20) feet
b. Side and rear (except waterfront): Ten (10) feet
c. Waterfront: Twenty (20) feet
(5) Recreational vehicles parked or stored on such unbuildable lots or parcels shall not be used for living, sleeping, or
housekeeping purposes.
(6) No buildings or structures shall be constructed in association with recreational vehicles parked or stored on such unbuildable
lots or parcels.
(7) The repair, refurbishing, or reconstruction of recreational vehicles on such unbuildable lots or parcels shall be prohibited.
(8) Inoperable vehicles and vehicle parts shall not be stored on such unbuildable parcels.
(9) Recreational vehicles stored pursuant to the provisions of this section shall display current licenses or registration, as required
by law.
Sec. 38-316. Off-street loading requirements.
(a) On the same premises with every building, or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods
display, department store, wholesale, market, hotel, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or
distribution of vehicles, material, or merchandise, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading services shall be provided
and maintained on the lot in order to avoid undue interference with the street or parking areas. Such loading and unloading space,
unless completely and adequately provided for within a building, shall be an area of ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet, with a fourteen
(14) foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule:
VII-8
ARTICLE VII
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Loading and Unloading Spaces Required in Terms of Square Foot Gross Floor Area
0 - 2,000 None
2,000 - 20,000 One
20,000 - 100,000 One, plus one for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,000 square feet
100,000 - 500,000 Five, plus one for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 100,000 square feet
Over 500,000 Fifteen, plus one for each 80,000 square feet in excess of 500,000 square feet
(b) Off-street loading space areas shall not be construed as, or counted toward, the supply of required off-street parking space area.
(c) Backing into a site from a public or private road right-of-way shall be prohibited.
Secs. 38-317 - 38-350. Reserved.
VII-9
ARTICLE VII
VII-10
This page is left intentionally blank.
ARTICLE VIII
ARTICLE VIII. ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Sec. 38-351. Purpose.
No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any district which does not conform to the standards of use, occupancy and operation
set forth in this article, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained within such area.
Sec. 38-352. Smoke.
(a) Smoke, dust and fly ash emissions. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the emission of any smoke, dust, or fly ash from
any source whatsoever to a density greater than that permitted by the Federal Clean Air Standards and the standards promulgated
by the MDEQ pursuant to air pollution control, part 55 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.5501 et seq.).
(b) Air pollution. The state’s air resource is protected by air pollution control, part 55 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.5501 et
seq.). A permit must be issued by the air pollution control commission (APCC) prior to the installation or alteration of any process,
including reconstruction and relocation of a process which is fuel or refuse burning.
(c) Particulate emissions. Particulate emissions present in the ambient air in the form of smoke, dust, fly ash, or other similar forms
shall not be present in quantities which create an opacity level greater than or equal to twenty percent (20%). Such levels are then
injurious to human health or welfare, animal life, plant life, or property.
(d) Compliance report; nuisance dust. The owner or petitioner shall be required to retain a certified observer of visible emissions
to prepare a report over a two (2) week period of reading to prove compliance. Concentrations in excess of five (5) milligrams per
cubic meter are classified as nuisance dust.
(e) Organic emissions.
(1) Organic emissions are allowed as permitted by air pollution control, part 55 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.5501 et
seq.).
(2) If requested, a property owner must demonstrate that property line concentrations of organic emissions do not exceed a one
in 1,000,000 cancer risk level by stack testing and air modeling.
Sec. 38-353. Dust, dirt, and fly ash.
(a) Quantity of emissions. Any person operating, or causing to be operated, any combustion device utilizing coal or synthetic fuels
shall not permit such device to emit into the atmosphere a quantity of gasborne solids in excess of two-tenths (0.20) gram per
cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit.
(b) Measurement method. For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such devices, such conditions are to be conformed
to when the percentage of excess air in the stack does not exceed fifty percent (50%) at full load. Such requirements shall be
measured by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Test Code for dust-separating apparatus. All other forms of
dust, dirt, and fly ash shall be completely eliminated to prevent escape or emission into the open air. The Zoning Administrator
or designee may require such additional data as is deemed necessary to show that adequate and approved provisions for the
prevention and elimination of dust, dirt, and fly ash have been made.
VIII-1
ARTICLE VIII
Sec. 38-354. Glare and electromagnetic radiation.
(a) Glare from any process, such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting, which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be
performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line, and so as not to create a public nuisance
or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes, including electromagnetic radiation emitted through X-ray machine
operation, shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the
property line.
(b) Glare from automobiles, or commercial or industrial vehicle headlights, shall not be directed into any adjacent property so as to
become a nuisance.
(c) Exterior lighting shall be designed, installed, and regulated in accordance with Section 38-364.
Sec. 38-355. Fire and explosive hazards.
The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquified petroleum gases, and explosives shall comply with the state rules and
regulations as established by the fire prevention code, Public Act No. 207 of 1941 (MCL 29.1 et seq.), and the following shall be required:
(1) Approved indoor flammable storage cabinets for flammable materials shall be used.
(2) Outdoor storage containers shall not exceed two hundred (200) gallons.
(3) A concrete pad, with containment features, shall be installed beneath any outdoor storage tank.
(4) A concrete charging pad shall be installed to prevent surface leakage from entering the ground.
(5) A double walled container storage tank shall be installed for aboveground structures protected by a roofed structure.
Sec. 38-356. Regulation of discharges.
Any discharge is regulated by water resources protection, part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.3101 et seq.). Such discharge
shall be deemed illegal unless specifically permitted by the MDEQ or the petitioner can present a permit exemption letter from the MDEQ.
Sec. 38-357. Noise.
All uses of land and activities conducted on land shall comply with Chapter 10, Article IV, the Township Anti-Noise Ordinance.
Sec. 38-358. Waste and rubbish dumping.
No garbage, sewage, filth, refuse, waste, trash, debris, construction surplus, or rubbish, including cans, bottles, wastepaper, cartons,
boxes and crates, or other offensive or obnoxious matter, shall be kept in open containers or piled, placed, stored, or dumped on any land
within the Township in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance, create an eyesore, or create a hazard to the health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the citizens of the Township.
Sec. 38-359. Mineral mining and extractive operations.
(a) Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to promote the underlying spirit and intent of this article, but at
the same time allow for the extraction of minerals in locations where such minerals have been naturally deposited, and ensure
that mineral mining activity shall be compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the capacities of public
VIII-2
ARTICLE VIII
services and facilities affected by the land use, and ensure that mineral mining activities are consistent with the public health,
safety, and welfare of the Township.
(b) Use restriction. Sand, gravel, stone, and/or other mineral mining in the Township shall be prohibited unless first authorized by
the grant of a special approval use application by the Planning Commission in accordance with this section and Section 38-44. In all
events, such use shall be prohibited in LA, R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts, as well as the Natural River and Tributary overlay zones.
(c) Exemption. Usual and customary land balancing by cutting and filling, in preparation for immediately planned and approved
development, in accordance with this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and laws, shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section.
(d) Application. Fifteen (15) copies of an application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator or designee and shall include the
following:
(1) A site plan prepared in accordance with Section 38-71.
(2) Duration of the proposed operation, and the location, timing, and any other relevant details with respect to the phasing and
progression of work on the site.
(3) Land use study/drawing, showing the existing land uses, with a specification of the type of use (e.g., single-family residential,
multiple-family residential, retail, or office) and the density of individual units in the areas shown, including:
a. Property within a radius of one (1) mile around the site; and
b. The property fronting on all vehicular routes within the Township contemplated to be utilized by trucks which will enter
and leave the site.
(4) Geological/hydrological/engineering survey, prepared by appropriate and qualified experts, indicating:
a. The level of the water table throughout the proposed mining areas;
b. An opinion as to each and every effect on the water table, private wells, and property owners within the reasonably
anticipated area of impact during and subsequent to the operation;
c. All qualitative and quantitative aspects of the surface water, groundwater, and watershed anticipated to be impacted
during and subsequent to the operation to the geographical extent reasonably expected to be affected; and
d. An opinion of whether the exposure of subterranean waters and/or the impoundment of surface waters, where
permitted, will establish a suitable water level at the levels proposed as part of the operation, and whether the operation
will interfere with the existing subterranean water or cause any harm or impairment to the general public.
(5) A description of the vehicles, machinery, and equipment proposed for use on the property, specifying with respect to each the
anticipated noise and vibration levels and the hours of operation thereof.
(e) Application review procedure.
(1) The Zoning Administrator or designee shall retain the original of the application for the file, and forward the copies to the
members of the Planning Commission, the Township engineer and planner, and the county road commission.
(2) The Township engineer and planner shall each file a report with the Zoning Administrator or designee, together with a
recommendation on the need for additional experts. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall retain the original of such
reports for the file and forward copies to the Planning Commission.
(3) The Zoning Administrator or designee shall request a report from the county road commission regarding traffic safety relevant
to the application.
(4) After receiving all reports, including any additional reports of experts recommended by the Township engineer and planner,
if deemed appropriate, the Planning Commission shall consider the application in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Section 38-44.
VIII-3
ARTICLE VIII
(5) Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of the application for the special land use to ensure that public
services and facilities affected by the proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and
facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy,
to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable
manner. Conditions imposed shall be reasonable and shall be in compliance with applicable law.
(f) Requirements and standards. The determination of applications submitted under this section shall be based upon the following
requirements and standards, as determined at the discretion of the Planning Commission, and if the application is approved, such
standards and requirements shall be maintained as a condition to continued operation and use by the applicant:
(1) It shall be demonstrated by the applicant that the proposed special land use shall not result in a probable impairment,
pollution, and/or destruction of the air, water, natural resources, and public trust therein.
(2) It shall be demonstrated by the applicant that the proposed special land use shall not result in a probable impairment to the
water table and/or private wells of property owners within the reasonably anticipated area of impact during and subsequent
to the operation.
(3) It shall be demonstrated by the applicant that the proposed special land use shall not create a probable impairment of, and/or
unreasonable alteration in, the course, quantity, and quality of surface water, groundwater, and/or the watershed anticipated
to be impacted by the operation.
(4) Taking into consideration the duration and size of the operation, viewed within the context of the surrounding land uses
in existence, or reasonably anticipated to be in existence during the operation, the proposed special land use shall not be
incompatible with such surrounding uses, based upon an application of generally accepted planning standards and principles.
(5) The proposed special land use shall not unreasonably burden the capacity of public services and facilities.
(6) The proposed special land use shall have immediate and direct access to a paved road having a right-of-way of not less than
one hundred and twenty (120) feet and having necessary and appropriate loadbearing and traffic volume capacity in relation
to the proposed intensity of the use.
(7) The proposed special land use shall not unreasonably impact upon surrounding property and/or property along haul routes,
in terms of noise, dust, air, water, odor, light, and/or vibration, and further shall not unreasonably impact upon persons
perceiving the operation in terms of aesthetics.
(8) All activities conducted in connection with the operation shall occur at least one hundred and sixty (160) feet from the nearest
property line, provided all processing and stockpiling shall be conducted at least two hundred and sixty (260) feet from the
center of the nearest street and two hundred (200) feet from the nearest property line.
(9) The hours of operation shall not reasonably interfere with usual and customary uses of land within the surrounding area
anticipated to be impacted.
(10) Taking into consideration that the Township is conditionally authorizing the special land use in residential districts, and that
the special land use is, to some extent, inharmonious with child rearing and other residentially related activities, and as an
attempt to legislate a balance of interests between the mineral mine user and the owners and/or occupants of residential
property, the maximum duration of the proposed special land use, if conducted in or immediately adjacent to a residential
zoning district, shall be ten (10) years.
(11) The total area being mined, and which has not been reclaimed, shall at no time exceed the lesser of seventy-five (75) acres or
forty percent (40%) of the entire parcel approved as a special use.
(12) The activities of the proposed special land use shall not result in a demand for local services and/or facilities which are, or
become, unavailable, including, without limitation, road and/or drainage facilities, maintenance, and repair.
(13) The proposed transportation routes within the Township shall be as direct and minimal in detrimental impact as reasonably
possible, as determined at the discretion of the Township Board at the time of application and thereafter.
VIII-4
ARTICLE VIII
(g) Reclamation. Reclamation of the site shall be in accordance with a reclamation plan approved by the Planning Commission as
part of the application review process. There shall be no final slopes having a grade in excess of a minimum ratio of one (1) foot
vertical to five (5) feet horizontal, and, for permanent water areas, for a distance of not less than ten (10) feet, nor more than fifty
(50) feet. Submerged slopes shall be graded from the water’s edge at a grade not in excess of a minimum ratio of one (1) foot
vertical to seven (7) feet horizontal. The entire site shall be planted with sufficient vegetation so as to sustain short-term and longterm
growth and in order to avoid erosion and washout. To the extent necessary to achieve such objective, suitable soils shall be
placed on the property. All structures, machinery, equipment, and improvements shall be removed from the site unless, following
approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, they are deemed consistent with the zoning district in which the site is situated. The
Township Board shall have the right to impose performance bonds or letters of credit to ensure that the reclamation and restoration
plans, as submitted, are implemented.
Sec. 38-360. Sanitary landfills.
(a) Intent and purpose.
(1) It is the intent and purpose of this section to:
a. Promote the underlying spirit and intent of this article, but at the same time allow for sanitary landfills through special
approval use;
b. Ensure that such activities shall be compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the capacities of
public services and facilities affected by the land use; and
c. Ensure that such activities are consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare of the Township.
(2) Prior to consideration of a special approval use by the Planning Commission for a sanitary landfill facility in any area of
the Township, the limitations and conditions set forth in this section shall be strictly complied with, in addition to any
other requirements contained in this article or in any other Township ordinance controlling such operations. The rules and
regulations set forth in this section shall apply specifically to each landfill area, unless county or state regulations on any
particular requirement are more restrictive, and then such more restrictive regulation shall apply (solid waste management,
part 115 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.11501 et seq.)).
(b) Application. No sanitary landfill activities shall be allowed or commenced until an application has been submitted to the
Planning Commission, disclosing compliance with all of the provisions of this section or the manner in which compliance will be
secured by the applicant. Fifteen (15) copies of the application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator or designee and shall
include the following:
(1) A site plan prepared in accordance with Section 38-71.
(2) Land use study/drawing, showing the existing land uses, with a specification of the type of use (e.g., single-family residential,
multiple-family residential, retail, or office) and the density of individual units in the areas shown, including the:
a. Property within a radius of one (1) mile around the site; and
b. Property fronting on all vehicular routes within the Township contemplated to be utilized by trucks which will enter and
leave the site.
(3) Number of acres, and the location thereof, proposed to be operated upon within the following twelve (12) month period after
commencement of the operations.
(4) Type of sanitary landfill proposed to be constructed, the nature of the equipment to be used and the materials to be accepted.
(5) Geological/hydrological/engineering survey, prepared by appropriate and qualified experts, indicating:
a. The level of the water table throughout the proposed landfill areas;
b. An opinion as to each and every effect on the water table, private wells, and property owners within the reasonably
anticipated area of impact during and subsequent to the operation;
VIII-5
ARTICLE VIII
c. All qualitative and quantitative aspects of the surface water, groundwater, and watershed anticipated to be impacted
during and subsequent to the operation to the geographical extent reasonably expected to be affected; and
d. Stratigraphic records of all subsurface material in and around the active landfill areas.
(6) A plan map, disclosing the approximate final grade and the levels to be established following completion of the disposal
areas, including the proposed uses being contemplated for the future use of the land.
(c) Application review procedures.
(1) The Zoning Administrator or designee shall retain the original of the application for the file, and forward the copies to the
members of the Planning Commission, the Township engineer and planner, and the county road commission.
(2) The Township engineer and planner shall each file a report with the Zoning Administrator or designee, together with a
recommendation on the need for additional experts. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall retain the original of such
reports for the file and forward copies to the Planning Commission.
(3) The Zoning Administrator or designee shall request a report from the county road commission regarding traffic safety relevant
to the application.
(4) After receiving all reports, including any additional reports of experts recommended by the Township engineer and planner,
if deemed appropriate, the Planning Commission shall consider the application in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Section 38-44.
(5) Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of the application for the special land use to ensure that public
services and facilities affected by the proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and
facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy,
to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable
manner. Conditions imposed shall be reasonable and shall be in compliance with applicable law.
(d) Requirements and standards. The determination of applications submitted under this section shall be based upon the following
requirements and standards, as determined at the discretion of the Planning Commission, and if the application is approved, such
standards and requirements shall be maintained as a condition to continued operation and use by the applicant:
(1) It shall be demonstrated by the applicant that the proposed special land use shall not result in a probable impairment,
pollution, and/or destruction of the air, water, natural resources, and public trust therein.
(2) It shall be demonstrated by the applicant that the proposed special land use shall not result in a probable impairment to the
water table and/or private wells of property owners within the reasonably anticipated area of impact during and subsequent
to the operation.
(3) It shall be demonstrated by the applicant that the proposed special land use shall not create a probable impairment of, and/or
unreasonable alteration in, the course, quantity, and quality of surface water, groundwater, and/or the watershed anticipated
to be impacted by the operation.
(4) Taking into consideration the duration and size of the operation, viewed within the context of the surrounding land uses
in existence, or reasonably anticipated to be in existence during the operation, the proposed special land use shall not be
incompatible with such surrounding uses, based upon an application of generally accepted planning standards and principles.
(5) The proposed special land use shall not unreasonably burden the capacity of public services and facilities.
(6) The proposed special land use shall have immediate and direct access to a state highway or county primary road.
(7) Sufficient setback shall be provided from all property lines and public highways to assure adequate lateral support for
adjacent public and private property. No such disposal area shall be permitted closer than one hundred (100) feet from the
interior boundary lines. In addition, no disposal areas shall be permitted closer than three hundred (300) feet to any domicile
or within three hundred (300) feet of any residential or agricultural district. No such disposal areas shall be permitted closer
than ninety (90) feet to adjacent public rights-of-way, property lines, lakes, and streams. Such disposal areas shall not at any
time be permitted where adjoining lateral support for the maintenance of adjoining land is not maintained.
VIII-6
ARTICLE VIII
(8) Any permanent solid waste processing plant and its accessory structures shall not be located closer than two hundred and fifty
(250) feet from the interior property lines. In addition, if located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residence, it shall be
obscured by a suitable barrier not less than ten (10) feet high, with screening of a type to be decided on an individual basis by
the Planning Commission at the time of application. Where practicable, the processing plant shall be as close to the center of
the subject property as possible, and at a lower level than the surrounding terrain in order to lessen visual and noise impact,
excluding digging or excavating apparatus, stockpiling or loading, and transportation equipment.
(9) Sight barriers shall be provided along all setback lines of the sites which lack natural screening conditions through existing
contours or evergreen growth. Such barriers shall consist of a berm of at least ten (10) feet in height and plantings of
evergreen trees, not more than ten (10) feet apart, or shrubbery not more than five (5) feet apart, in staggered rows, along
the berm and parallel to the boundaries of the property. Evergreens shall be at least two (2) year transplants at the time of
planting, and shall grow to not less than ten (10) feet in height, and shall be sufficiently spaced to provide effective sight
barriers when ten (10) feet in height. Trees or shrubs which die shall be replaced.
(10) The sanitary landfill area is to be fenced with an eight (8) foot high chainlink fence, with three (3) strands of barbed wire
angled forty-five (45) degrees toward the outside of the premises on the top. Such fence shall be located inside of any berms
or screening following the exterior boundaries. The entrance to the sanitary landfill area shall have a gate which shall be
closed and locked at all times that the landfill is not open.
(11) Air pollution, noise, and vibration, and their effects upon adjacent properties, shall be minimized by the utilization of
adequate soundproofing equipment and buildings designed to accomplish such minimization, and by the proper use of
berms, walls, and natural planting screens. Interior and adjoining roads used in the solid waste disposal operations shall have
their surfaces treated to minimize any condition.
(12) The applicant shall demonstrate that an acceptable means of rodent and litter control has been devised.
(13) Any security lighting deemed necessary by the Township and/or the owner/operator shall be the sodium vapor type and shall
be aligned so that no part of the illuminated field shall fall on any adjoining property.
(14) The hours of operation shall not reasonably interfere with usual and customary uses of land within the surrounding area
anticipated to be impacted.
(15) The landfill facility shall be compatible with, and directly referenced in, the adopted and official county solid waste plan and
comply with all standards stated in such plan.
(e) Liability insurance. All applicants shall be required to carry personal injury, pollution liability, major catastrophe, and property
damage insurance, in addition to any and all bonds required by state statute, while any open or unrehabilitated area exists. Such
insurance shall be in an amount set by resolution of the Township Board from time-to-time for each person injured or property
damaged, or for any injury or damage to more than one (1) person or one (1) person’s property, arising out of any occurrence. Such
insurance shall cover injury or damage occurring upon the site of the operation, as well as upon properties adjoining thereto, as the
result of conditions or activities existing upon the site. Such policies shall be filed with the Township clerk, and shall be maintained
in effect for a period of not less than twenty (20) years following final closure and termination of sanitary landfill activities. The
deductible written into the insurance policy shall not exceed five percent (5%) of the per incident limit of the liability of the policy
and the Township shall be named as an additional insured. The coverage obtained by the owner/operator to fulfill the requirements
of this subsection shall include the provisions that the insurer shall notify the Township thirty (30) days prior to the cancellation of
the insurance for any reason.
(f) Closure of disposal areas. Reclamation or rehabilitation of sanitary landfill areas shall be accomplished as soon as practicable
following the completion of an area. Where possible, such reclamation or rehabilitation shall be accomplished concurrently with
the facility’s operations. Substantial completion of reclamation and rehabilitation shall be effected within two (2) years after
the termination of the waste disposal facility. Inactivity for twelve (12) consecutive months shall constitute, for such purpose,
termination of disposal activities. Technical standards which shall control the final reclamation and rehabilitation of the site and the
VIII-7
ARTICLE VIII
post-closure monitoring of the site shall be the rules and regulations written by the MDEQ, which is solid waste management, part
115 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.11501 et seq.).
(g) Permit fees. An annual permit fee, as determined by the Township Board, shall be paid to the Township for all landfill operations.
(h) Site inspection. Site inspection shall be provided by the Township during all hours of operation, at the expense of the owner/
operator. The owner/operator shall pay in advance, on a monthly basis, the actual cost of providing on-site inspection personnel.
Sec. 38-361. Natural River overlay zone.
(a) Purpose. The intent of the Natural River overlay zone is to provide an overlay zone that reinforces the Natural Rivers Act (Part 305
of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended (MCL 324.30501 et seq.)). The purpose of this overlay zone is to preserve and
enhance the recreational, ecological, and aesthetic values of a “natural river” area in the interests of future generations. The natural
river overlay zone establishes supplementary standards by overlaying existing zoning for an area four hundred (400) feet from the
ordinary high-water mark on each side of and parallel to the Huron River and its tributaries, as denoted on the Green Oak Township
zoning map, including:
(1) Huron River from the eastern boundary of Section 1 to the western boundary of Section 18;
(2) Spring Mill Creek from the eastern boundary of section 1 to its confluence with the Huron River, excluding that portion covered
by the Tributary overlay zone in Section 11;
(3) Davis Creek from the eastern boundary of Section 13 to its outlet into Crooked Lake in Section 22, excluding that portion
covered by the Tributary overlay zone in Sections 12, 13, and 14;
(4) Greenock Creek from the outfall of Nichwagh Lake in Section 25 to Sandy Bottom Lake;
(5) South branch of the Huron River from the outfall of Sandy Bottom Lake to its confluence with the Huron River;
It is emphasized that a natural rivers designation, or establishment of an overlay zone along the river, does not open private lands
to the public. Private lands remain private and are subject to the rights of private ownership.
(b) Lot and building standards.
(1) Lot area and width. New parcels, lots, or units created in the natural river overlay zone shall be at least one (1) acre in area,
and shall have a minimum lot width of one hundred and fifty (150) feet at the ordinary high-water mark of the adjacent
stream. Lot width at the front building line shall be as required by the underlying zoning district.
(2) Nonconforming lots of record. Lots of record that are nonconforming at the time of the effective date of these regulations,
because of size to accommodate building setbacks from the water’s edge, may be allowed to be built upon with such variances
as may be allowed by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3) Building setbacks. New buildings and appurtenances on all reaches of the natural river overlay zone will be required to
be set back a minimum of one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet from the ordinary high-water mark. The setback may be
decreased ten (10) feet for every ten (10) foot of rise in bank height to a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the ordinary
high-water mark. In no case shall a building be located any closer than fifty (50) feet from the edge of the steep slope/bluff or
ten (10) feet from the required vegetative strip, whichever provides greater distance from the tributary. Further, no building
shall take place on land that is subject to flooding and all tributaries of the Huron River as defined above.
(c) Nonresidential structures. All existing nonresidential structures shall conform to this section. Commercial uses and structures
are prohibited within the Natural River overlay zone.
VIII-8
ARTICLE VIII
(d) Permits.
(1) In order to ensure that developments within the natural river overlay zone, including dwellings, structures, and land
alterations, including but not limited to dredging, cutting, filling, and timber cutting and/or removal, are done so as to further
the intent and objectives of the natural river overlay zone, approval of a natural rivers/tributary overlay zone permit by the
Zoning Administrator or designee, pursuant to Section 38-50, shall be required. The permit shall be required before any work
can take place in the Natural River Overlay Zone.
(2) The Zoning Administrator or designee may submit the permit application and required plot plan to the Planning Commission
for approval or disapproval of the requested permit in those cases where compliance with this chapter and its requirements
is in question due to the presence of unique or unusual natural features, potential impacts on natural features, existing
nonconformities, or other factors as determined by the Zoning Administrator or designee.
(e) Land alteration.
(1) Cutting, filling for building (including appurtenances) on the floodplain, and filling for buildings on the upland within five
hundred (500) feet of the river’s edge where the groundwater table is within six (6) feet of the surface shall be prohibited.
Dredging or filling for the construction of fish or wildlife ponds within five hundred (500) feet of the river requires a permit
under part 91 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of 1994. However, no lake shall be constructed within the natural river overlay zone.
(2) A stormwater runoff management facility shall be constructed to ensure the protection of the watercourses from unnecessary
degradation due to sedimentation for all stormwater discharges prior to their reaching the ordinary high-water mark of any
lake or stream. The facility shall be built to Township standards.
(f) Building design and screening.
(1) Use of natural materials and colors. Property owners are encouraged to use natural materials and natural unobtrusive
colors in the construction of new or remodeling of existing buildings.
(2) Floodplain restrictions. No structure shall be permitted in the floodplain of the natural river area of the Huron River and its
designated tributaries and no land filling is permitted in the floodplain.
(3) Natural vegetation strip. To minimize erosion, stabilize the riverbank, protect water quality, keep nutrients out of the water,
maintain water temperature at natural levels, preserve fish and wildlife habitat, screen manmade structures, and also to
preserve aesthetic values of the natural river area, a natural vegetation strip shall be maintained on each parcel or lot between
the river’s edge and a line, each point of which is one hundred (100) feet on all land horizontal from and perpendicular to the
river’s edge. Clear cutting within their vegetation strip is strictly prohibited.
For all other lots and parcels, this minimum restricted vegetation strip shall apply on each side of the mainstream and
designated tributaries. The natural vegetation strip shall have three (3) distinct zones requiring the following minimum
widths and vegetative targets:
a. Zone 1: Water Side Zone.
1. Undisturbed vegetated area aims to protect the physical and ecological integrity of the river/stream ecosystem.
2. Begins at the edge of the river/stream bank of the active channel and extends a minimum distance of twenty-five
(25) feet, measured horizontally on a line perpendicular to the water course.
3. The vegetative target for the water side zone is undisturbed native woody species with native plants forming
canopy, understory, and duff (or ground) layer; where such forest does not grow naturally, then native vegetative
cover appropriate for the area (such as grasses, forbs, and shrubs) is the vegetative target. This vegetative target
specifically excludes non-native turf grass. It also excludes maintaining native grasses or other vegetation as a
mown lawn.
b. Zone 2: Middle Zone.
1. This managed area of native vegetation protects key components of the stream ecosystem and provides distance
VIII-9
ARTICLE VIII
between upland development and the water side zone.
2. Extends immediately from the outer edge of Zone 1 for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet.
3. The vegetative target for the middle zone is either undisturbed or managed native woody species or, in its absence,
native vegetative cover of shrubs, grasses, and forbs. This vegetative target specifically excludes non-native turf
grass. It also excludes maintaining native grasses or other native vegetation as a mown lawn. Undisturbed forest, as
in Zone 1, is strongly encouraged to further protect water quality and the river/stream ecosystem.
c. Zone 3: Outer Zone.
1. This zone prevents encroachment into the riparian buffer, filters runoff from adjacent land, and encourages sheet
flow of runoff into the natural vegetation strip.
2. Extends a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet, measured immediately from the outer edge of Zone 2.
3. The vegetative target for the outer zone is native woody and herbaceous vegetation to increase the total width of
the vegetation strip. Native grasses and forbs are acceptable.
Graphic adapted from Schueler, WPT 2/94, p. 19 (Courtesy of the Center for Watershed Protection)
d. The natural vegetation strip width shall be modified if there are steep slopes and/or bluffs which are within two hundred
(200) feet of the river/stream. In those cases, Zone 3 of the vegetation strip shall be adjusted as given in the following
table. In any event, Zone 3 shall vegetate the top of a steep slope/bluff for a minimum width of ten (10) feet measured
parallel to the edge of the steep slope/bluff.
Width for Zone 3 Vegetation Strip
% Slope Width
0 - 8 25 feet
9 - 15 35 feet
> 15 45 feet
e. In the case of the presence of a floodplain, or regulated wetland wholly or partially within the natural vegetation strip, an
additional twenty-five (25) feet will be added to the floodplain or regulated wetland boundary.
f. Within the natural vegetation strip, trees and shrubs may be selectively pruned or removed for harvest of merchantable
VIII-10
ARTICLE VIII
timber to achieve a filtered view of the river from the main dwelling, and for reasonable private access to the river. Said
pruning and removal activities:
1. Shall ensure a live root system stays intact to provide for stream bank stabilization and erosion control;
2. Shall ensure that any path to the river is no greater than four (4) feet in width, shall meander down to the river’s
edge in a manner which protects the soil and vegetation from erosion while also screening the principal structure
and vehicles from a direct river view.
3. Dead, diseased, unsafe, or fallen trees, invasive vegetation including buckthorn, honeysuckle, and multiflora rose,
and noxious plants and shrubs, including poison ivy, poison sumac, and poison oak, and other plants regarded as
a common nuisance in Section 2, Act 359 of the Public Acts of 1941, as amended, may be removed. Planting of
perennial native species in the natural vegetation strip is encouraged, especially where exposed soil and steep slopes
exist, and in reforestation efforts; and
4. Pathways or boardwalks running along or parallel to the river within the required natural vegetation strip shall be
prohibited.
5. Shall be accompanied by a permit from the Planning and Zoning Administrator, as outlined in Section 38-50.
6. The construction, maintenance, repair or operation of gas or oil pipelines, electric transmission and distribution
power lines, and municipal water and sewer lines are exempt from this requirement as long as the pipelines, power
lines, or other utility lines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in a manner to assure that any adverse effect on
the natural vegetation strip will be otherwise minimized. The MDNR still requires a permit for utility work within
the Natural River overlay zone.
g. All nonconforming uses, vegetation or plantings, and structures existing in the natural vegetation strip at the effective
date of this regulation may be continued but shall not be changed or enlarged in a manner that increases the degree of
nonconformity.
h. Development projects including site condominiums, subdivisions, and Planned Unit Developments (PUDs), or projects
that require site plan review or special land use approval that are subject to Section 38-361 and required to provide a
natural vegetation strip, shall also:
1. Designate how the natural vegetation strip will be preserved. The strips shall be preserved through:
EITHER
A declaration of protective covenant, approved by the Township body responsible for approving the development
project. The covenant shall be recorded in the land records and shall run with the land and continue in perpetuity.
OR
A conservation easement to a local land conservancy acceptable to the Township body responsible for approving the
development project. The easement shall be recorded in the land records and shall run with the land and continue
in perpetuity. Terms of such an easement shall be at least as restrictive as those included in this ordinance. The
easement shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for their review, or review by their designee, prior to
execution.
i. All lease and sales agreements must contain a notation regarding the presence and location of protective
covenants for natural vegetation strips, and which shall contain information on the management and
maintenance requirements for the natural vegetation strips for the new property owner.
ii. An offer of dedication of a natural vegetation strip by conservation easement shall not be interpreted to mean
that this offer automatically conveys to the general public the right of access to this area.
iii. If a conservation easement is dedicated, the land conservancy shall inspect the buffer annually and
immediately following severe storms for evidence of sediment deposition, erosion, or concentrated flow
channels, and identify corrective action to be taken to ensure the integrity and functions of the vegetation strip.
2. Install permanent boundary markers every two hundred (200) feet prior to final approval of the required clearing
and grading plan. Boundary markers shall be placed at the transitional edge of Zone 2 and Zone 3 (See illustration
in Section 38-361(f)(3)c).
VIII-11
ARTICLE VIII
3. Submit a natural vegetation strip maintenance plan at the same time as the natural rivers overlay zone permit
application, which shall contain the following information:
i. Field-delineated and surveyed natural vegetation strip by outside professional consultants.
ii. Steep slopes, regulated wetlands, and floodplains for areas adjacent to and within two hundred (200) feet of
the river/stream.
iii. A narrative describing the species and distribution of existing vegetation within the buffer.
iv. A narrative describing the restrictions to uses and vegetation cutting and removal within the natural vegetation
strip.
v. A note on the survey stating the following: “There shall be no clearing, grading, construction, storage of
construction materials, equipment, and the like, or disturbance of vegetation within the natural vegetation
strip except as permitted by Green Oak Charter Township.”
vi. A note on the survey stating the following: “Any natural vegetation strip shown hereon is subject to protective
covenants that may be found in the land records and restrict disturbance and use of these areas.”
i. Inspections of construction or use covered by any building or land use permit that requires preservation of a natural
vegetation strip shall be conducted as described in Section 38-50 of this ordinance.
(4) Removal of logs and debris from the river. A riverfront owner may clean deadfall logs and other debris from the river to
maintain a safe, clean, and free-flowing river. Removal should be undertaken in a manner which will least disrupt fish and
wildlife habitat, riverside vegetation, and limit sediment disruption on the river bottom. An MDNR fisheries biologist shall be
consulted before any river channel clearing is begun to determine if a permit is required.
(5) Excavation. All excavation, including dredging, cutting, filling, and grading, within five hundred (500) feet of the river’s
edge shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the Livingston County Drain Commissioner for soil erosion/
sedimentation control pursuant to the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, part 91 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of
1994, as amended (MCL 324.9101 et seq.) and other applicable state and local laws. In addition, commercial mining and
extraction of topsoil or subsurface sand, gravel, or minerals is not permitted within four hundred (400) feet of the river’s edge.
(6) Dredge and fill activities. All dredge and fill activities and construction of permanent structures, including docks, lying
below the ordinary high-water mark of the river are subject to the provisions of part 301 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of 1994,
as amended.
(7) Use of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. Because of the potentially severe adverse effects on riverfront vegetation,
fish, wildlife, and water quality from improper use of even small amounts of synthetic pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers,
their use on lands within the natural river area is prohibited. Note that this prohibition does not apply for the limited use of
synthetic herbicides for the control of invasive or noxious plant species, as described in Section (f)(3)f.3. above. (Contact the
Township for more information on the environmentally-responsible use of herbicides for invasive/noxious plant control.) Use
of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers that are approved for organic production (Organic Materials Review Institute – or OMRI
– approved) are allowed.
(8) Required minimum distance from river. All septic system drainfields shall be set back from the river’s edge at least one
hundred and fifty (150) feet.
(g) Docks. Docks may be constructed which do not exceed six (6) feet in width nor are more than twenty (20) feet in length with
no more than four (4) feet of the dock extending beyond the low water mark. Docks must be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the Livingston County Drain Commissioner for soil erosion/sedimentation control pursuant to the Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Act, part 91 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended (MCL 324.9101 et seq.) and other applicable
state and local laws. The use of natural materials and camouflaging is encouraged.
(h) Campgrounds and picnic areas. On public land, no new structures associated with a campground or picnic area, except those
necessary to protect the riverbank, will be permitted within three hundred (300) feet of the designated mainstream or tributary.
VIII-12
ARTICLE VIII
Such structure shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to further the purpose of this overlay zone.
(i) Archaeological sites. The identification, preservation, and interpretation of archaeological sites along the designated portions of
the overlay zone, both by public agencies and local societies, is strongly encouraged.
(j) Compliance with stormwater management standards. All activity within the natural river overlay zone shall be in compliance
with all County and Township stormwater management standards.
(k) Stream/river crossings. New stream/river crossings of the Huron River and the south branch of the Huron River are prohibited.
(l) Violations. In the event of violation of this article, the Township Code Enforcement Official shall notify the owner of record and
shall specify the violation and corrective action including the replacement, restoration or remediation of removed vegetation.
Violations shall also be subject to Section 38-46 and Township penalties as municipal civil infraction.
Sec. 38-362. Tributary overlay zone.
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Tributary overlay zone is to preserve and enhance the environmental, ecological, and aesthetic values
of the streams and creeks within the Township. These water resources are unique features within Green Oak Charter Township. In
order to protect said resources, overlay zones are hereby established. The zones overlay existing zoning for an area one hundred and
twenty-five (125) feet from the ordinary high-water mark on each side of and parallel to the designated tributaries, as denoted on
the Green Oak Charter Township zoning map.
(b) Building setbacks. New buildings on all reaches of the overlay zones shall be set back a minimum of one hundred and twentyfive
(125) feet from the water’s edge.
(c) Accessory uses. All accessory uses, including storage buildings, garages, parking lots, detention ponds, retention ponds, gravel
parking lots, or outdoor industrial storage areas shall be set back a minimum of one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet from the
water’s edge.
(d) Excavation. All excavation, including dredging, cutting, filling, and grading within the overlay zone shall be done in accordance
with the requirements of the Livingston County Drain Commissioner for soil erosion/sedimentation control pursuant to the Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, part 91 of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended (MCL 324.9101 et seq.) and
other applicable state and local laws. In addition, commercial mining, extraction of soil materials, sand, or gravel is prohibited
within the overlay zone. Activities within four hundred (400) feet of Davis Creek or Spring Mill Creek are subject to additional
regulations and permitting as stated in Public Act 451 of 1994, as amended and as regulated by the MDEQ.
(e) Use of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. Because of the effects on vegetation, fish, wildlife, and water quality from
improper use of even small amounts of synthetic pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, the use of such on lands within the
overlay zone is prohibited. Note that this prohibition does not apply for the limited use of synthetic herbicides for the control of
invasive or noxious plant species, as described in Section 38-361(f)(3)f.3.. (Contact the Township for more information on the
environmentally-responsible use of herbicides for invasive/noxious plant control.) Use of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers that
are approved for organic production (Organic Materials Review Institute – or OMRI – approved) are allowed.
(f) Required minimum distance from tributary. All septic system drainfields shall be set back from the rivers edge at least one
hundred (100) feet, or outside the required natural vegetation strip, if further.
VIII-13
ARTICLE VIII
(g) Natural vegetation strip. To minimize erosion, stabilize the creek bank, protect water quality, minimize nutrient loading,
maintain water temperature at natural levels, preserve fish and wildlife habitat, screen manmade structures, and preserve
aesthetic values of the tributaries covered by the Tributary overlay zone, a natural vegetation strip shall be maintained on each
parcel or lot between the water’s edge and a line, each point of which is one hundred (100) feet horizontal from and perpendicular
to the water’s edge. Clear cutting within this vegetation strip is strictly prohibited. This restricted vegetation strip shall apply to
each side of the tributary. The natural vegetation strip shall have three (3) distinct zones, requiring the following minimum widths
and vegetative targets:
(1) Zone 1: Water Side Zone.
a. Undisturbed vegetated area aims to protect the physical and ecological integrity of the river/stream ecosystem.
b. Begins at the edge of the creek bank of the active channel and extends a minimum distance of twenty-five (25) feet,
measured horizontally on a line perpendicular to the water course.
c. The vegetative target for the water side zone is undisturbed native woody species with native plants forming canopy,
understory, and duff (or ground) layer; where such forest does not grow naturally, then native vegetative cover
appropriate for the area (such as grasses, forbs, and shrubs) is the vegetative target. This vegetative target specifically
excludes non-native turf grass. It also excludes maintaining native grasses or other vegetation as a mowed lawn.
(2) Zone 2: Middle Zone.
a. This managed area of native vegetation protects key components of the stream ecosystem and provides distance
between upland development and the water side zone.
b. Extends immediately from the outer edge of Zone 1 for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet.
c. The vegetative target for the middle zone is either undisturbed or managed native woody species or, in its absence,
native vegetative cover of shrubs, grasses, and forbs. This vegetative target specifically excludes non-native turf grass. It
also excludes maintaining native grasses or other native vegetation as a mown lawn. Undisturbed forest, as in Zone 1, is
strongly encouraged to further protect water quality and the river/stream ecosystem.
(3) Zone 3: Outer Zone.
a. This zone prevents encroachment into the riparian buffer, filters runoff from adjacent land, and encourages sheet flow of
runoff into the natural vegetation strip.
b. Extends a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet, measured immediately from the outer edge of Zone 2.
c. The vegetative target for the outer zone is native woody and herbaceous vegetation to increase the total width of the
vegetation strip. Native grasses and forbs are acceptable.
VIII-14
ARTICLE VIII
Graphic adapted from Schueler, WPT 2/94, p. 19 (Courtesy of the Center for Watershed Protection)
(4) The natural vegetation strip width shall be modified if there are steep slopes and/or bluffs which are within two hundred
(200) feet of the creek. In those cases, the Zone 3 of the vegetation strip shall be adjusted as given in the following table. In
any event, Zone 3 shall vegetate the top of a steep slope/bluff for a minimum width of ten (10) feet measured parallel to the
edge of the steep slope/bluff.
Width for Zone 3 Vegetation Strip
% Slope Width
0 - 8 25 feet
9 - 15 35 feet
> 15 45 feet
(5) In the case of the presence of a floodplain, or regulated wetland wholly or partially within the natural vegetation strip, an
additional twenty-five (25) feet will be added to floodplain or regulated wetland boundary.
(6) Within the natural vegetation strip, trees and shrubs may be selectively pruned or removed for harvest of merchantable
timber to achieve a filtered view of the river from the main dwelling, and for reasonable private access to the river. Said
pruning and removal activities:
a. Shall ensure that a live root system stays intact to provide for creek bank stabilization and soil erosion control.
b. Shall ensure that any path to the tributary is no greater than four (4) feet in width, shall meander down to the tributary’s
edge in a manner which protects the soil and vegetation from erosion while also screening the principal structure and
vehicles from a direct tributary view.
c. Dead, diseased, unsafe, or fallen trees, invasive vegetation including buckthorn, honeysuckle, and multiflora rose, and
noxious plants and shrubs, including poison ivy, poison sumac, and other plants regarded as common nuisances in
Section 2, Act 359 of the Public Acts of 1941, as amended, may be removed.
d. Planting of perennial native species on the natural vegetation strip is encouraged, especially where exposed soil or steep
slopes exist or where reforestation is necessary.
VIII-15
ARTICLE VIII
e. Pathways or boardwalks running along or parallel to the tributary within the required natural vegetation strip shall be
prohibited.
f. Shall be accompanied by a permit from the Planning and Zoning Administrator, as outlined in Section 38-50.
g. The construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of gas or oil pipelines, electric transmission and distribution power
lines, and municipal water and sewer lines shall be exempt from this requirement as long as the pipelines, power lines,
or other utility lines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in a manner to assure that any adverse effect on the natural
vegetation strip will be otherwise minimized.
(7) All nonconforming uses, vegetation or plantings, and structures existing in the natural vegetation strip at the effective
date of this regulation may be continued but shall not be changed or enlarged in a manner that increases the degree of
nonconformity.
(8) Development projects including site condominiums, subdivisions, and Planned Unit Developments (PUDs), or projects that
require site plan review or special land use approval that are subject to Section 38-362 and required to provide a natural
vegetation strip, shall also:
a. Designate how the natural vegetation strip will be preserved. The strips shall be preserved through:
EITHER
A declaration of protective covenant, approved by the Township body responsible for approving the development project.
The covenant shall be recorded in the land records and shall run with the land and continue in perpetuity.
OR
A conservation easement to a local land conservancy acceptable to the Township body responsible for approving the
development project. The easement shall be recorded in the land records and shall run with the land and continue in
perpetuity. Terms of such an easement shall be at least as restrictive as those included in this ordinance. The easement
shall be submitted to the Township body responsible for approving the development project for their review, or review by
their designee, prior to execution.
1. All lease and sales agreements must contain a notation regarding the presence and location of protective
covenants for natural vegetation strips, and which shall contain information on the management and maintenance
requirements for the natural vegetation strips for the new property owner.
2. An offer of dedication of a natural vegetation strip by conservation easement shall not be interpreted to mean that
this offer automatically conveys to the general public the right of access to this area.
3. If a conservation easement is dedicated, the land conservancy shall inspect the buffer annually and immediately
following severe storms for evidence of sediment deposition, erosion, or concentrated flow channels and identify
corrective action to be taken to ensure the integrity and functions of the vegetation strip.
b. Install permanent boundary markers every two hundred (200) feet prior to final approval of the required clearing and
grading plan. Boundary markers shall be placed at the transitional edge of Zone 2 and Zone 3 (See illustration in Section
38-362(g)3).
c. Submit a natural vegetation strip maintenance plan at the same time as the Tributary overlay zone permit application,
which shall contain the following information:
1. Field-delineated and surveyed natural vegetation strip by outside professional consultants.
2. Steep slopes, regulated wetlands and floodplains for areas adjacent to and within two hundred (200) feet of the
creek.
3. A narrative describing the species and distribution of existing vegetation within the buffer.
4. A narrative describing the restrictions to uses and vegetation cutting and removal within the natural vegetation
strip.
5. A note on the survey stating the following: “There shall be no clearing, grading, construction, storage of construction
materials, equipment and the like, or disturbance of vegetation within the natural vegetation strip except as
permitted by Green Oak Charter Township.”
VIII-16
ARTICLE VIII
6. A note on the survey stating the following: “Any natural vegetation strip shown hereon is subject to protective
covenants that may be found in the land records and restrict disturbance and use of these areas.”
(9) Inspections of construction or use covered by any building or land use permit that requires preservation of a natural vegetation
strip shall be conducted as described in Section 38-50 of this ordinance.
(h) Permits. In order to ensure that developments within the Tributary overlay zone, including dwellings, structures, and land
alterations, including but not limited to dredging, cutting, filling, and timber cutting and/or removal, are done so as to further
the intent and objectives of the Tributary overlay zone, approval of a permit by the Zoning Administrator or designee, pursuant to
Section 38-50, shall be required prior to any work taking place in the Tributary Overlay Zone. The Zoning Administrator or designee
may submit the permit application and required plot plan to the Planning Commission for approval or disapproval of the requested
permit in those cases where compliance with this chapter and its requirements is in question due to the presence of unique or
unusual natural features, potential impacts on natural features, existing nonconformities, or other factors as determined by the
Zoning Administrator or designee.
(i) Application of standards. In cases where nonconforming uses or nonconforming structures exist at the time of adoption
of these standards, the Planning Commission may determine that compliance with all of the overlay standards of this section
is unreasonable. In these cases, the standards shall be applied to the maximum extent possible. In such situation, suitable
alternatives that substantially achieve the purpose of this section may be accepted by the Planning Commission, provided that the
applicant demonstrate that one or more of the following conditions apply:
(1) Size of the parcel is insufficient to meet dimensional standards.
(2) A site plan, plat, or special use permit was previously approved by the Planning Commission, or building permits were
previously issued by the building department.
(j) Compliance with stormwater management standards. All activity within the Tributary overlay zone shall be in compliance
with all County and Township stormwater management standards.
(k) Violations. In the event of violation of this article, the Township Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of record and
shall specify the violation and corrective action including the replacement, restoration or remediation of removed vegetation.
Violations shall also be subject to Section 38-46 and Township penalties as a municipal civil infraction.
Sec. 38-363. Woodlands protection and preservation.
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to protect woodlands within Township and preserve the economic, health, aesthetic and
environmental values associated with woodlands. Regulation of the removal of tree resources will help protect and preserve an
important natural feature of the Township for the benefit of present and future generations, and for the future well-being of the
public health, Township character, and the natural environment. The provisions of this section are also intended to prohibit clearcutting
of woodland areas within the Township.
(b) Applicability. This section shall apply to land for which a site plan, plat or site condominium plan has been submitted for approval
to the Planning Commission on or after the effective date of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived. The provisions of
this section shall also apply to simple land divisions under Chapter 18, pertaining to land divisions and subdivisions, and the land
division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
(c) Exemptions. The following activities or conditions are permitted under this section unless otherwise prohibited by statute or
other ordinances:
VIII-17
ARTICLE VIII
(1) Residential parcels of five acres or less. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, removal or transplantation of trees
is permitted on residential parcels of five (5) acres or less, provided, the parcel supports only one (1) dwelling and permitted
residential accessory uses, and provided that the parcel is not part of a site plan, plat, or site condominium being reviewed or
anticipated for review under subsection (b) of this section. Such exemption shall not apply to landmark trees located on such
parcels.
(2) Emergencies. This section shall not bar tree removal, transplantation, or other prohibited activities where such actions
were made necessary by a genuine emergency, such as a tornado, windstorm, flood, freeze, dangerous and infectious insect
infestation or disease, or other natural or manmade disaster, in order to prevent injury or damage to persons or property, or to
restore order.
(3) Dead or damaged trees. This section shall not bar removal, transplantation, or trimming of dead, diseased, infested, or
damaged trees, where the damage resulted from an accident or natural cause, and, provided that the removal or trimming is
accomplished through the use of accepted standard forestry practices and techniques.
(4) Public utilities. This section shall not bar repair or maintenance work performed by public utilities, which would necessarily
require the trimming or cutting of trees; however, it is intended to encourage the preservation of trees by public utilities,
wherever possible.
(5) Agricultural uses. This section shall not bar removal or transplantation of trees occurring during the use of the land for
agriculture purposes or the operation of a commercial nursery or certified tree farm, provided, the commercial nursery or
certified tree farm has been licensed with the state and has received all other necessary licenses and permits.
(6) Woodlands management. Thinning, selective clearing, and trimming of trees shall be exempt from the permit requirements
of this section, if conducted in accordance with professional forest management techniques as directed by a forester licensed
and registered in the state. Woodlands management activities shall not, however, include clear cutting or the wholesale
removal of significant vegetation for the site.
(d) Tree inventory. A tree inventory shall be required for all lands, parcels, and projects to which this section applies. The Planning
Commission shall have the authority to waive the tree inventory requirements of this subsection, if such requirements are
determined to be unreasonable, unnecessary, or not applicable, provided the Planning Commission shall not have the authority to
waive such requirements for woodlands within building envelopes and when pertaining to landmark trees. If the tree inventory is
waived, the Planning Commission may still require compliance with some of the noted required information, and may also include
an indication of tree massing and a statement indicating predominate species and the estimated number and size of trees on the
site within each massing. The tree inventory shall include the following information:
(1) An inventory indicating the location of all existing trees that are six (6) inches in diameter at breast height (dbh) or more,
including off-site trees within twenty-five (25) feet of the property lines, and all trees to be affected by the development,
such as trees located within areas of right-of-way improvements or off-site utility work. All such trees proposed to remain, be
relocated, or be removed shall be so designated. Clearing limits shall be clearly shown on the inventory. The inventory shall be
accompanied by a separate key, identifying the numbered trees by size, common name, and condition.
(2) Tree location inventories are to be performed by actual field survey by a registered land surveyor, registered landscape
architect, or certified arborist or forester. Professionals must verify the contents by seal or signature, whichever is applicable.
(3) If existing trees are to be relocated, the proposed location for such trees, together with a statement of how such trees are to be
protected and/or stored during land clearance and construction, and how the trees are to be maintained after construction.
(4) A statement showing how trees to remain are to be protected during land clearance and construction, and on a permanent
basis, including the proposed use of tree wells, protective barriers, tunneling, or retaining walls.
(5) A description of soil types and characteristics.
VIII-18
ARTICLE VIII
(e) Historic or landmark trees.
(1) A nomination for historic or landmark tree designation shall be reviewed and determined by the Planning Commission.
(2) Any Township property owner may nominate a tree within his or her own property boundaries for designation as a landmark
tree or historic tree. If nominated, the Planning Commission shall review the nomination request, and, if the tree is
determined to meet the criteria listed in subsection (e)(3) of this section, it shall be placed on the Township’s landmark tree
inventory.
(3) The Planning Commission may designate a tree, upon nomination, as a landmark tree or historic tree upon a finding that one
(1) or more of the following unique characteristics exist:
a. The tree is the predominant tree within a distinct scenic or aesthetically valued setting.
b. The tree is of unusual age or size for that species in this climatic and geographic location. For example, trees listed as
large trees on the register of big trees or the state botanical club.
c. The tree has gained prominence due to unusual form or botanical characteristics.
d. The tree has some historical significance to the Township.
(4) The building department shall maintain an inventory of all nominated and designated historic or landmark trees.
(5) A permit shall be required to remove any landmark or historic tree. Any historic tree shall be replaced on a one to one (1:1)
caliper inch basis. For example, a forty-eight (48) inch landmark tree shall be replaced by twenty-four (24) two (2) inch
trees. Such replacement requirement may be waived if, in the opinion of the Planning Commission and after review by the
Township’s consultant, the health and condition of the tree is such that it should not be counted.
(f) Landmark trees. All landmark trees are identified in the following table:
Common Name Species
Size**
(inches)
Arborvitae Thuja occidentalis 18
Ash Fraxinus spp. 24
American basswood Tilia americana 24
American beech Fagus grandifolia 24
American chestnut Castanea dentata 8
Birch Betula spp. 18
Black alder Alnus glutinosa 18
Black tupelo Nyssa sylvatica 18
Black and white walnut Juglans nigra, J. cinerea 24
Buckeye (horsechestnut) Aesculus spp. 24
Cedar, red Junipurus spp. 18
Crabapple (cultivar) Malus spp. 12
Douglas fir Pseudotsuga menziesii 24
Eastern hemlock Tsuga canadens 18
Elm Ulnus spp. 24
Flowering dogwood Cornus florida 8
Ginko Ginkgo biloba 24
Hickory Carya spp. 24
Kentucky coffee tree Gymnocladus dioicus 24
Larch/tamarck Larix laricina (eastern) 18
Locust Gleditsia triacanthus 24
VIII-19
ARTICLE VIII
London plane / Sycamore Platenus spp. 24
Maple Acer spp. (exc. negundo, saccharium) 24
Oak Quercus spp. 24
Pine Pinus spp. 24
Sassafras Sassafras albidum 15
Spruce Picea spp. 24
Tuliptree Liriodendron tuliperifera 24
Wild cherry Prunus spp. 24
* The landmark tree list includes the species that are prevalent in this area. Size designations take into consideration the potential longevity of the tree so that
protected trees may still have years to grow.
** Size = dbh (diameter at breast height when measured 4 ½ feet above the existing grade).
(g) Trees to be removed/protected. Developments that are subject to the woodlands preservation regulations of this section shall
indicate all trees proposed to be removed and preserved on the provided tree inventory. The trees designated for protection shall
be properly protected from damage due to construction operations and development. Prior to commencement of development
or construction operations, land clearing, filling, or any land alteration, a developer must erect and maintain suitable protective
barriers to protect trees designated to remain under the submitted plan. The protective barriers shall be required for all trees
designated to remain in place by the submitted plan.
(h) Development of land parcels. Subject to the exemptions listed in subsection (c) of this section, no person shall remove, cause to
be removed, transplant, or destroy, on any land in the Township slated for land development to which this chapter applies, any tree
having a six (6) inch or greater dbh, without first obtaining approval subject to the provisions of this section. Protected trees shall
be mitigated or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(i) Tree mitigation and replacement.
(1) Requirement. For each protected tree required to be preserved under the terms and standards set forth in this section, and
which is permitted to be removed under this section, the applicant shall replace or relocate trees according to the replacement
tree requirements set forth in subsection (i)(2) of this section.
(2) Specifications.
a. Replacement trees shall have shade potential and/or other characteristics comparable to the removed trees; shall be
state department of agriculture nursery grade no. 1 or better; and must be approved by the Township prior to planting.
Replacement trees must be staked, fertilized, mulched, and watered, and shall be guaranteed by the applicant for a
period of two (2) years.
b. Trees usable for replacement trees may be transplanted on-site, using appropriate and accepted procedures and
precautions.
c. For all regulated trees removed, replacement shall be on a one-for-one (1:1) basis. For example, for each tree removed,
a replacement tree shall be planted. All replacement trees shall have a dbh of at least two (2) inches. All evergreen
replacement trees shall be at least six (6) feet in height.
d. Landmark trees shall be replaced at a rate of one (1) inch of replacement tree for each dbh inch of landmark tree
removed.
e. If more than fifty percent (50%) of the parcel of land is designated on the Township’s woodlands map, an applicant shall
not be required to replace more than thirty percent (30%) of all protected trees, excluding landmark trees.
f. The Planning Commission shall be authorized to waive portions of the tree replacement requirements when site factors,
tree conditions, or development requirements warrant special consideration or if the applicant has adjusted site design to
save landmark trees.
VIII-20
ARTICLE VIII
(3) Location.
a. Township approval required. The Township shall approve tree relocation or replacement at off-site locations in order to
provide optimum enhancement, preservation, and protection of wooded areas. To the extent feasible and desirable, trees
shall be relocated or replaced on-site and within the same general area as trees removed, provided that survival shall not
be jeopardized by improvements or activities.
b. Relocation or replacement off-site. Where it is not feasible and desirable to relocate or replace trees on-site, relocation
or replacement may be made at another location in the Township that has been approved as part of the approval.
(4) Environmental trust fund. If lot coverage or site characteristics prohibit on-site or off-site mitigation, contribution to the
Township’s environmental trust fund may be permitted. In lieu of replacing regulated trees, the Planning Commission may
direct the applicant to exercise the option to contribute money to the Township’s environmental trust fund. Payment to the
environmental trust fund, per tree removed, shall be in accordance with replacement fee schedules as established by the
Township Board, and shall be used to fund tree planting activities on public land or public right-of-way areas.
Sec. 38-364. Lighting regulations.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Canopy structure means any overhead protective structure, which is either extended from a building or freestanding, including an
awning.
Footcandle means a standard unit, established as a reference, and used when measuring the quantity of light. A footcandle equals the
total intensity of light that falls upon a one (1) square foot surface that is placed one (1) foot away from one (1) lit candle.
Glare means light that is misdirected into the eye of potential observers or passersby, potentially impairing their ability to see clearly and
compromises public safety and welfare.
Lamp means the component of the luminaire that produces the actual light, including luminous tube lighting.
Light fixture means the assembly that holds a lamp and may include an assembly housing, mounting bracket or pole socket, lamp
holder, ballast, reflector or mirror, and refractor or lens. Such term also includes the assembly for luminous tube and fluorescent lighting.
Light pollution means the electric light which may impact the safety and welfare of travelers by impairing their ability to effectively see
potential hazards, reduces the enjoyment of the night sky or causes undesirable glare, unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties, or
a detrimental effect on the environment.
Light trespass means the shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located.
Luminaire means the complete lighting system, including the lamp and light fixture.
Luminous tube lighting means gas filled tubing which, when subjected to high voltage, becomes luminescent in a color characteristic of
the particular gas used (e.g., neon, argon, etc.).
VIII-21
ARTICLE VIII
Shielded fixture means an outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in a manner so that its light does not project beyond a certain
limit. A luminaire mounted in a recessed fashion under a canopy or other structure so that the surrounding structure effectively shields
the light in the same manner is also considered fully shielded for the purposes of this section. Shielded fixtures shall be specified and
properly installed to restrict light spillage past the property line.
Spill light means light that is misdirected and illuminates an object or area that is not intended to be illuminated.
Useful light means light that is directed to illuminate an object or area for a useful purpose.
(b) Purpose. This section provides standards for various forms of outdoor lighting so as to properly illuminate buildings and sites for
safety and security without contributing to light pollution, intrusive artificial light or degradation of the natural nighttime visual
environment.
(c) Applicability. The standards in this section shall apply to any light source that is visible from any property line other than, or
beyond, the site from which the light is emanating. The building official or designated individual may review any site to determine
compliance with the requirements under this section and may require a property owner or developer to make such corrections
as necessary to comply with Section 38-46. Whenever a person is required to obtain a building permit, electrical permit for
outdoor lighting or signage, a special land use permit, subdivision approval or site plan approval from the Township, the applicant
shall submit sufficient information to assure the building official and/or Planning Commission that the proposed lighting can
comply with this section. The applicant shall bear responsibility for the actual performance of lighting in compliance with such
requirements.
(d) Lighting plan submittal requirements. The following information must be included on all site plan submissions:
(1) The locations of all freestanding, building mounted, and canopy light fixtures on the site plan and/or building elevations,
including a legend that identifies the fixtures and their intended accessories by manufacturer and model numbers.
(2) A photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan, indicating the light intensity throughout the site, in footcandles.
The Planning Commission is authorized to waive the requirement of a photometric grid when it is determined that such
information is not necessary for site plan review.
(3) All manufacturers’ published specifications and cut sheets for the type of fixture being proposed, including the total luminance
output, type of lamp and voltage, method of shielding, and all applicable accessories.
(4) A scale drawing of no less than one (1) inch equals one (1) foot, showing a typical fixture, at its intended elevation closest to
the property line, with the accessory shield attached. A line shall be drawn representing the coverage angle distribution from
the far side of the fixture lens to the bottom edge of the shield on the opposite side of the fixture. The line shall be projected to
the ground plane and shall confirm the glare of the fixture does not pass the property line in any direction. Any details relating
to the proper installation and adjustment for optimum performance shall be described.
(5) Any other information deemed necessary by the building official and/or Planning Commission to determine the
appropriateness of illumination.
(e) Nonresidential lighting standards. Unless exempted under this section, all nonresidential lighting must comply with the
following standards:
(1) Freestanding pole lighting.
a. Exterior lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. The intensity of light at the base
of a light fixture shall not exceed twenty (20) footcandles unless lights are recessed within an overhead roof or canopy
structure.
VIII-22
ARTICLE VIII
b. Properties adjacent to residential properties shall be designed and maintained so that illumination levels shall not exceed
three-tenths (0.3) footcandle at or beyond property lines. Lighting for uses adjacent to nonresidential properties shall be
designed and maintained so that illumination levels do not exceed one (1) footcandle at or beyond property lines.
c. Parking lot illumination shall average no less than the following minimum levels over the entire area when measured five
(5) feet above the surface:
Parking Lot Size
Parking Lot Average Illumination
(in footcandles, minimum)
Small (5 - 10 spaces) 0.4
Medium (11 - 99 spaces) 0.6
Large (100+ spaces) 0.9
d. Metal halide, incandescent, fluorescent, or mercury vapor fixtures shall be used in an effort to maintain a unified lighting
standard throughout the Township and reduce light pollution. Suitable applications for high pressure and low pressure
sodium fixtures may be used, but only with color corrected and shielded lenses.
e. The Planning Commission may approve decorative or historic light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it
can be proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed fixtures will be more consistent with the character of
the site.
f. The maximum height of pole fixtures shall be twenty (20) feet or the height of the building, whichever is less, measured
from the ground level to the centerline of the light source. Fixtures should provide an overlapping pattern of light at a
height of seven (7) feet above the ground level. The Planning Commission may permit a maximum height of thirty (30)
feet in an industrial district where fixtures are no closer than two hundred (200) feet to any residential property.
g. All outdoor lighting fixtures installed and maintained upon private property within commercial, industrial, and office
zoning districts shall be automatically turned off or reduced by no less than fifty percent (50%) in intensity between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except where active use continues after 11:00 p.m., but only for as long as such use
continues.
h. No exposed luminous tube lighting shall be used.
(2) Building mounted lighting.
a. Building mounted lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. The intensity of light
shall not exceed twenty (20) footcandles, unless lights are recessed within an overhead roof or canopy structure. Light
shall not exceed three-tenths (0.3) footcandle beyond new and existing residential property lines, and one (1) footcandle
beyond nonresidential property lines.
b. Metal halide, incandescent, fluorescent, or mercury vapor fixtures shall be used in an effort to maintain a unified lighting
standard throughout the Township and prevent light pollution. Sodium vapor fixtures may be used, but only with color
corrected and shielded lenses.
c. The Planning Commission may approve decorative or historic light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it
can be proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed fixtures will be more consistent with the character of
the site.
d. Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting is prohibited as an architectural detail on all buildings (e.g., along
the roofline and eaves, around windows, etc.). The Planning Commission may approve internally illuminated architectural
bands or external lighting directed on buildings where it can be shown that the treatment will serve a legitimate
function and will not adversely impact neighboring properties or create glare off-site.
(3) Sign/canopy lighting.
a. Sign lighting may be directed upward or downward, or may be internal to the sign.
VIII-23
ARTICLE VIII
b. Downward and upward directed sign lighting shall illuminate the sign only, and light spillover shall not exceed one (1)
footcandle along nonresidential property lines and three-tenths (0.3) footcandle along residential property lines.
c. Upward sign lighting shall illuminate the sign only, and any point source or glare of light shall not be visible from
adjacent properties, adjacent roadways, or safety paths. Light shall not spill past the sign to the extent that it is visible
from beyond the property.
d. All internal sign lighting shall illuminate the sign only. Internal lighting shall be evenly distributed over the sign so as not
to cause glare. Internal light sources shall not be directly visible from any location. Projected sign illumination intensity
shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) footcandles as measured four (4) feet above the ground and ten (10) feet from
the base of the sign.
e. All internally lit translucent or fabric awnings shall be prohibited within any zoning district unless the Planning
Commission determines that the following conditions are met:
1. Internal light sources are not directly visible from the road rights-of-way.
2. Light levels comply with other provisions of this section and are not offensive to the adjoining neighbors.
3. Any proposed signage on a translucent or fabric awning, whether illuminated or not, shall comply with Section
38-406(4).
(f) Residential lighting standards. Unless exempted under this section, all outdoor lighting in residential use districts shall be
shielded or directed in a manner which reduces glare and shall be arranged so as to prevent objectionable lighting from intruding
upon any adjacent residential district or adjacent residence.
(g) Nonresidential uses in residential use districts. For nonresidential uses allowed in residential zoning districts, such as churches,
schools, municipal facilities, etc., all illumination shall be subject to subsection (e) of this section.
(h) Prohibited lighting types. The following lighting types are prohibited within the Township:
(1) The use of searchlights or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertisement or entertainment, except as approved
by the Township Board as part of an assembly license issued in accordance with Chapter 24, provided that glare from such
lighting shall not enter the road right-of-way.
(2) Flashing, moving or intermittent type lighting.
(3) Building mounted or roof mounted lighting, intended to attract attention to a building and/or use, which is not strictly
designed for security purposes or architectural accent, or which projects light beyond the property.
(4) Exterior exposed luminous tube lighting, except neon lighting.
(i) Lamp or fixture substitutions. Should any light fixture regulated under this section, or the type of light source therein, be
changed after the permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the building official for administrative approval,
together with adequate information to assure compliance with this chapter, and which must be received prior to such substitution.
(j) Exemptions. The following are exempt from the lighting requirements of this section, except that the building official may take
steps to eliminate the impact of the following exempted items when deemed necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of the public:
(1) Sports fields that are properly designed to meet the criteria for minimal light trespass and glare control.
(2) Swimming pools.
(3) Holiday decorations.
(4) Shielded pedestrian walkway lighting.
VIII-24
ARTICLE VIII
Sec. 38-365. Common use riparian lot (keyhole) regulations.
(a) Intent. The intent of this section is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, which could be threatened by the overusage
of inland lakes and streams, and avoid situations which may create a nuisance, impair important irreparable natural resources, and
harm property values. The regulations set forth in this section are intended to reinforce the implementation of the inland lakes
and streams, part 301 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30101 et seq.). These regulations are not intended to negate any
obligations of a property owner to fully comply with regulations contained in the Natural River Overlay District or other applicable
overlay districts, but are supplementary thereto.
(b) Applicability. The regulations set forth in this section shall apply to the following private sites, platted lots, and other parcels
to be held in common by a subdivision, condominium, association, similar agency, or group of individuals, or held in common by
virtue of the terms of a plat of record, or which provide for common use riparian access under deed restrictions (all of which are
referred to herein as “Common Use Riparian Lots”):
(1) Lots created after the effective date of the Ordinance.
(2) Lots of record existing prior to the effective date of the Ordinance that did not provide common use access to a water body
(riparian rights to nonriparian landowners) prior to the effective date of the Ordinance.
(3) Lots that have been providing common use access to a water body for a defined geographical area or a specific number of
lots through an association or subdivision/condominium deed prior to the effective date of the Ordinance, and where it is
proposed to expand the geographical area, add amenities, or increase or change the number of lots that are provided common
use access to a water body through such common use access lot.
Common Use Riparian Lots that existed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance that provided common use access to a water
body may continue to provide those riparian rights existing on the date of this Ordinance as provided herein.
Any improvement, expansion or alteration of a Common Use Riparian Lot shall require a marina operating permit requirements of
inland lakes and streams, part 301 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30101 et seq.), if applicable.
(c) Special use approval required.
(1) The following uses shall be permitted on Common Use Riparian Lots in any residential district upon special use approval of
the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 38-44 and subject to the standards provided in subsection (c)(2) of this
section:
a. Recreational sites, including parks, picnic areas, bathing, beaches, playgrounds, boat launching sites (excluding boat
docking), and other recreational areas.
b. Scenic sites.
c. Trails, bicycle paths, and access routes, other than dedicated streets.
d. Boat docks, provided that all requirements of subsection (e) of this section are met.
(2) Common Use Riparian Lots used for the uses listed in subsection (c)(1) of this section shall be developed according to the
following standards:
a. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided to accommodate anticipated users of a Common Use Riparian Lot. Such
parking shall be developed to the standards set forth in Article VII of this chapter. Parking shall not be permitted on lawn
areas or within a road right-of-way.
b. Screening shall be provided along the property lines shared with adjacent properties and shall be sufficient to reasonably
mitigate the visual impact it may cause. Such screening shall be in the form of a screening fence, landscape screening,
or berms, or a combination thereof. In no case shall such screening negatively impact the view of the lake or stream by
adjacent properties.
VIII-25
ARTICLE VIII
Those in control of Common Use Riparian Lots through an association or subdivision/condominium deed or otherwise may
choose to impose additional private regulations (e.g. hours of operation, lighting, signage) on the use of a particular Common
Use Riparian Lot. However, any such private regulations shall be enforced by those in control of the Common Use Riparian Lots.
It shall not be the obligation or responsibility of the Township to enforce any such private regulations.
(d) General requirements.
(1) Upon application for the development of property involving a riparian lot or parcel, the applicant shall specifically disclose all
parcels or property that gain, or will gain, riparian access via the riparian lot.
(2) The deed to such lot or parcel shall specify the nonriparian lots or parcels, which shall have rights to its use.
(3) The responsibility for maintenance of landscaping and improvements to such common use riparian lot shall be specified in the
deed, master deed, covenants, or similar document governing the parcel.
(e) Boat docks.
(1) The maximum number of docking spaces, slips, or mooring points for boats or other watercraft (e.g., jet skis, canoes, etc.) that
may be provided at or off-shore of a Common Use Riparian Lot shall be based upon the lot’s riparian frontage, at the following
ratio:
Zoning District Number of Docking Spaces Permitted
NR (Natural River) 1 per 100 feet of riparian frontage
All other residential districts 1 per 50 feet of riparian frontage
(2) Riparian frontage shall be measured by a straight line which intersects each side lot line at the water’s edge. Shoreline
encumbered by wetlands, as defined by the MDEQ, that extend more than fifty (50) feet inland and perpendicular to the
water’s edge shall not be included in the calculation of necessary riparian frontage, nor shall such wetland be dredged,
drained, or filled to create the frontage necessary for a proposed development. Artificially created shoreline may not be used
to increase the calculated riparian frontage.
(3) The boat dock facility must obtain all necessary permits from the MDEQ in accordance with administrative rules, inland
lakes and streams, part 301 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30101 et seq.). The design for a boat dock facility shall
meet all of the MDEQ’s standards for such facilities. Public access sites owned and operated by the state are exempt from this
subsection.
Sec. 38-366. Low Impact Development.
Low Impact Development (LID) is an ecologically-based stormwater management approach favoring innovative stormwater engineering
and management of rainfall on-site rather than traditional stormwater techniques of channeling or piping. The goal of LID is to sustain
the site’s pre-development hydrologic regime by using techniques that minimize, infiltrate, filter, store, and evaporate stormwater runoff.
LID remediates polluted runoff through a network of distributed treatment landscapes.
By incorporating LID techniques into the Green Oak Charter Township Zoning Ordinance, the Township can ensure that high-quality,
environmentally sensitive development will recognize the Huron River Watershed area as an important asset to the Township. Where
practical, the following representative LID techniques are to be incorporated into stormwater management control measures (Figure 38-
366-1, following page).
VIII-26
ARTICLE VIII
The Planning Commission and/or the Township Board is authorized to waive or modify Low Impact Development requirements where the
following requirements where the following site conditions are present:
• Topographic conditions which make LID intervention impractical
• Soil conditions such as clay soils or high ground water not conducive to infiltration
• Site constraints such as the size of the parcel and limited land area
• Engineering restrictions or limitations which make LID techniques impractical
• Jurisdictional requirements of the Livingston County Drain Commissioner or Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
(MDEQ)
• Other restrictions or limitations found acceptable to the Township
As part of the Township’s review for a waiver or modification, the Township may request an opinion from its planner, engineer, or County
Drain Commissioner regarding LID application and feasibility. The Township may also require supplemental studies, soil reports, or other
items of information prior to its decision on a waiver or modification.
VIII-27
ARTICLE VIII
VIII-28
Figure 38-366-1
Representative LID Techniques
Secs. 38-367 - 38-400. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX
ARTICLE IX. SIGNS*
Sec. 38-401. Purpose, authority, and findings.
The intent of this Chapter is to regulate signs and outdoor advertising within Township to protect public safety, health, and welfare;
minimize abundance and size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction, and loss of visibility; promote public convenience;
preserve property values; and enhance the aesthetic appearance and quality of life within the Township.
The regulations and standards of this Chapter are considered the minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve a substantial
government interest for public safety, traffic safety, aesthetics, protection of property values, and are intended to be content neutral. These
objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum amount of regulations necessary concerning the size, placement, construction,
illumination, and other aspects of signs in the Township so as to:
(a) Protect the public right to express and receive messages, especially noncommercial messages such as religious, political, social,
philosophical, and other types of information protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. Nothing in this Chapter is
intended to limit the expression of free speech protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.
(b) Recognize that the principal intent of commercial signs, to meet the purpose of these standards and serve the public interest, should
be for identification of an establishment on the premises.
(c) Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to motorists and non-motorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of
signs directing and warning the public, causes confusion, reduces desired uniform traffic flow, creates potential for accidents, and
may result in visual clutter.
(d) Recognize that different areas of the Township require different sign regulations due to factors such as their intended audience
(pedestrians, drivers, etc.) and their ability to help promote the character of an area.
(e) Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to structural deficiencies or disrepair.
(f) Enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities without excessive difficulty and confusion by restricting the number and
placement of signs.
(g) Prevent placement of signs that will conceal or obscure signs of adjacent uses.
(h) Prevent off-premise signs from conflicting with land uses.
(i) Preserve and improve the appearance of the Township and road corridors through the Township, including the M-36 corridor, by
encouraging signs of consistent type and size which are compatible with and complementary to related buildings and uses, and
harmonious with their surroundings.
IX-1
ARTICLE IX
Sec. 38-402. Prohibited signs.
(a) Unless otherwise permitted by this Article, the following signs shall not be permitted:
(1) Signs which imitate an official FHWA, MDOT, or LCRC traffic control sign or signal.
(2) Signs which are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of illumination which may be confused with, or
construed to be, a traffic control device.
(3) Signs which hide from view all or any part of any traffic sign, street sign, or traffic signal.
(4) Signs which obstruct the view (sight lines) in any direction at a street or road intersection or entranceway.
(5) Signs located in, or which project into or overhang any public right-of-way, except as allowed by local, state, or federal law or
regulation.
(6) Obsolete signs.
(7) Signs which are pasted or attached to utility poles or placed upon trees, fences, rocks or in an unauthorized manner to walls or
other signs.
(8) Any sign displayed on an unlicensed automobile, truck, trailer (MCL 257.1 – 257.93), or wagon or other conveyance. This
restriction shall not apply to temporary for sale signs in vehicle windows.
(9) Roof signs, except any sign erected or constructed as an integral, or essentially integral, part of a normal roof structure (See
“Roof Sign, Integral”).
(10) Signs on public or private towers. Any type of signage, including logos, shall not be permitted on a public or private radio,
television, cellular phone or water tower, except the name of the municipality, utility company, name of provider, and emergency
contact number, which does not exceed four (4) square feet in sign area.
(11) Any sign or sign structure which is structurally unsafe as determined by the Township Building Official, or constitutes a hazard to
safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment, or is not kept in good repair, or is capable
of causing electrical shock to persons likely to come in contact with such sign.
(12) Any new non-conforming sign in any zoning district is expressly prohibited.
(13) Flagpoles greater than thirty (30) feet in height.
(14) A sign which displays flashing, animation, scrolling, blinking, or intermittent lights, or lights with changing levels of light
intensity (Section 38-410).
(15) Rotating searchlights or similar devices.
(16) All portable or nonstructural signs, except as allowed under other sections of this article. For purposes of this article, a sign
shall be considered nonstructural if it has no permanently mounted, self-supporting structure or is not an integral part of the
building to which it is accessory.
(17) Temporary electronic message (LED) signs.
(18) All signs advertising a model home or residential sales office for which a residential certificate of occupancy has been issued or
has received permanent or temporary residential occupancy.
(19) Off-premise signs, except as allowed in this Ordinance.
(20) Banners, wire stake signs, balloon signs, inflatable signs or figures, flag signs and feather signs.
Sec. 38-403. Authority to remove prohibited signs.
The Township Building Official or designee shall have the authority to enter upon property and to remove and discard any sign determined
to be in violation of this Article and any private or commercial signs located upon public property or public right-of-way. Such authority
shall be in addition to the authority conferred upon the Zoning Administrator by Article II of this chapter or by general law.
IX-2
ARTICLE IX
Sec. 38-404. Regulations and standards for signs exempt from permit requirements.
The following signs are specifically exempt from the sign permit requirements of this Article, but are subject to the following regulations
and standards:
(a) Exempt non-commercial and public safety signs.
(1) Integral signs when carved into stone, concrete, or similar material, or made of bronze, aluminum, or other noncombustible
material, that are an integral part of a structure, not to exceed nine (9) square feet in area.
(2) Public signs of a noncommercial nature and in the interest of, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer or building official in
the performance of public duty and/or are required to insure public safety.
(3) Signs that are erected by a public agency in compliance with the requirements of the Federal and Michigan “Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices”(MUTCD). This may include electronic message signs used for right-of-way or public utility improvements.
(4) Residential community or development signs consisting of one (1) permanent sign per entranceway, which shall not exceed
thirty-six (36) square feet in area, nor a maximum height of six (6) feet. Ornamental base or apron supporting framework,
bracing or decorative frames, or structural members shall be computed not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the surface area
of the sign face. Portions of stone or masonry walls without signage shall be excluded from the measurement of sign area.
(5) Flags indicating the insignia of any nation, state, community organization, college, or university.
(6) Historical markers consisting of plaques or signs describing a state or national designation as an historic site or structure, and/
or containing a narrative, and not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area.
(7) Nonprofit organization signs of religious facilities, schools, museums, libraries, fraternal organizations, or other nonprofit
institution bulletin boards that:
a. Are permanent signs;
b. Have a minimum setback from the street right-of-way of fifteen (15) feet;
c. Do not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area; and
d. Are a maximum of six (6) feet in height.
(8) Temporary off-premise and/or on-premise signs for civic or non-profit events and festivals, as approved by the Township Board.
(9) Electronic message signs for schools, religious facilities, museums, or other non-profit institutions shall comply with Section
38-411, and shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area.
(10) Warning signs, such as no trespassing or warning of electrical currents or animals, provided that such signs do not exceed six
(6) square feet in area.
(b) Exempt residential and commercial district signs.
(1) Gas station pump island signs located on the structural supports identifying “self-serve” and “full-serve” operations, provided
that:
a. There is no business identification or advertising copy on such signs;
b. There are no more than two (2) such signs per pump island; and
c. Such signs do not exceed four (4) square feet in area for each sign.
(2) Menu boards, up to two (2) signs each, and no greater than sixteen (16) square feet and eight (8) feet in height, which display
menu items and contain a communication system for placing food orders at an approved drive-through restaurant, provided
such signs are not located in the front yard.
(3) Miscellaneous signs on vending machines, gas pumps, and ice containers, and indicating the contents or announcing onpremises
sales, provided that the sign on each device does not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
(4) Noncommercial directional signs containing noncommercial messages, such as signs designating the location of public
telephones, restrooms, restrictions on smoking, driveway entrances, and restrictions on building entrances, provided that such
signs do not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
IX-3
ARTICLE IX
(5) Parking lot signs indicating restrictions on parking, when such signs:
a. Are placed within a permitted parking lot;
b. Are a maximum of ten (10) feet in height; and
c. Do not exceed six (6) square feet in area.
(6) Garage sale signs (including estate sales, rummage sales, yard sales, moving sales, and similar activities) provided that:
a. No more than two (2) temporary garage sale signs may be permitted offsite, on approach routes to the sale as regulated
by Sec. 38-187,
b. Signs shall not be placed within the right-of-way,
c. Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area a maximum of four (4) feet high, and
d. Signs are erected no more than seven (7) business days before, and are removed within one (1) business day after, the sale,
(7) Real estate signs.
a. In residential districts, such signs shall be freestanding (such as lawn signs) or wall mounted, and offer an open house
on the premises or offer the premises on which they are located “for sale” or “for rent,” provided that there shall not be
more than one (1) such sign per parcel, except that, on a corner parcel, two (2) signs (one (1) facing each street) shall be
permitted. Such signs in residential districts shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, and no freestanding sign shall
project higher than six (6) feet above normal grade. Such signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the sale or
rental of the property. In addition up to four (4) temporary directional signs may be permitted offsite, on approach routes
to a real estate open house, only during the time of the open house. Direction signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in
area, and shall not be placed within the right-of-way.
b. In nonresidential districts, such signs shall be freestanding or wall mounted, and offer the premises on which they are
located “for sale” or “for rent,” provided that there shall not be more than one (1) such sign per parcel, except that, on a
corner parcel, two (2) signs (one (1) facing each street) shall be permitted. Such signs in nonresidential districts shall not
exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area per side. No freestanding sign shall project higher than eight (8) feet above
normal grade, and no wall mounted sign shall project higher than ten (10) feet above normal grade. Such signs shall be
removed within thirty (30) days after the sale or lease of the property, or, in the case of rental property, within thirty (30)
days after final occupancy has been issued to the entire development.
(8) Rental office directional signs consisting of up to two (2) signs identifying or directing motorists to a rental or management
office in a multiple-family development, provided that such signs:
a. Are a maximum of four (4) feet in height;
b. Are setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line or public right-of-way; and
c. Do not exceed three (3) square feet in area.
(9) Street address signs (street numbers) that do not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
(10) Political signs, including election signs and free expression signs.
Sec. 38-405. Design standards.
(a) Construction standards.
(1) General requirements. All permanent signs shall be designed and constructed in a safe and stable manner in accordance with
the Township’s adopted Building and Electrical Code. All electrical wiring associated with a freestanding sign shall be installed
underground.
(2) Building code compliance. All permanent signs shall be designed to comply with minimum wind pressure and other
requirements set forth in the adopted Building Code.
(3) Framework. All signs attached to a structure shall be designed so that the supporting framework, other than the supporting
elements on a freestanding sign, is contained within or behind the face of the sign or within the building to which the sign is
attached so as to be totally screened from view.
IX-4
ARTICLE IX
(b) Illumination:
(1) Types of Illumination. Signs may be either internally or externally illuminated. Signs shall be externally illuminated only by
steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign, or by illumination internal to the sign. Electronic messages,
and digital display are regulated by Sections 38-409 and 38-410.
(2) Non-glare, shielded lighting. Use of glaring, undiffused lights or bulbs of any type shall be prohibited. Lights shall be shaded
so as not to project onto adjoining properties or thoroughfares.
(3) Traffic hazards. Sign illumination color and/or brightness that will create a traffic hazard shall be prohibited.
(4) Illumination by bare bulbs or flames is prohibited.
(5) For external and internal illumination, brightness shall not exceed fifteen (15) foot-candles measured at four (4) feet
perpendicular to any surface of the sign. Electronic messages, or digital display are regulated by Sections 38-409 and 38-410.
(c) Location.
(1) Compliance with setback requirements. All permanent signs shall comply with the setback requirements.
(d) Measurements of sign area.
(1) Area of the sign. Sign area shall be computed as follows and as illustrated in Figure 405-1.
a. General requirements. Where a sign consists of a generally flat surface or sign face on which lettering and other
information is affixed, the sign area shall be computed by measuring the entire face of the sign, including any borders (but
excluding uprights or supports for freestanding signs).
b. Individual letters. Where a sign consists of individual letters and logo affixed directly to a building, the area of the sign
shall be computed by measuring the area of the envelope (square, rectangle, circle, etc.) required to enclose the lettering
and logo.
c. Freestanding signs. The area of a double-faced freestanding sign shall be computed using only one (1) face of the sign,
including borders, provided that the:
1. Outline and dimensions of both faces are identical; and
2. Faces are back-to-back so that only one (1) face is visible from any given direction.
3. For freestanding signs, the area shall include the entire area of the sign face upon which copy, lettering, drawings, or
photos can be placed. This shall include borders or framing, but shall exclude necessary uprights and supports. For
freestanding signs which are mounted on a solid base, the base shall be excluded from the calculation of sign for a
distance up to thirty (30) inches above grade.
d. Cylindrical signs. The area of a cylindrical ground sign shall be computed by multiplying the circumference of the cylinder
by its height. (See the definition of Monolith Sign.)
IX-5
ARTICLE IX
Figure 405-1. Calculating the Total Area of Wall Signs and Freestanding Signs
(2) Setbacks and distances (on premises sign). The following guidelines shall be used to determine compliance with setback
and distance measurements:
a. The distance between two (2) signs shall be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents the shortest distance
between the two (2) signs.
b. The distance between a sign and a parking lot or building shall be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents
the shortest distance between the outer edge of the parking lot or building.
IX-6
ARTICLE IX
c. The distance between a sign and a building or property line shall be measured along a straight horizontal line that
represents the shortest distance between the edge of the sign and the building or property line.
Sec. 38-406. Nonresidential district signs.
The following signs shall be permitted in districts zoned for nonresidential use, including districts zoned LB, GB, HC, RO, LI, GI, and
nonresidential PUD:
(1) Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be allowed in the LB, GB, HC, RO, LI, GI, and nonresidential PUD districts, subject
to the following regulations:
a. Number. One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per street or highway frontage on each parcel.
b. Size. The total area of the freestanding sign shall not exceed one-half (½) of a square foot per lineal foot of lot frontage,
but in no case shall the freestanding sign exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in area. Exception, see Section 38-408:
Common Signage Plan.
c. Setback from right-of-way. Freestanding signs may be located in the required front yard, provided that no portion of
any such sign shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to the right-of-way line. If a parcel is served by a private road or
service road, no portion of a freestanding sign shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to the edge of the road or private road
easement/right-of-way.
d. Height. The height of a freestanding sign in any nonresidential district shall not exceed eight (8) feet above the natural
grade.
e. Setback from residential districts. Freestanding signs other than billboards (setbacks for billboards are regulated by
Sec. 38-409) shall be located no closer to any residential district than indicated in the following table:
Table 406-1 Freestanding Sign Setback from Residential District
Zoning District in Which Sign is Located Required Setback from Residential District (feet)
LB, RO 50
GB, HC, LI, GI 100
Table 406-2 Summary of Non-Residential Sign Regulations
Zoning District Wall Signs Freestanding Signs Window Signs
LB, GB, HC, RO, LI, GI, PUD (nonresidential)
1 wall sign permitted*
1 square foot per lineal foot of
building frontage (up to 60
square feet) of sign area**
1 freestanding sign permitted per
street frontage
½ square foot per lineal foot of lot
frontage, not to exceed a maximum
of 48 square feet of sign area
Setback from right-of-way 15 feet
Total combined area of signs shall
not exceed ¼ or 25% of the total
window area***
* See regulations (Section 38-406) for corner frontage or multi-tenant spaces
** See regulations (Section 38-406) for buildings setback more than one hundred and fifty (150) feet from right-of-way
*** See exception in Section 38-408, Common Signage Plan
(2) Gasoline price signs. Gasoline price signs shall be permitted, subject to the following standards:
a. Number. One (1) gasoline price sign shall be permitted for each gas station.
b. Size. Gasoline price signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in area. Gasoline price signs shall not be counted
c. in determining compliance with the standards for total area of wall or freestanding signs permitted on the parcel.
d. Setback. Gasoline price signs shall comply with the setback and height requirements specified for freestanding signs in
the district in which the signs are located.
IX-7
ARTICLE IX
(3) Time, temperature, and stock market signs. Time, temperature, and stock market signs shall be permitted in commercial,
industrial, and office districts, subject to the following conditions:
a. Frequency of message change. The message change shall not be more frequent than once every nine (9) seconds.
b. Size. The area of such signs shall not be included within the maximum sign area permitted on the site, and in accordance
with Section 406.
c. Number. One (1) such sign shall be permitted per street frontage.
(4) Wall signs. Wall signs shall be permitted in office, commercial, and industrial districts, subject to the following regulations:
a. Number. One (1) wall sign shall be permitted per street or highway frontage on each parcel. In the case of a multi-tenant
building or shopping center, one (1) wall sign shall be permitted for each tenant having an individual means of public
access. Tenants who occupy a corner space in a multi-tenant structure shall be permitted to have one (1) sign on each side
of the building. Where several tenants use a common entrance in a multi-tenant structure, only one (1) wall sign shall be
permitted, but the total sign area should be allocated on an equal basis to all tenants. In the event that the resulting multitenant
sign is no longer safely legible to the public the applicant may petition the Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance.
b. Size. The total area of a wall sign shall not exceed one (1) square foot per lineal foot of building frontage, but in no case
shall the wall sign exceed sixty (60) square feet in area. Buildings which are set back more than one hundred and fifty (150)
feet from the road right-of-way may be allowed to have a maximum square footage, (based upon the preceding lineal foot
formula), not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
c. Location. One (1) wall sign may be located on each side of a building that faces a street or highway.
d. Vertical dimensions. The maximum vertical dimension of any wall sign shall not exceed one-fourth (¼) of the building
height.
e. Horizontal dimensions. The maximum horizontal dimension of any wall sign shall not exceed one-half (½) of the width
of the building.
f. Height. The top of a wall sign shall not be higher than whichever is lowest:
1. The maximum height specified for the district in which the sign is located.
2. The top of the upper sills at the first level on windows above the first story.
3. The height of the building facing the street on which the sign is located.
g. Projection. A wall sign shall not project more than twenty-four (24) inches from the face of a wall.
(5) Marquee Signs. Marquee signs shall be allowed for theaters subject to the following requirements:
a. Construction. Marquee signs shall consist of hard incombustible materials, and the written message is to be affixed flat
to the vertical face of the marquee.
b. Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of ten (10) feet shall be provided beneath any marquee.
c. Projection. Limitations imposed by this Article regarding the projection of signs from the face of a wall or building shall
not apply to marquee signs, provided that marquee signs shall comply with the setback requirements for the district in
which the signs are located.
d. Number. One (1) marquee sign shall be permitted per street frontage.
e. Size. The total size of a marquee sign shall not exceed one and one half (1½) square feet per lineal foot of building frontage.
f. Compliance with size requirements for wall signs. The area of permanent lettering on a marquee sign shall be counted
in determining compliance with the standards for total area of wall signs permitted on the parcel (Section 38- 405(d)).
(6) Awnings and canopies. Signs on awnings and canopies shall be allowed in commercial, office, and industrial districts, subject
to the following standards:
a. Coverage. The total area of the lettering and logo shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total area of the
awning or canopy that is visible from the street.
b. Compliance with wall sign size requirements. The area of the sign on awnings or canopies shall be counted in
determining compliance with the standards for total area of wall signs permitted on the parcel.
IX-8
ARTICLE IX
c. Projection. Limitations imposed by this article regarding projection of signs from the face of a wall or building shall not
apply to awning and canopy signs, provided that such signs shall comply with the setback requirements for the district in
which the signs are located.
d. Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of ten (10) feet shall be provided beneath any awning or canopy.
e. Illuminated fabric canopy signs. A translucent fabric canopy sign with internal illumination shall be considered as a wall
sign. The entire surface of the illuminated fabric canopy shall be counted in the determination of sign area.
(7) Window signs. Temporary and permanent window signs shall be allowed on the inside in commercial, industrial, and office
districts, provided that the total combined area of such signs, including incidental signs, shall not exceed one-fourth (¼) or
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total window area per window unit. However, all such signs shall be placed in a manner that
will not block or impede visibility through the window by police, fire, and other public safety personnel. Exception, see Section
38-408, Common Signage Plan. Window signs are subject to the regulations for Illumination, brightness, and interval. (See
Definitions Section 38-1).
(8) Promotional signs that are temporary signs of a commercial nature, announcing grand openings, or other special events or
promotions, subject to the limitations as to size, height, and location set forth in this section. Such signs shall be confined within
private property and shall be displayed no more than two (2) times per year by any business or establishment, for a limited
period not to exceed a time period in excess of seven (7) days. Temporary signs of a commercial nature shall not exceed sixty
(60) square feet in surface area. The permit for such signage must clearly state the beginning and end date for the display time.
Sec. 38-407. Shopping centers.
(a) One (1) ground sign, used to identify a shopping center, shall be permitted and shall conform with the requirements of Section
38-406. Each business with a separate entrance within a neighborhood shopping center may provide one (1) wall sign which shall
conform to the requirements of Section 38-406.
(b) Where the roof structure of a building containing more than one (1) business is extended over a walkway along the outer edge of
the building, one (1) underhanging sign may be permitted for each business in the building, provided:
(1) All such signs will be of an identical size and shape.
(2) Underhanging signs shall contain the name of the business only and shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area per side.
(3) All such signs (marquee and underhanging) shall utilize identical lettering style and color scheme.
(4) A vertical clearance of at least eight (8) feet is provided between the sign and any part of the sign structure and the surface of
the sidewalk at ground level.
Sec. 38-408. Common signage plan.
If the owners of two (2) or more contiguous (disregarding intervening streets and alleys) zoned lots or the owner of a single lot with more
than one (1) building, not including any accessory building, in any commercial (business) or industrial zoning district shall file with the
Zoning Administrator for such zone lots a common signage plan conforming with the following provisions, a twenty-five percent (25%)
increase in the maximum total sign area shall be allowed for each included zone lot. Such bonus shall be allocated within each zone lot as
the owners elect:
(1) Contents. The common signage plan shall contain all of the information required for a master signage plan and shall also
specify standards for consistency among all signs on the zone lots affected by the plan with regard to:
a. Lettering, graphic style, or color coordination;
b. Lighting;
c. Location of each sign on the buildings;
d. Material; and
e. Sign proportions. IX-9
ARTICLE IX
(2) Window signs. A common signage plan or master signage plan, including window signs, may simply indicate the areas of
the windows to be covered by window signs and the general type of the window signs (e.g., paper affixed to the window,
painted, etched on glass, or some other material hung inside the window) and need not specify the exact dimension or nature
of every window sign provided the area does not exceed the sign area permitted in Sec. 38-406 (7).
(3) Limitation of number of freestanding/ground signs. The common signage plan for all zone lots with multiple uses or
multiple users shall limit the number of freestanding/ground signs to a total of one (1) for each street on which the zone lots
included in the plan have frontage and shall provide for shared or common usage of such signs.
(4) Miscellaneous restrictions. The master signage plan or common signage plan may contain such other restrictions as the
Township may reasonably determine.
(5) Signatures required. The master signage plan or common signage plan shall be signed by all owners or their authorized
agents in such form as the building official shall require.
(6) Inclusions. A master signage plan or common signage plan shall be included in any development plan, site plan, planned
unit development plan, or other official plan required by the Township for the proposed development and shall be processed
simultaneously with such other plan.
(7) Amendments. A master signage plan or common signage plan may be requested for amendment by filing a new master
signage plan or common signage plan with the Township that conforms with all requirements of the ordinance then in effect.
(8) Nonconforming existing signs. If any new or amended common signage plan is filed for a property on which existing signs
are located, such plan shall include a schedule for bringing into conformance, within three (3) years, all signs not conforming
to the proposed amended plan or to the requirements of this section in effect on the date of submission.
(9) Binding effect. After approval of a master signage plan or common signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted,
or maintained, except in conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this
article. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a plan and any other provision of this article, the plan which has
been approved by the Township shall control.
Sec. 38-409. Billboards.
(a) Districts. Billboards shall be permitted only in the LI Light Industrial district and the GI General Industrial District abutting the rightof-
way of M-36 between Whitmore Lake Road and Leman Road or US-23.
(b) Area. The total sign area of any billboard shall not exceed six hundred and seventy-two (672) square feet per face. A triangular or
“V”-shaped billboard shall not have more than two (2) sign faces and not be separated by an internal angle of more than 20 degrees.
(c) Setback. No billboard shall project over public property. No billboard shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any property
line. No billboard shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residentially used or zoned property. Billboards shall be set
back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any other structure on or off the same premise upon which the billboard is located.
(d) Distance from other signs. Billboards shall be spaced no closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from another billboard.
(e) Interchange Distance. A sign structure shall not be permitted adjacent to or within five hundred (500) feet of an interchange, an
intersection at grade, or any highway pull off including MDOT facilities. The five hundred (500) feet shall be measured from the point
of beginning or ending of pavement widening at the exit from or entrance to the main traveled way.
(f) Height. The top of any billboard, including the structure and the display area, shall not be higher than twenty-five (25) feet above
average preexisting normal grade at any point beneath the sign.
IX-10
ARTICLE IX
(g) Illumination. A billboard may be either externally or internally illuminated subject to section 38-405 (b), or may utilize digital
technology subject to the following:
(1) A billboard shall not display light of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare, impair the vision of an ordinary driver, or constitute
a nuisance. In order to reduce glare, no design shall have a white or near white background.
(2) The digital billboard sign shall operate at a brightness level not to exceed 6000 cd/m2 (candelas per square meter) between
sunrise and sunset, and a maximum brightness of300 cd/m2 between sunset and sunrise. Sunrise and sunset times shall be
determined according to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST“http//:www.nist.gov”). In addition to the
above maximum day/night brightness thresholds, the digital billboard sign shall be equipped with ambient light sensors that
automatically adjust the brightness levels to no more than 0.3 foot candles above ambient light conditions.
(3) Sign Owner shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer or company furnishing the sign display system, that
the above requirements have been pre-set at the factory or other facility. The sign owner shall separately certify that the above
requirements setting will not be adjusted.
(4) The brightness of the sign shall be measured by a certified individual, other than the Sign Owner or an employee of the Sign
Owner, who is qualified to make such measurement using a handheld luminance meter e.g., “nit gun.” The required operation/
level of ambient light sensors shall be measured using a handheld illuminance meter. The timing for each message change
shall be verified by use of a stop watch, video camera or other appropriate measuring device. The Sign Owner shall certify in
writing to the Township Planning and Zoning Administrator before final construction inspection, and twice annually from the
Sign Owner’s initial certification date thereafter, that the sign has been field tested by a certified individual, other than the Sign
Owner or employee of the Sign Owner, and the sign is operating in compliance with the requirements in this section. The cost of
all certification shall be the responsibility of the Sign Owner.
(5) The digital billboard sign display system shall be configured with a self-diagnostics program that will notify the Sign Owner’s
technical support team in the event of a malfunction of the sign. In the event of a display failure resulting in a flashing or
intermittent light change, or a failure resulting in the display exceeding the brightness level or image dwell standard stated
in subsection (f)(2) above, the display shall be automatically shut-off or steps shall be taken immediately by the Sign Owner’s
technical support team to shut-off the sign remotely. Additionally, should more than one individual display panel comprising
the total sign display area not function as engineered, the display shall be immediately shut-off remotely.
(6) All displayed images must be static.
(7) No flashing, animation, scrolling, blinking, or intermittent lights, or lights with changing colors or levels of light intensity shall
be permitted.
(8) The use of video on signs is expressly prohibited.
(9) The transition time between images shall be instantaneous (less than one second), with no transition effects between images.
(10) The minimum dwell time (time an image is displayed) of each and any image will be exactly 9 seconds. Emergency messages
may exceed this dwell time if deemed appropriate.
(11) Sequential images or messages (e.g. back-to-back, 9 second images that form one continual advertisement), are prohibited.
IX-11
ARTICLE IX
(12) The digital billboard screen shall be allowed to operate 24 hours per day, seven days per week, unless a malfunction occurs.
(h) Construction. A billboard shall be self-supported and pole-mounted. The materials used for the construction of the billboard
structure will be metal, stone, brick or similar materials. The support structures for billboards shall be covered in brick or stone
substantially similar to the example in figure 409-1.
(i) Landscaping. A landscape plan shall be submitted in conjunction with the sign
permit application for a billboard. A landscape buffer a minimum of 15 feet wide
shall be provided at the base of all billboards. Such landscaped area should be
enhanced with a decretive wall. Trees and shrubbery, including evergreen and
flowering trees, of sufficient size and quantity shall be used to achieve the effect
of making the base of the structure blend with the surroundings. The proposed
landscaping plan shall be substantially similar to the example in figure 409-1. An
irrigation system shall be installed for the landscaping area.
(j) Conversion. No existing static billboard may be converted to one using digital technology without first submitting a sign permit
application that demonstrates that the proposed sign will meet all of the requirements of this ordinance.
(k) Guarantee. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit for construction of a billboard, a performance guarantee in the form of cash or an
automatically renewing irrevocable letter of credit in an amount established by the Township shall be deposited with the Township
to guaranty completion of the project and cost for sign removal should its removal be required in the future. The amount of the
guaranty shall be reduced in proportion to the amount of project work completed provided the amount of guarantee remaining
shall not be less than an amount equal to the cost to remove the sign, related ground structure and landscape should the sign be
abandoned or fall into a state of disrepair. Should it be found that the guarantee is insufficient to cover said cost, any additional cost
will be assessed to the property owner and become a lean on the property if not paid.
Sec. 38-410. Electronic message signs.
Electronic Message Signs (LED) shall be permitted only within the LB, RO, GB, and HC zoning districts, as either a freestanding or wallmounted
sign or window sign. This shall exclude electronic message signs for non-profit organizations such as churches, schools, libraries,
etc. in accordance with Section 38-404. It shall also exclude electronic restaurant menu boards for drive-through restaurants. Such signs
shall be allowed subject to the sign regulations for each zoning district and subject to the following additional regulations:
(a) The electronic display shall not be animated, flashing, multi-colored, or scrolling.
(b) The frequency of the message change shall be restricted to no more than once every nine (9) seconds.
(c) The maximum area of an electronic message board shall be considered a part of a wall or freestanding sign and shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the total sign area as allowed per zoning district and sign regulations of this article.
(d) The maximum height of an electronic message board shall conform to the height regulations for signs allowed in each zoning district.
(e) The electronic message sign may not display light of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare, impair the vision of an ordinary
driver, or constitute a nuisance. An electronic message sign shall possess automatic dimming capabilities so that the maximum
IX-12
Figure 409-1
ARTICLE IX
luminescence level is not more than fifteen (15) foot-candles measured four (4) feet perpendicular to any surface. This shall exclude
billboards, which are subject to Section 38-409.
(f) Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light
intensity has been factory-programmed not to exceed the above listed light levels, and that the intensity level is protected from enduser
manipulation by password-protected software or other method satisfactory to Green Oak Charter Township.
Sec. 38-411. Election Signs / Free Expression Signs.
(a) A sign whose message relates to a candidate for election, political office, or to a political party, is permitted in all zoning districts,
subject to the following conditions:
(1) Each sign shall have a maximum height of forty-eight (48) inches from the ground and a maximum width of ninety-six (96)
inches, including the support structure.
(2) Such signs shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the road right-of-way. Permission to locate such signs on private
property shall be obtained from the owner or occupant of the property on which such signs are located.
(3) A sign which advocates or opposes a candidate for public office or a position on an issue to be determined at an election shall
be removed within two (2) days after the election.
(b) The following provisions apply on election days only, to signs that directly or indirectly make reference to an election, a candidate,
or a ballot question and that are erected on property on which a public polling place is located. Such signs are not subject to the
placement requirements of subsection (a), but such sign:
(1) Shall not be erected within one hundred (100) feet of any entrance to a building in which a polling place is located;
(2) Shall not be erected in the public right-of-way meant for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, which is contiguous with and on the
same side of the street as the property on which the polling place is located. Permission from the owner of the property on
which the polling place is located shall not be required to erect such a sign in the limited portion of the public right-of-way
that this ordinance permits;
(3) Shall not be erected such that it hinders or obstructs the free and safe passage of pedestrians and vehicles in the public rightof-
way;
(4) Shall not be erected more than eighteen (18) hours before the polls open; and,
(5) Shall not remain on the property on which the polling place is located or in the public right-of-way more than two (2) days
after the polls close.
(6) Signs located near a public polling place shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Michigan.
(c) A sign whose message relates to free expression or an ideological opinion is permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the
following:
(1) Each sign shall have a maximum height of forty-eight (48) inches and a maximum width of ninety-six (96) inches, including
the support structure.
(2) Such signs shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the road right-of-way. Permission to locate such sign on private
property shall be obtained from the owner or occupant of the property on which such signs are located.
(3) Free expression or ideological opinion signs not related to an election shall not be subject to any specific time limit but must
be removed if they become unsafe or otherwise prohibited by Section 38-402.
IX-13
ARTICLE IX
Table 411-1 Summary of Sign Regulations
Type of Sign
Districts
Permitted
Maximum Height
Maximum Sign
Area
Maximum Number Permit Required Additional Requirements
Wall Signs
Non-residential
zoning districts
¼ of building
height
1 square foot
per lineal foot of
building frontage,
up to 60 square
feet
1 per building
frontage
Yes See Section 38-406
Electronic
Message Signs
CB, RO, GB, HC,
plus schools,
churches, etc.
Compliance with wall sign or freestanding sign regulations Yes
50% of total sign area
allowed, see Section
38-410
Freestanding Signs
All nonresidential
districts
8 feet
½ square foot per
foot of frontage,
up to 48 square
feet
1 per street
frontage
Yes
½ square foot per
building frontage, up to
48 square feet
Menu Boards
Commercial
districts
8 feet 16 square feet Maximum of 2 Yes
Pole Signs
All nonresidential
districts
Compliance with freestanding sign regulations Yes
½ square foot per
building frontage, up to
48 square feet
Off-Premise Signs -
Billboards
LI/GI districts on
M-36/US-23
25 feet 672 square feet 1 Yes See Section 38-409
Off-Premise Signs Not permitted except as noted
Election Signs All zoning districts 48 inches 32 square feet - No See Section 38-411
Free Expression
Signs
All zoning districts 48 inches 32 square feet - No See Section 38-411
Residential Real
Estate Signs
Residential
zoning districts
6 feet 6 square feet
1 per street
frontage
No See Section 38-404
Non-Residential
Real Estate Signs
Non-residential
zoning districts
8 feet 32 square feet
1 per street
frontage
No See Section 38-404
Garage Sale Signs
Residential
zoning districts
4 feet 6 square feet - No See Section 38-404
Window Signs
Non-residential
zoning districts
25% total area of
the window unit
See Section
38-406(7)
Note: Table 411-1 is a summary of regulations, please refer to the Ordinance for detailed regulations
Sec. 38-412. Permits; applications; inspections and maintenance; abandoned signs; nonconforming
signs; appeals.
(a) Plans, specifications, and permits.
(1) Permits. (See Section 38-404, Exemptions)
a. Temporary signs. All temporary signs shall require a permit issued by the Green Oak Charter Township Zoning Administrator
and completion of a Township generated permit application. This shall exclude election signs or free expression signs. All
temporary commercial signs shall require a permit, completion of a Township generated permit application, and payment
of a fee based on the Township fee schedule, which shall be established by the Township Board. No fee will be required for
non-commercial temporary signs. Temporary sign permits shall be issued within three (3) business days. (See Section 38-1
Definitions: “Temporary Sign”)
IX-14
ARTICLE IX
b. Permanent signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate, or structurally change a sign or other
advertising structure, unless specifically exempted by this article (See Section 38-404), without first obtaining a permit
in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Section. A permit shall also be required for a change of copy for any sign
face. A permit shall require payment of a fee, which shall be established by the Township Board. Permanent sign permits
shall be issued within fifteen (15) business days.
c. Effect of issuance. No permit for a sign issued under this Article shall be deemed to constitute permission or authorization
to maintain an unlawful sign nor shall any permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in an action to abate an unlawful
sign.
(2) Application. Application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by the Township Zoning Administrator or
Building Official. The following information shall be required for all commercial signs:
a. Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
b. Location of the building, structure, or lot upon which the sign is to be attached or erected.
c. Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, and property lines.
d. Plans showing the dimensions, materials, method of construction, and attachment to the building or in the ground.
e. Copies of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary by the Building Official, showing the structure as designed for
dead load and wind pressure.
f. Name and address of the person owning, erecting, and maintaining the sign.
g. Information concerning required electrical connections.
h. Insurance policy or bond, as required in this article.
i. Written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be erected.
j. Other information as required by the Building Official to make the determination that the sign is in compliance with all
applicable laws and regulations.
(3) Review of application.
a. Planning Commission review. Sign permit applications submitted in conjunction with the proposed construction of a new
building or addition to an existing building shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for signs located within the PUD,
GB, and HC zoning districts as a part of the required site plan review. Proposed signs must be shown on the site plan. The
applicant shall have the option of submitting sign applications to the Planning Commission under procedures which are
separate from the site plan review.
b. Zoning Administrator review. The Zoning Administrator shall review the sign permit application for any sign proposed on a
site or existing building where no other new construction is proposed.
c. Issuance of permit. Following review and approval of a sign application by the Planning Commission or Zoning Administrator,
as appropriate, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to issue a sign permit.
(4) Exceptions. A sign shall not be enlarged or relocated, except in conformity with the provisions set forth in this Article for
new signs, nor until a proper permit has been secured. However, a new permit shall not be required for ordinary servicing or
repainting of an existing sign message, cleaning of a sign, name changes, or changing of the message on the sign where the
sign is designed for such changes. Furthermore, a permit shall not be required for certain exempt signs listed in Section 38-404.
(b) Inspections and maintenance.
(1) Inspection of new signs.
a. All permanent signs for which a permit has been issued shall be inspected, when erected, by the Zoning Administrator
or designee. Approval shall be granted only if the sign has been constructed in compliance with the approved plans and
applicable standards of this Article and the building code.
IX-15
ARTICLE IX
b. In cases where fastenings or anchorages are to be eventually bricked in or otherwise enclosed, the sign erector shall advise
the Zoning Administrator or designee when such fastenings are to be installed so that an inspection may be completed
before such enclosure.
(2) Inspection of existing signs. The Zoning Administrator or designee shall have the authority to routinely enter onto property
to inspect existing signs. In conducting such inspections, the Zoning Administrator or designee shall determine whether the
sign is adequately supported, painted to prevent corrosion, and secured to the building or other support so as to safely bear the
weight of the sign and pressure created by the wind.
(3) Correction of defects. If the Zoning Administrator or designee finds that any sign is unsafe, insecure, improperly constructed,
or poorly maintained, the sign erector, owner of the sign, or owner of the land shall make the sign safe and secure by completing
any necessary reconstruction or repairs, or entirely remove the sign in accordance with the timetable established by the Zoning
Administrator.
(c) Removal of abandoned or obsolete signs. Abandoned or obsolete signs shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person having
use of the land, building, or structure. Upon vacating a commercial or industrial establishment, facility, or land, the proprietor shall
be responsible for removal of all abandoned or obsolete signs.
However, where a conforming sign structure and frame are typically reused by a current occupant in a leased or rented building, the
building owner shall not be required to remove the sign structure and frame in the interim periods when the building is not occupied,
provided that the sign structure and frame are maintained in good condition.
(d) Nonconforming signs. No nonconforming sign shall be altered or reconstructed unless the alteration or reconstruction is in
compliance with this article, except that nonconforming signs shall comply with the following regulations:
(1) Repairs and maintenance. Normal maintenance shall be permitted, provided that any nonconforming sign that is destroyed
by any means to an extent greater than fifty percent (50%) of the sign’s pre-catastrophe fair market value, exclusive of the
foundation, shall not be reconstructed. Normal maintenance shall include painting of chipped or faded signs, replacement of
faded or damaged surface panels, name changes, or repair or replacement of electrical wiring or electrical devices.
(2) Substitutions. No nonconforming sign shall be replaced with another nonconforming sign.
(3) Modifications to the principal building. Whenever the principal building on a site on which a nonconforming sign is located
is modified to the extent that site plan review and approval is required, the nonconforming sign shall be removed.
(e) Appeals. Any party who has been refused a sign permit for a proposed permanent sign may file an appeal with the Zoning Board of
Appeals, in accordance with Article II of this ordinance. In determining whether a variance is appropriate, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall study the sign proposal, giving consideration to any extraordinary circumstances, such as those listed below, that would cause
practical difficulty in complying with this Article. The presence of any of the circumstances listed may be sufficient to justify granting
a variance; however, the Zoning Board of Appeals may decline to grant a variance, even if certain of the circumstances are present:
(1) The allowed signage could not be easily seen by passing motorists due to the configuration of existing buildings, trees, or other
obstructions.
(2) The allowed signage could not be seen by passing motorists in sufficient time to permit for safe deceleration and exit. In
determining whether such circumstances exist, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the standards established in the
Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. (MMUTCD) and any more current Federal, State, or credible private research
related to signage and traffic safety.
(3) Existing signs on nearby parcels would substantially reduce the visibility or advertising impact of a conforming sign on the
subject parcel.
IX-16
ARTICLE IX
(4) Construction of a conforming sign would require removal or severe alteration to natural features on the parcel, such as, but not
limited to, removal of trees, alteration of the natural topography, filling of wetlands, or obstruction of a natural drainage course.
(5) Construction of a conforming sign would obstruct the vision of motorists or otherwise endanger the health or safety of passersby.
(6) Variance from certain sign regulations would be offset by increased building setback, increased landscaping, or other such
enhancements, so that the net effect is an improvement in appearance of the parcel, compared to the result that would
otherwise be achieved with construction of a conforming sign.
(7) A sign which exceeds the permitted height or area standards of this article would be more appropriate in scale because of the
large size or frontage of the parcel or building.
Secs. 38-413 - 38-440. Reserved.
IX-17
ARTICLE IX
This page is left intentionally blank.
IX-18
ARTICLE X
ARTICLE X. PRIVATE ROADS*
Sec. 38-441. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to provide procedures and minimum standards and specifications for private roads constructed in the
Township in order to provide unobstructed, safe, and continuous vehicle access, and promote and protect the public health, safety, and
welfare. It is further the intent of this article to ensure that private roads are maintained and repaired by the private property owners who
own and use the roads.
Sec. 38-442. Authority.
The ordinance from which this article is derived is enacted pursuant to the statutory authority granted by public highways and private
roads, Public Act No. 283 of 1909 (MCL 220.1 et seq.) and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL
125.3101 et seq.
Sec. 38-443. Subdivisions and condominium projects.
All roads located within a subdivision plat or condominium project (site condominium or attached condominium) shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specification of the county road commission. The Township Planning Commission may recommend to
the Zoning Board of Appeals that a waiver of frontage or curb and gutter requirements be granted, and the Zoning Board of Appeals may
grant such waiver, when topographical features, density, and other factors indicate that such waiver would be in keeping with the intent
of this article and the character of the community.
Sec. 38-444. Private roads serving more than two lots or resulting parcels.
(a) All private roads serving more than two (2) lots or resulting parcels shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications set forth in Section 38-449.
(b) Private roads serving seven (7) or more lots shall require a class A road.
(c) Private roads serving not less than four (4) , nor more than six (6) lots shall require a class B road.
(d) Private roads serving three (3) or less lots shall require a class C road.
(e) Private roads involving a land division as described in the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), or
Chapter 18, pertaining to land divisions and subdivisions, must be reviewed by the officials designated by the Township Board.
Sec. 38-445. Private driveways.
Private driveways may serve up to two (2) parcels and shall not be considered a private road; provided, however, both parcels meet
the applicable requirements for road frontage. If, at any time, more than two (2) parcels are to have access using the existing private
driveway, such private driveway shall be brought into compliance with the standards contained in this article.
X-1
ARTICLE X
Sec. 38-446. Permits required.
No private road shall be constructed unless and until a permit is obtained by the applicant from the Township. Such permit must be
requested by proper application, upon forms provided for such purpose by the Township, and must meet the requirements set forth in this
article. Prior to such permit being granted to an applicant by the Township, a right-of-way permit shall be obtained from the county road
commission by the applicant for any private road which intersects a public road.
Sec. 38-447. Permit application requirements and approval procedures.
(a) Application requirements. A complete application for a proposed private road permit shall be filed with the Township official
and shall include the following:
(1) A completed private road application form.
(2) A complete legal description and survey of the lots or parcels and the names and addresses of the owners of the lots or parcels
to be served by the private road.
(3) A complete legal description of the private road easement for ingress and egress, and related utility and drainage easements.
(4) Ten (10) copies of the engineering plans, profiles, and cross sections of the proposed private road, showing all materials,
grades, dimensions, and bearings in compliance with the applicable standards set forth in this article. Such plans shall be
prepared and sealed by a civil engineer or land surveyor registered in the state.
(5) Existing topography, at two (2) foot contour intervals, and soil and drainage characteristics of the subject site.
(6) Proposed improvements, including but not limited to roads, sewers, and ditches, shown in plan and profile, and indicating all
materials, grades, dimensions, and bearings in compliance with the standards set forth in this article.
(7) A minimum of two (2) soil borings at a minimum of every five hundred (500) feet along the proposed route of the road.
(8) The location of existing buildings on the lots or parcels being served, or intended to be served, by the private road, as well as
any existing buildings or structures in or adjacent to any proposed road easement.
(9) The location of existing and proposed utilities and easements, such as gas, telephone, and electric.
(10) The proposed maintenance agreement, in a form suitable for recording, which specifically addresses the liability and
responsibility of the parties to the agreement to maintain the private road pursuant to the specifications provided for in this
and other applicable articles, including but not limited to the responsibility of removing snow from such private road and
maintaining clear road width for ingress and egress of emergency vehicles. The recorded statement which runs with the land
shall also inform subsequent purchasers that the road is private and may never be maintained or accepted by the county road
commission or any other applicable road authority.
(11) An application fee and applicable consultant review fee as established by resolution of the Township Board.
(b) Permit approval procedure.
(1) Upon receipt of an application, the Township official shall refer the application to the Planning Commission, at its next regular
meeting, for the purpose of a recommendation to the Township Board.
(2) The Planning Commission may refer the private road plans to the Township engineer and/or Township planner for review and
recommendation. If so referred, Township engineer and/or Township planner shall make a written report as to whether or not
the proposed private road conforms to the standards set forth in this article and recommendation as to approval. Such reports
may include any suggested conditions, to be attached to the permit, that are necessary to achieve the intent of this article.
(3) Within forty-five (45) days following the submission of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Township Board
shall consider the application, with the relevant reports and other relevant information, in determining whether to grant the
permit application.
(4) If the information submitted by the applicant demonstrates that the proposed private road will conform to the standards and
specifications set forth in this article, the Township Board shall grant the permit.
X-2
ARTICLE X
(5) As a condition to the granting of any permit under this article, the applicant shall deposit with the Township building, zoning,
and planning department a sum of money, bank letter of credit, or certified check, in a form suitable to the Township, in
an amount sufficient to guarantee that the applicant shall perform the terms and conditions of the permit, including the
payment of required fees. Upon completion of all improvements required by this article, any unused portion of the escrow/
deposit shall be refunded to the applicant.
(6) Upon receipt of the required deposit and predetermined fees and approval of the application by the Township Board, the
Township Zoning Administrator or designee shall issue the permit pursuant to the terms established by the Township Board
approving the application.
(7) Only the Township Board shall have the authority to approve or deny applications for permits. No other permit issued by any
Township official or other governmental body or official shall be a substitute for a permit.
Sec. 38-448. Fees.
The Township shall, by resolution of the Township Board, adopt a schedule of review fees. All applications for private roads shall be
accompanied by review and inspection fees. The fees shall be imposed to cover Township administrative costs, as well as engineering
review, field inspection, planning review, and legal and other professional services. The Township also reserves the right to require escrow
fees for field inspections. The balance of any escrow amount shall be refunded to the applicant upon final approval. Should the Township’s
costs exceed the fees submitted and/or the escrow amount, the applicant shall be responsible for payment of such amounts prior to the
issuance of the certificate of completion.
Sec. 38-449. Standards.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 38-443, the design and construction of all private roads shall comply with the standards for
the criteria applicable to the private road as set forth in the following Exhibit A. In addition, all private roads shall meet the following
additional minimum requirements and specifications:
(1) The roadway surface and cul-de-sac area shall be centered in the right-of-way.
(2) Aprons shall be required for all private roads.
(3) The connection between the private road and the public road shall conform to the standards and specifications of the county
road commission. If the private road provides direct access to a county road, approval of the road connection placement and
design must be approved by the county road commission prior to Township approval.
(4) Underground cross road drainage shall be provided where the proposed road crosses a stream or other drainage course.
Necessary culverts and erosion treatments shall be provided in accordance with the specifications of the county road
commission and/or county drain commission. A minimum of eighteen (18) inches of cover shall be provided over all culverts
and storm sewer systems placed under the proposed roadway.
(5) The private road easement and road shall be adequately drained so as to prevent flooding or erosion of the roadway. Ditches
shall be located within the private road easement. Road drainage shall be constructed so that runoff water shall be conveyed
to existing watercourses or waterbodies. The discharged water shall not be discharged upon the land of another property
owner unless the water is following an established watercourse or upon an established drain easement. The water discharged
onto adjoining properties shall also not exceed the normal agricultural rate. Connection to county drains shall be approved by
the county drain commissioner prior to issuance of a permit. Connection to roadside ditches within public road rights-of-way
shall be approved by the county road commission prior to the issuance of a permit.
(6) Private road signs shall be designated with the word “private” and shall be erected and maintained in accordance with the
state Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Private roads shall be named by the applicant, but shall be subject to review
and approval by the county road commission. The applicant shall be responsible for the erection and maintenance of all street
signs and traffic signs required by the Township, county, and state.
X-3
ARTICLE X
(7) All private roads constructed in excess of one thousand (1,000) feet must be built to the standards established by the county
road commission for paved roads. This subsection is not subject to variances from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(8) Private road easements must be at least sixty-six (66) feet in width.
(9) T-type dead-end roads will not be permitted without prior approval from the fire chief. In no instance shall T-type dead-end
roads be permitted on class A roads. Dead-end roads which are permitted by the Township shall require a cul-de-sac. Culs-desac
shall have an adequate turnaround with a minimum seventy-five (75) foot radius right-of-way and a minimum fifty (50)
foot radius roadway surface.
(10) All areas disturbed by construction must be topsoiled, seeded, and mulched. Steep ditch slopes may require sod, riprap, or
other stabilizers to minimize soil erosion. Temporary erosion control measures must be utilized.
(11) All trees and other objects must be removed from the roadway to the back slope of the ditch at one (1) foot above the ditch
bottom.
(12) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, private roads in subdivisions platted prior to the enactment of the
Ordinance from which this article is derived, and private roads or easements which are contained in land divisions approved
by the Township prior to the enactment of the Ordinance from which this article is derived, shall continue to meet the
specifications approved at the time of the application. Upon expansion, reconstruction, or major alteration of an existing
private road, new construction shall comply with the requirements of this article. The Township engineer shall determine if
such provision is met.
(13) The location of all newly created private roads and placement of required easements shall be consistent with approvals
granted according to site plans approved by the Township.
(14) The management of stormwater associated with private roads shall be in compliance with the Low Impact Development
Manual for Michigan and the Green Oak Charter Township Stormwater Management Ordinance. Refer to Figure 38-366-1 for
representative LID techniques.
Exhibit A - Schedule of Minimum Requirements and Specifications for Private Roads
Class A Class B Class C
Number of lots
served
7 or more 4 - 6 3 or less
Right-of-way width
66-foot minimum
75-foot minimum radius for culs-de-sac
66-foot minimum
75-foot minimum radius for culs-de-sac
66-foot minimum
75-foot minimum radius for culs-de-sac
Pavement cross-sections
Road width
20 feet with 2-foot gravel shoulders and
50-foot minimum cul-de-sac radius**
18 feet with 2-foot gravel shoulders and
50-foot minimum cul-de-sac radius**
18 feet with 50-foot minimum cul-de-sac
radius**
Sub-base
6 inches of compacted class II sand***
On-site material may be used if laboratory
analysis indicates that it meets the county
road commission specification requirements
6 inches of compacted class II sand***
On-site material may be used if laboratory
analysis indicates that it meets the county
road commission specification requirements
6 inches of compacted class II sand***
On-site material may be used if laboratory
analysis indicates that it meets the county
road commission specification requirements
Base
7 inches of 22A or 23A processed road
gravel placed and compacted in 2 courses
7 inches of 22A or 23A processed road
gravel placed and compacted in 2 courses
7 inches of 22A or 23A processed road
gravel placed and compacted in 2 courses
Pavement
3 inches of bituminous asphalt placed in 2
courses
Not required Not required
Roadway grades
Minimum 0.5%
Maximum 8%
Minimum 0.5%
Maximum 8%
Minimum 0.5%
Maximum 8%
Ditches
Minimum grade 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Front/back slopes 1:3 1:3 1:4
** With curb and gutter, the width shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet from back-of-curb to back-of-curb
*** Sampling and testing to be completed by an accredited testing firm experienced in soil analysis. Results shall be provided to the Township for review and approval. X-4
ARTICLE X
Sec. 38-450. Inspections.
(a) All required improvements shall be inspected by the Township engineer at various stages of construction. At a minimum,
inspections shall occur:
(1) After the subbase has been prepared and before the base is placed.
(2) After the final lift of aggregate material is placed and before the bituminous pavement is placed.
(3) Upon completion of construction, including final signing and restoration.
(b) The applicant shall notify the Township engineer a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours before the inspections are required. The
Township engineer shall make a final inspection upon completion of construction and shall report the results of the final inspection
to the Township Zoning Administrator or designee in writing. The applicant’s engineer shall certify to the Township engineer, before
the final inspection and report thereon are made, that the required improvements were made in accordance with this article and
all approved plans. A letter of completion by the Township engineer shall be delivered to the Township building, zoning, and
planning department and the applicant. The cost of inspection, including compensation of the Township engineer, shall be paid by
the applicant prior to the issuance of the certificate of completion.
Sec. 38-451. Permit validity.
A permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance, or such longer period as determined by the Township Board.
If the required improvements have not been completed upon the expiration of one (1) year or a longer period of time, the permit shall be
void and of no force and effect, and any unused portion of the escrow shall be refunded to the applicant.
Sec. 38-452. Recording of easements.
The easement, including all relevant agreements, shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds for the county prior to the
issuance of the certificate of completion as required in this article.
Sec. 38-453. Certificates of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building on a lot unless all of the requirements of this article have been met.
Sec. 38-454. Responsibility for maintenance.
Maintenance of private roads is the sole responsibility of the persons holding ownership or easement rights in the private roads. Should
a private road fall into a state of disrepair, the Township may, at its discretion, begin special assessment procedures for the maintenance,
repair, and/or improvement thereof as provided for by state law.
Sec. 38-455. Variances and appeals.
(a) Except pursuant to Section 38-449(7), where there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this article,
such as topographical and other physical characteristics of a parcel, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to vary or
modify the application of the provisions of this article so that the intent and purpose of this article shall be observed and public
safety secured. Findings of practical difficulty shall be reviewed by the ZBA in accordance with the criteria established in Section
38-95(a)(8). Any applicant may apply for a variance from any provision of the article by filing an application for variance with the
Zoning Administrator or designee and the ZBA.
X-5
ARTICLE X
(b) The Zoning Board of Appeals may attach reasonable conditions in granting any variance from any provision of this article, and the
breach of any condition or the failure of any applicant to comply with the conditions shall void the variance. This subsection is
intended, in part, to enable variances to be granted and conditions attached to the variances to facilitate the upgrading of prior
nonconforming rights-of-way and private roads to the standards of this article, in a reasonably practical manner, including, but not
limited to, such rights-of-way and private roads as have been established, recorded, constructed, or maintained prior to the date
of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, which cannot be brought into conformity with this article without
unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty due to soil conditions, topographical considerations, or other factors.
Secs. 38-456 - 38-490. Reserved.
X-6
ARTICLE XI
ARTICLE XI. NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES OF LAND, STRUCTURES, AND USES OF STRUCTURES AND
PREMISES*
Sec. 38-491. Intent and findings.
(a) It is the intent of this article to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are removed.
(b) It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this chapter uses which were lawful before the Ordinance from
which this article is derived was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this
article or future amendments. Such uses are declared by this article to be incompatible permitted uses in the districts involved. It is
further the intent of this article that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, or be used as grounds for
adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(c) A nonconforming use of a structure or land, or a structure and land, shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of the
Ordinance from which this article is derived by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen
from off the premises or by the addition of other uses or structures of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district
involved.
(d) To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this article shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated
use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of the
Ordinance from which this article is derived and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. For the
purposes of this subsection, the term “actual construction” means the placing of construction materials in a permanent position
and fastening in a permanent manner, except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially
begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall
be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
Sec. 38-492. Nonconforming lots.
(a) In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of the Ordinance from which this article is derived. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails
to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and
other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lots shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot
is located. A variance to yard requirements may be obtained through approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(b) If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage and single ownership are of record at
the date of passage or amendment of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and if all or part of the lots do not meet
the requirements for lot width and area as established by this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided
parcel for the purpose of this article, and no portion of such parcel shall be used or occupied which does not meet lot width and
area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with a
width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter; provided, however, the Zoning Administrator or designee may permit
single-family dwellings to be built on lots having a width less than the minimum established by this chapter upon determining
and making findings that the resultant lot width would be consistent with the character of the existing single-family residential
XI-1
ARTICLE XI
neighborhood or where, because of existing development or ownership or other existing conditions, it would not be possible to
meet the minimum lot width requirements of this chapter, provided that the resultant lots are not less than sixty (60) feet in width.
Requirements for yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, for the building lot shall conform
to the regulations for the district in which such building lot is located.
Sec. 38-493. Nonconforming uses of land.
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived, a lawful use of land exists
that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued as long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
(2) No such nonconforming use shall be moved, in whole or in part, to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
(3) If such nonconforming use of land ceases operation with the intent of abandonment for a period of more than six (6) months,
any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is
located.
Sec. 38-494. Nonconforming structures.
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived which
could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of
the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
(1) No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. For example, existing residences on
lots of a width less than required in this chapter may add a rear porch, provided that other requirements relative to yard space
and land coverage are met.
(2) Should a residential dwelling unit be destroyed by any means, it shall not be reconstructed in a manner which increases the
nonconformity or in a manner by which the structure extends beyond the original footprint of the residential dwelling.
(3) Should a nonresidential structure be destroyed by any means, it shall not be reconstructed, except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) Should such a structure be moved for any reason, for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations
for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
(5) Examples of expansions to nonconforming lots or structures which do not require variances from the Board of Zoning Appeals
are depicted in diagrams A, C, and D. Examples of expansions to nonconforming lots or structures which require variances
from the Board of Zoning Appeals are depicted in diagrams B, E, and F. Note that any second story or upper level expansion or
addition to a nonconforming structure will require a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals.
XI-2
ARTICLE XI
XI-3
ARTICLE XI
XI-4
ARTICLE XI
Sec. 38-495. Nonconforming uses of structures and land.
If a lawful use of a structure, or of a structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the
Ordinance from which this chapter is derived that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may
be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, except in changing the use of the structure to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located.
XI-5
ARTICLE XI
(2) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for
such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived, but no
such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
(3) Any structure, or a structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use
shall thereafter conform to the regulations pertaining to the uses permitted in the district in which such structure is located,
and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. Section 38-494 shall apply to any nonconformity relating to such
structure.
(4) If such nonconforming use of land and structures ceases operation with the intent of abandonment for a period of more than
six (6) months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter pertaining to the
uses permitted in the district in which such land is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this
provision only as long as the seasonal uses shall continue.
(5) Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
(6) If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or a structure and premises, may be changed
to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification, provided that the Zoning Board of Appeals,
either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate
or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the purpose and intent of this article. Where a
nonconforming use of a structure or land, or structure and land in combination, is changed to a more restrictive classification,
it shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted classification.
Sec. 38-496. Repairs and maintenance.
On any building devoted, in whole or in part, to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive
months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of
passage or amendment of the Ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall not be increased.
Sec. 38-497. Uses allowed as general exception, conditional approval, or special approval uses.
Any use for which a general exception, conditional approval, or special approval is permitted as provided in this chapter shall not be
deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district.
Sec. 38-498. Change of tenancy or ownership.
There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming use of land, structure, and premises,
provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming use, except in conformity with the provisions of this article.
Secs. 38-499 – 38-535. Reserved.
XI-6
ARTICLE XII
ARTICLE XII AMENDMENT/CONDITIONAL REZONING
Sec. 38-536. Initiating Amendments.
The Township Board may, from time to time, amend, modify, supplement, or revise the district boundaries or the provisions and
regulations of this Ordinance. Amendments may be initiated by the Township Board, the Township Planning Commission, by petition
of one or more property owners of Green Oak Charter Township, or by one (1) or more persons acting on behalf of a property owner(s)
of Green Oak Charter Township. All proposed amendments shall be referred to the Township Planning Commission for review, public
hearing, and recommendation before action may be taken by the Township Board.
Sec. 38-537. Amendment Procedure.
The procedure for amending this Ordinance shall be in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as
amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq., and the provisions of this Ordinance.
(1) A request for the rezoning of land from one (1) zoning classification to a different zoning classification, or a request for a
text amendment, shall be made by submitting an application, along with all required information and the required fee
as established by the Township Board, to the Zoning Administrator. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Zoning
Administrator shall transmit a copy of the application and required information to the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application.
(2) All required notices shall be given in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of
2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq., and Section 38-51 of the Township’s Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Planning Commission, the Township Board may hold a public hearing if it
considers same to be necessary or otherwise required. The Township Board shall grant a hearing on a proposed ordinance
provision to a property owner who requests a hearing by certified mail addressed to the Clerk of the Township.
Sec. 38-538. Information Required.
(a) If an application involves a request to rezone land from one zoning classification to another zoning classification, the petitioner
shall submit the following information:
(1) A legal description of the property, including all street addresses and tax ID number(s).
(2) A scaled map of the property, correlated with the legal description, and clearly showing the property’s location.
(3) The name and address of the petitioner, the record owner, and all other parties claiming an interest in said property.
(4) The petitioners interest in the property. If the petitioner is not the record owner, the name and address of the record owner(s),
and the record owner(s) and other interested parties consent in writing to the petition.
(5) Signature(s) of the petitioner(s) and owner(s) certifying the accuracy of the information.
(6) Identification of the zoning district requested and the existing zoning classification of property.
(7) A vicinity map showing the location of the property, and adjacent land uses and zoning districts.
(8) Additional studies such as traffic studies, environmental studies, or market studies as requested by the Planning Commission.
(b) If a petition involves a change in the text of the zoning ordinance, the petitioner shall submit the following information:
(1) A detailed statement of the proposed amendment, clearly and completely setting forth all proposed provisions and
regulations, including all changes in the Zoning Ordinance necessary to accommodate the proposed amendment.
(2) Name and address of the petitioner.
(3) Reasons for the proposed amendment.
XII-1
ARTICLE XII
Sec. 38-539. Review.
(a) In reviewing any petition for a zoning amendment, the Planning Commission shall evaluate all factors relevant to the petition and
shall make its recommendations for disposition of the petition to the Township Board following a public hearing.
(b) The factors to be considered by the Planning Commission may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) Whether the rezoning is consistent with the policies and uses proposed for that area in the Township’s Master Land Use Plan;
(2) Whether all of the uses allowed under the proposed rezoning would be compatible with other zones and uses in the
surrounding area;
(3) Whether any public services and facilities would be significantly adversely impacted by a development or use allowed under
the requested rezoning;
(4) Whether the uses allowed under the proposed rezoning would be equally or better suited to the area than uses allowed under
the current zoning of the land;
(5) Whether the condition and/or value of property in the Township or in adjacent communities would be significantly adversely
impacted by a development or use allowed under the requested rezoning;
(6) Whether or not the requested zoning change is justified by a change in conditions since the original ordinance was adopted or
by an error in the original ordinance; and
(7) Whether precedents might result from approval or denial of the petition, and the possible effects of such precedents.
(c) All findings shall be made a part of the public records of the meetings of the Planning Commission and the Township Board.
Sec. 38-540. Conformance to Court Decree.
Any amendment for the purpose of conforming a provision of the Zoning Ordinance to a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction as
to any specific lands, may be adopted by the Township Board and notice of the adopted amendment published without referring the
amendment to any board or agency provided for under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL
125.3101 et seq.
Sec. 38-541. Publication.
Following Township Board approval of an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance, notice of the amendment shall be published within
fifteen (15) days after adoption in a newspaper of general circulation within the Township. The notice of adoption shall include the
following information:
(1) In the case of an amendment to the existing Zoning Ordinance, either a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment,
including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment.
(2) The effective date of the amendment.
(3) The place and time where a copy of the Ordinance may be purchased or inspected.
Sec. 38-542. Conditional Rezoning.
(a) Intent. It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of the Township, as well as
advantageous to property owners seeking a change in zoning classification, that certain conditions could be proposed by property
owners as part of a request for rezoning. This is especially true since the Township must consider all potential uses which may
be made of property when considering a traditional rezoning request, some of which may be inappropriate for a particular
XII-2
ARTICLE XII
piece of property considering items such as, but not limited to, the surrounding land uses, the Township Master Plan, available
infrastructure and utilities, and natural features. It is the intent of this Section to provide a process consistent with the provisions
of Section 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq., by which an
owner seeking a rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of land as part of the rezoning
request.
(b) Application and offer of conditions. An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or
development of land for which a conditional rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for
conditional rezoning is filed, or additional conditions may be offered at a later time during the conditional rezoning process as set
forth below.
(1) General procedure. A request for a conditional rezoning shall be commenced by filing an application with the Township
Zoning Administrator or designee, on the required forms, accompanied by the specified fees. The application and process for
considering a conditional rezoning request will be the same as that for considering a rezoning request without any conditions,
except as modified by this Section. The application shall explicitly describe the proposed conditional rezoning and shall be
signed by the owner of the property. Applications for conditional rezoning of a specific site shall be accompanied by a plot
plan or survey which contains all the information required in Section 38-71(3) of this Ordinance. The applicant shall also
present a conceptual plan showing the specific proposed use of the property and containing all the information outlined in
Section 38-71(3) of this Ordinance.
(2) Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a formal request for a conditional rezoning, and prior to a public hearing,
the applicant must informally meet with the Township Zoning Administrator or designee, and other representatives as
deemed necessary by the Township, to discuss the proposed development. The Pre-Application Conference is intended to be
informative and advisory in nature, and affords the applicant the opportunity to discuss the land use and planning policies of
the Green Oak Charter Township.
The applicant must present a conceptual plan for the contemplated conditional rezoning at or before the Pre-Application
Conference. Any and all statements made by the Green Oak Charter Township Board of Trustees, Zoning Administrator
or designee, Planning Commissioners, Township employees, attorneys, agents, or representatives at the Pre-Application
Conference have no legal force and are not legal and binding promises, commitments, or contracts.
(c) Review procedures. The owner’s offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses or developments not permitted in the
requested new zoning district. The owner’s offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the property for
which the conditional rezoning is requested. Further, the Planning Commission and Township Board shall, at a minimum, consider
all the review considerations contained in Section 38-542 of this Ordinance in rendering a decision on a request for conditional
rezoning.
(1) Other required approvals.
a. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a special land use permit under the
terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if a special land use permit for such use or development is ultimately
granted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
b. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a variance under the terms of this
Ordinance may only be commenced if a variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
c. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require site plan approval under the terms
of this Ordinance may only be commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately granted in
accordance with the terms of this Ordinance.
(2) Amendment of conditions. The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of conditional rezoning
consideration, provided that any amended or additional conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner, and confirmed in
writing. An owner may withdraw in writing all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of the
Township Board provided that, if such withdrawal occurs subsequent to the Planning Commission’s public hearing on the
XII-3
ARTICLE XII
original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred back to the Planning Commission for a new public
hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation.
(d) Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission, after public hearing and consideration of the factors for rezoning set
forth in Section 38-538(b) of this Ordinance, may recommend approval, approval with recommended changes, or denial of the
rezoning; provided, however, that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered
by the owner in writing. In the event that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are not subsequently offered
by the owner in writing, the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be considered by the Township Board to be a
recommendation of denial of the proposed conditional rezoning.
(e) Township board review. After receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the Township Board shall review the
Planning Commission’s recommendation and deliberate upon the requested conditional rezoning, considering the factors for
rezoning set forth in Section 38-538(b), and may approve or deny the conditional rezoning request. If the applicant initiates
additional or different conditions not considered by the Planning Commission subsequent to the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, then the Township Board shall refer such proposed additional or different conditions to the Planning Commission for
report thereon within a time specified by the Township Board, and the Township Board shall thereafter proceed to deny or approve
the conditional rezoning.
(f) Approval. If the Township Board finds the conditional rezoning request and offer of conditions acceptable, the offer of conditions
shall be incorporated into a formal written Statement of Conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the
provisions of this Section. The Statement of Conditions shall be incorporated by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part
of the Ordinance adopted by the Township Board to accomplish the requested conditional rezoning. The Statement of Conditions
shall:
(1) Be prepared in a form recordable with the Livingston County Register of Deeds;
(2) Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains;
(3) Contain a statement acknowledging that the Statement of Conditions runs with the land, and is binding upon successor
owners of the land;
(4) Incorporate by attachment the conceptual plan which formed the basis of the conditional rezoning;
(5) Contain the notarized signatures of all the owners of the property proceeded by a statement attesting to the fact that they
are the only parties having an interest in the property, and that they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained
within the Statement of Conditions;
(6) The Statement of Conditions may be reviewed and approved by the Township Attorney, with the applicant to pay all costs
associated with such review and approval.
The approved Statement of Conditions shall be filed by the owner with the Livingston County Register of Deeds within thirty (30)
days after approval of the conditional rezoning. The owner shall provide the Township with a recorded copy of the Statement
of Conditions within thirty (30) days of receipt. The Township Board shall have the authority to waive this requirement if it
determines that, given the nature of the conditions and/or the time frame within which the conditions are to be satisfied, the
recording of the Statement of Conditions would be of no material benefit to the Township or to any subsequent owner of the land;
and
Upon the conditional rezoning taking effect, the Zoning Map shall be amended to reflect the new zoning classification, together
with a designation that the land was a Conditional Rezoning with a Statement of Conditions. Upon the conditional rezoning taking
effect, and after the required recording of the Statement of Conditions, unless waived, use of the land so rezoned shall conform
thereafter to all the requirements regulating use and development within the new zoning district as modified by any more
restrictive provisions contained in the Statement of Conditions.
XII-4
ARTICLE XII
(g) Compliance with conditions. Any person who establishes development or commences a use upon land that has been
conditionally rezoned shall continuously operate and maintain the development or use in full compliance with all the conditions
set forth in the Statement of Conditions. Any failure to comply fully with the conditions contained within the Statement of
Conditions shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be
deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law.
(h) Time period for establishing development or use. The approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and
other required permits must be commenced upon the land within eighteen (18) months after the effective date by publication
of the conditional rezoning action, and must thereafter proceed diligently to completion. This time limitation may, upon written
request, be extended by the Township Board if:
(1) It is demonstrated to the Township Board’s sole satisfaction that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use
will commence within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion, and
(2) The Township Board finds that there has not been change in circumstances that would render the conditional rezoning with
Statement of Conditions incompatible with other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound
zoning policy.
(i) Reversion of zoning. If approved development and/or use of the rezoned land does not occur within the time frame specified
under subsection (h) above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as set forth in MCL 125.3405(2). The
reversion process shall be initiated by the Township Board, and proceed pursuant to Section 38-536.
(j) Subsequent rezoning of land. When land that is conditionally rezoned with the Statement of Conditions is thereafter rezoned
to a different zoning classification, or to the same zoning classification but with a different or no Statement of Conditions, whether
as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to subsection (i) above, or upon application of the landowner, or otherwise, the
Statement of Conditions imposed under the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. Upon the owner’s written
request, the Township Clerk shall record with the Livingston County Register of Deeds a notice that the Statement of Conditions is
no longer in effect.
(k) Amendment of conditions. During the time period for commencement of an approved development or use specified pursuant
to subsection (h) above, or during any extension thereof granted by the Township Board, the Township shall not add to or alter the
conditions in the Statement of Conditions.
The Statement of Conditions may be amended thereafter in the same manner as was prescribed for the original conditional
rezoning and Statement of Conditions.
(l) Township right to rezone. Nothing in the Statement of Conditions nor in the provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit
the Township from rezoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a Statement of Conditions to another zoning classification.
Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with this Ordinance and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of
2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq.
(m) Failure to offer conditions. The Township shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of
an offer of conditions shall not affect an owner’s rights under this Ordinance.
XII-5
ARTICLE XII
XII-6
This page is left intentionally blank.

[back cover]
