CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GROSSE POINTE, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 1994 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: August 15, 1994 
Effective: August 28, 1994 
____________ 

> 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Grosse Pointe, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1980 Code, as supplemented through October 19, 1987, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ORDINANCE NO. 293 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Grosse Pointe; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Grosse Pointe, Michigan: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Grosse Pointe" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 90, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 31, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 31, 1993 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinances shall become effective August 28, 1994. 
    Passed and adopted by the city council this 15th day of August, 1994. 
/s/ Susan J. Wheeler 
      Mayor   /s/ Thomas W. Kressbach 
      City Clerk   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the council of the city of Grosse Pointe held on the 15th day of August, 1994. 
/s/ Thomas W. Kressbach 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 391  7-19-10 Included 19 392 11-15-10 Included 19 393 12-13-10 Included 19 394 12-13-10 Included 19 395  5-16-11 Included 20 396  5-16-11 Included 20 397  5-16-11 Included 20 398  5-16-11 Included 20 399  5-16-11 Included 20 400  5-16-11 Included 20 401  5-16-11 Included 20 402  5-16-11 Included 20 403  1-23-12 Included 20 404  2-13-12 Included 20 405  5-21-12 Included 21 406  5-21-12 Included 21 407  7-15-13 Included 21 408  7-15-13 Included 21 409  7-15-13 Included 21 410  9- 5-13 Included 21 411 11-18-13 Included 21 Minutes of 11-18-13 Included 21 412  2-24-14 Included 22 413  5-19-14 Included 22 414  6-16-14 Included 22 415  6-16-14 Included 22 416  9-15-14 Omitted 22 417  1-26-15 Included 22 418  4-20-15 Included 23 419  4-20-15 Included 23 420  5-18-15 Included 23 421  7-20-15 Included 23 422  8-17-15 Included 23 Charter amend. 11-03-15(1) Included 23 Charter amend. 11-03-15(2) Included 23 Charter amend. 11-03-15(3) Included 23 Charter amend. 11-03-15(4) Included 23 423  2-22-16 Included 24 424  3-21-16 Included 24 425  3-21-16 Included 24 426  5-16-16 Included 24 427  8-15-16 Included 24 428  1-23-17 Included 24 429  5-15-17 Included 24 430  6-19-17 Included 24 431  6-19-17 Included 24 432  3-19-18 Included 25 433  5-21-18 Included 25 434  7-18-18 Included 25 435 12-17-18 Included 25 436 12-17-18 Included 25 437  1-14-19 Included 25 438  1-14-19 Included 25  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Part A, Corporate Powers, of the Charter of Grosse Pointe, Michigan, as adopted by the electors on May 3, 1934, and effective on June 4, 1934. Part B, Employees' Retirement System, adopted by the electors on November 1, 1945, is not printed in this volume but is on file in city hall. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule cities generally, MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.; power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 

PART A. - CORPORATE POWERS 

Section 1. - [Description of corporate territory.] 
    The municipal corporation now existing and heretofore known as the Village of Grosse Pointe, and including all the territory described as follows: 
Beginning at a point on the shore of Lake St. Clair, distant 33 feet southwesterly and measured perpendicularly from the northeasterly line of Private Claim 300; thence northwesterly on a line which is 33 feet southwesterly and parallel to said northeasterly line of Private Claim 300 to the centerline of Jefferson Avenue; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Jefferson Avenue to its intersection with the northeasterly line of Private Claim 300; thence northwesterly along the northeasterly line of Private Claim 300 to the centerline of Mack Avenue; thence southwesterly along the centerline of Mack Avenue to the centerline of Cadieux Road; thence southeasterly along the centerline of said Cadieux Road and the extension thereof to the shore line of Lake St. Clair; thence northeasterly along the shore of Lake St. Clair to the point of beginning. 
shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name "City of Grosse Pointe." 
State Law reference- Incorporation, consolidation of territory and alteration of boundaries of home rule cities, MCL 117.61 et seq., MSA 5.2085 et seq. 
Section 2. - [Powers generally.] 
    The city shall provide for the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property. It shall have power to exercise any and all of the powers which cities are, or may hereafter be, permitted to exercise under the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, as fully and completely as though the powers were specifically enumerated herein, and to do any act to advance the interests of the city, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, except for such limitations and restrictions as are provided in this charter, and no enumeration of particular powers of the City in this charter shall be held to be exclusive. 
ELECTIONS 

Section 3. - [Applicability of state laws.] 
    The general laws of the state governing registration of voters and elections of officers shall apply to and control registrations and elections in the city, except as such general laws relate to party registration or enrollment or other party procedure, and except as otherwise provided by this charter. 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et seq.; mandatory that Charter provide for the time, manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c), MSA 5.2073(c). 
Section 4. - [Election commission; duties of city clerk.] 
    The city clerk, city attorney, and city treasurer shall be the election commission, and the city clerk shall have charge of all other activities and duties relating to the conduct of elections in the city. 
(Amend. of 11-3-15(1)) 
State Law reference- MCL 168.25. 
Section 5. - [Election boards in precincts.] 
    The election commission shall appoint an election board of not more than six members in each election precinct and designate the chairman. Such full time officials and clerical employees of the city as may not be employed at their regular work on election day may be appointed on election boards and shall serve without extra compensation. The compensation for other election personnel shall be a fixed amount determined in advance of each election by the election commission; provided, that if the expenditures for such services exceed the amount appropriated for elections in the budget, they must be approved by the council as are other increases in appropriations for any department or function. 
Section 6. - [Wards, precincts.] 
    The city shall consist of one ward, containing one or more voting precincts as required by state law. When more than one voting precinct is required, the boundaries of each shall be defined by ordinance. It shall be the duty of the clerk to advise the council when it is necessary to increase or decrease the number of precincts, but in no case shall the number exceed the minimum number required by state law and this charter. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for one or more wards, MCL 117.3(e), MSA 5.2073(e); election precincts, MCL 168.654 et seq., MSA 6.1654 et seq. 
Section 7. - [Filing of nominating petitions; fee.] 
    Except as provided in section 642, an officer required to be elected at the odd year general election shall be nominated at the odd year primary election. [2] Until December 31, 2013, if a charter provides for nomination by caucus or by filing a petition or affidavit directly for the general election, the candidate filing deadline or certification deadline shall be 4:00 p.m. on the twelfth Tuesday before the odd year general election. Beginning January 1, 2014, if a charter provides for nomination by caucus or by filing a petition or affidavit directly for the general election, the candidate filing deadline or certification deadline shall be 4 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday before the odd year general election. Until December 31, 2013, if a charter provides for the election at the primary of a candidate who receives more than 50 percent of the votes cast for that office, the candidate filing deadline or certification deadline shall be 4:00 p.m. on the twelfth Tuesday before the primary. Beginning January 1, 2014, if a charter provides for the election at the primary of a candidate who receives more than 50 percent of the votes cast for that office, the candidate filing deadline or certification deadline shall be 4:00 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday before the primary. 
(Amend. of 11-3-98; Amend. of 11-3-15(2)) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Please note that the time for filing petitions has been pre-empted by state law. Please see MCL 168.644e. 

Section 8. - [Frequency of elections.] 
    A regular city election shall be held each two years on the first Tuesday in November, beginning in 1935. Special elections shall be held when called by resolution of the city council adopted at least 30 days in advance of such special election, or when required by this charter or the general laws of the state. 
Editor's note- Regular elections are now held on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year pursuant to MCL 168.644a, MSA 6.1644(1). 
Section 9. - [Ballots.] 
    The names of candidates for each office shall be rotated on ballots for all city elections, and in all other respects the printing and numbering of ballots shall conform to state law, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear on any city ballot. 
State Law reference- Arrangement of ballot, MCL 168.706, MSA 6.1706. 
Section 10. - [Canvassing of returns.] 
(1)  A 4-member board of county canvassers is established in every county in this state. All of the powers granted to and duties required by law to be performed by all boards of canvassers established by law, other than the board of state canvassers, are granted to and required to be performed by the board of county canvassers. 
(2)  The board of county canvassers shall conduct all recounts of elections in cities, townships, villages, school districts, metropolitan districts, or any other districts and be vested with all of the powers and required to perform all the duties in connection with any recount. 
(3)  If a city, village, metropolitan district, or any other district, other than a school district, lies in more than one county, and a duty is to be performed by the board of county canvassers, the board of county canvassers in the county in which the greatest number of registered voters of the city, village, metropolitan district or other district resides at the close of registration for the election involved shall perform the duty. 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if a school district lies in more than one county, the board of county canvassers for each county in which a portion of the school district lies shall canvass that portion of a school district election that is held in that county. If a school district election precinct lies in more than one county, the board of county canvassers of the county in which the largest number of registered electors of that precinct reside shall canvass the results of that precinct. Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding two sentences, unless the school district election is conducted on the same date as another election in the county, a board of county canvassers that is not responsible for certifying the results of the school district election is not required to meet to canvass the school district election and the board of county canvassers responsible for certifying the results of the school district election shall canvass that portion of the school district election held in that county. Upon completion of the canvass, the clerk of the board of county canvassers shall transmit the canvassed results to the county clerk of the county in which the largest number of registered electors of that school district reside. Upon receipt of the canvassed results, the county clerk of the county in which the largest number of registered electors of that school district reside shall make a statement of returns and certify the results of the school district election to the secretary of the school board. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions of this subsection, if a city or village that lies in more than one county conducts an election on the same date as a school district that lies within the city or village that is conducting an election, that portion of the school district election held within that city or village shall be canvassed by the canvassing board responsible for canvassing the city or village election. 
(5)  The cost of canvass of school, metropolitan district, city, township, and village elections shall be borne by the school district, metropolitan district, city, township, or village holding the election, and upon presentation of a bill for the costs incurred by the board of county canvassers, the school district, metropolitan district, city, township, or village shall reimburse the county treasurer. 
(6)  All boards of canvassers provided for in law including boards of school canvassers, the duties of which are by this act required to be performed by boards of county canvassers, are abolished. 
(7)  Members of the board of county canvassers shall be appointed for terms of four years beginning on November 1 following their appointment. Of the members first appointed, one member of each of the political parties represented on the board of county canvassers shall be appointed for a term of four years and one for a term of two years. The county clerk shall notify members of the board of county canvassers of their appointment within five days of being appointed. 
(8)  This section applies to all elections, any charter provision to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(Amend. of 11-3-15(3)) 
Editor's note- MCL 168.24a(1) Assigns the duties formerly performed by the local board of canvassers to the County Board of Canvassers. 
GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION 

Section 11. - [Mayor and council.] 
    The government of the city, and all the powers thereof, except as otherwise provided by this charter or state law, shall be vested in a council consisting of a mayor and six councilmen. The mayor shall be elected at each regular city election for a term of two years. The six councilmen shall be elected for a term of four years, provided, however, that at the first election hereafter six councilmen shall be elected and of that number the three receiving the highest number of votes shall serve for four years and the remaining three for two years, and provided, further, that thereafter three councilmen shall be elected every two years for four year terms. The terms of office of the mayor and councilmen shall begin on the Monday next following their election. The mayor and councilmen shall have been registered voters in the city at least three years prior to the date of taking office and shall receive no compensation. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for election of a body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Section 11A. - [Council to act as city planning commission.] 
    The Council of the City of Grosse Pointe, Michigan, is designated and shall act as the City Planning Commission with all the powers and authority granted to planning commission by the Constitution, laws and statutes of the State of Michigan; and particularly, by Act 285 of Public Acts of 1931 [MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq.], as amended. The Council of the City of Grosse Pointe, Michigan, may, by ordinance, extend the powers and duties of said City Planning Commission in accordance with the Constitution, laws and statutes of the State of Michigan; and particularly, Act 285 of Public Acts of 1931 as amended. 
(Amended by electors, 11-4-75) 
Section 12. - [Duties of mayor; inability to serve.] 
    The mayor shall be the official head of the city for the service of process, the entitlement of actions and for all other purposes. He shall preside at all meetings of the council. In the event of his death, resignation or removal, the council shall choose one of its members mayor at the next regular meeting. In the absence or disability of the mayor, the council shall appoint, by a simple majority of the members present, one of its members to act as mayor for the duration of such absence or disability. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for election of certain officers, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Section 13. - [Vacancies in council, other offices.] 
    Any vacancy in the office of councilman shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining members of the council. Any vacancy in any other elective office and every appointive office shall be filled by the affirmative vote of four members of the council. 
Section 14. - [Appointment of city clerk, treasurer, assessor.] 
    The council shall appoint a city clerk, treasurer and assessor, and one person may, at the discretion of the council, be appointed to any two or more of said offices. 
(Amended by electors, 11-3-59) 
Section 15. - [Creation of, appointment to additional offices.] 
    The council shall appoint a city attorney, and may, by ordinance, create such additional offices as it may deem necessary in the conduct of the City's business, but no elective office shall be created by ordinance. Any appointive office or offices established by this charter or created by ordinance may be combined in any manner that the council may see fit, except as otherwise provided by this charter or state law. All appointments to any office established by this charter shall be by the affirmative vote of four members of the council and shall be for indefinite terms. Every officer appointed to any office created by ordinance under this charter shall be appointed as provided in such ordinance. Any officer appointed by the Council may be removed at any time by the affirmative vote of four members of the council, except as otherwise provided by this charter. Except as otherwise provided by this charter or state laws, the duties, powers and compensation of officials shall be fixed by ordinance; provided, that no official may be paid by fees, except as otherwise provided by this charter, and that all fees paid to any office or officer under this charter, the ordinances of the city or general laws of the state, shall be accounted for and paid into the city treasury by the official receiving them. 
Section 16. - [Establishment of purchasing procedures.] 
    The Council shall by ordinance establish the procedures for the purchase and sale of personal property under the direction of the City Purchasing Agent. Further, the Council shall establish by ordinance a maximum dollar limitation for purchases and shall approve all purchases which exceed the amount of such dollar limitation. The Purchasing Agent shall not purchase any item which exceeds any budget appropriation, until the Council has increased the appropriation as provided by the within Charter. 
(Amended by electors, 9-1-64, 11-8-83) 
Section 17. - [Board of review for general tax assessments.] 
    The council shall appoint three persons, who are citizens, who shall constitute a board of review for all general tax assessments. 
(Amend. of 11-3-15(4)) 
State Law reference- MCL 211.28. 
Section 18. - [Municipal court, municipal judge.] 
    The City shall have a municipal court with one judge. The municipal judge shall be a qualified resident elector of the City and an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Michigan. No person shall be elected or appointed as a municipal judge after reaching the age of seventy years. The municipal judge shall be elected, in accordance with the provisions of this Charter, at the regular City election of 1971, and every four years thereafter. His term of office shall begin 30 days after the regular City election in November of 1971, and on the Monday next following his election for every succeeding election. Of the two municipal judges elected at the regular City election in November of 1971, under the City Charter, Part A, Section 18, in effect prior to this amendment, the one receiving the highest number of votes shall be the elected municipal judge in accordance with this amended section for purposes of the regular City election in November, 1971. The municipal judge receiving the second highest number of votes in the regular City election in November of 1971, or in the event only one municipal judge is elected at that time, then that sole judge shall continue as municipal judge until 30 days after said election, at which time the office of second municipal judge is abolished. The municipal judge shall (Sec. 23 of this Charter notwithstanding) provide a corporate surety bond in amount not less than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and shall be paid a salary the amount of which is to be fixed by ordinance or such amount as may hereafter be provided for such municipal judges by state law. The municipal court and municipal judge shall have such jurisdiction, powers and duties as are now provided by Act No. 5 of Public Acts of Michigan of 1956 or may hereafter be provided by state law for such municipal courts and municipal judges. Practice and procedure before said court shall be in accordance with the practice or procedure as is now or may hereafter be provided for such municipal courts by state law. The Council may provide for the appointment of a clerk and one or more deputy clerks for said municipal court, to serve such term, be paid such salary, give such bond and perform such duties as may by ordinance be prescribed or as now or may hereafter be prescribed for such clerks by state law. The Council may provide for a court officer who shall have all of the duties and powers of court officer in the circuit courts of this state. The Council shall furnish necessary supplies and a suitable place for conducting said municipal court. 
(Amended by electors, 11-2-65, 11-2-71) 
Editor's note- The municipal court was abolished by MCL 600.9921, MSA 27A.9921. 
Section 19. - [Appointment, powers of constable.] 
    The Council shall appoint one constable who shall have like powers and authority as are conferred by State law on constables in townships, and shall have power to serve all processes for violations of this charter and ordinances of the city. If and when the state law shall permit, the office of constable shall be abolished and all duties thereof shall be performed by the regular police officers of the city; until such change in the state law may be made, such appointed constable shall be under the supervision of the mayor and chief of police. The only compensation of the constable shall be the fees of that office provided by state law. 
(Amended by electors, 11-3-59) 
Section 20. - [City representatives on county board of supervisors.] 
    Such representatives as the city may be entitled to on the Wayne County board of supervisors shall be appointed by the City Council. Any elective or appointive official of the city or any citizen may be appointed to such office, and shall serve at the pleasure of the council. If any representative of the city on the county board shall be unable to attend the meetings of the board for any reason, the council may appoint a qualified person to discharge the duties of such office during his absence or disability. All representatives of the city on the county board shall be entitled to retain any compensation paid to them as members of such board; provided, that full-time salaried employees of the city shall turn such compensation into the city treasury. 
State Law reference- Election and appointment of members of the board of supervisors is now done pursuant to MCL 46.401 et seq., MSA 5.359(1) et seq. 
Section 21. - [Conflict of interest as to contracts.] 
    No person holding any elective or appointive office under the city government shall take any official action on any contract with the city or other matter in which he is financially interested, or be a bondsman or surety on any contract or bond given to the city. Any member of the council or other officer violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction under this section shall forfeit his office. 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest as to contracts, MCL 15.321 et seq., MSA 4.1700(51) et seq.; standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq. 
Section 22. - [Offenses by officers; penalty.] 
    All offenses by officers of the city declared by this charter to be misdemeanors shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
Section 23. - [Bonds of officers.] 
    Any city officer elected or appointed by authority of this charter may be required to give a bond to be approved by the council for the faithful performance of the duties of his office in such sum as the council by ordinance or resolution shall determine, but all officers receiving or disbursing city funds shall be bonded. All official bonds, except those of the justice of the peace and the constable, which shall be the same as provided by state law for such officials, shall be corporate surety bonds, and the premiums thereon shall be payable by the city. All official bonds shall be accepted only upon approval of the city attorney and shall be filed with the clerk. 
Section 24. - [Notice of required bond, oath; failure to execute.] 
    Notice of the election or appointment of any officer of the city, and of the requirement of any official bond to be given by any officer, shall be given him by the city clerk within five days after election or appointment. If within 10 days from the date of notice, such officer shall not take, subscribe and file with the clerk his oath of office, or shall not execute and file with the clerk the required bond, such neglect shall be deemed a refusal to serve and the office shall thereupon be deemed vacant, unless the council shall extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
State Law reference- Oath of public officers, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. XI, § 1. 
Section 25. - [Proper publication of notice.] 
    When by this charter any officer is required to give publication to any notice, such notice shall be published once in a newspaper circulated in the city, and such notice shall be posted in at least five public places within the city. 
LEGISLATION 

Section 26. - [Meetings of council.] 
    The council shall hold at least one regular meeting each month, at the usual place for holding council meetings and at such time as it shall prescribe, for the transaction of business. All meetings of the council shall be public. Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor or any three councilmen on at least six hours written notice to each member of the council, served personally or left at his usual place of residence by the city clerk or someone designated by him; but any special meeting at which all members of the council are present shall be a legal meeting for all purposes without such notice. Absence from three consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the seat of a member, unless the absence is excused by the council by resolution setting forth such excuse. The council may, by a majority vote of those present, compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the city at its meetings and enforce orderly conduct therein. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for public meetings, MCL 117.3(1), MSA 5.2073(1); open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq. 
Section 27. - [Quorum; voting; rules of procedure.] 
    A majority of the members of the council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. Every ordinance and resolution shall be adopted or passed by the affirmative vote of four members of the council. Unless by the affirmative vote of four members of the council, no office shall be created or abolished, no tax or assessment be imposed, street, alley or public ground be vacated, real estate or any interest therein be sold or disposed of, private property be taken for public use, any vote of the council be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, nor any money appropriated, except as otherwise provided by this charter. No member of the council shall vote on any question in which he is financially interested or on any question concerning his own official conduct; but on all other questions every member of the council present shall vote. All votes shall be by "yea" and "nay". On all votes which are not unanimous, the yea and nay vote of each member shall be recorded in the regular proceedings, but where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. The council shall determine the rules of its proceedings and keep a journal thereof in the English language, which shall be signed by the city clerk, and shall be open to the public. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for ordinances, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k); general authority relative to adoption of ordinances, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22; mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of journal, MCL 117.3(m), MSA 5.2073(m). 
Section 28. - [Style, form of ordinances.] 
    The style of all ordinances shall be, "The City of Grosse Pointe ordains." No ordinance shall be revised, altered or amended by reference to its title only, but the section or sections of any ordinance as revised, altered, or amended shall be published in full, except as otherwise provided by this charter. The effective date of any ordinance shall be prescribed therein and shall not be less than one week after its adoption, unless the council shall, upon attaching a declaration of emergency affecting the public peace, health or safety, fix an earlier date; but no ordinance imposing a penalty shall take effect until at least ten days after publication, and no measure making or amending a grant, renewal or extension of a franchise or other special privilege shall ever be passed as an emergency measure. 
Section 29. - [Enactment of ordinances; recording, publication.] 
    All ordinances when legally enacted shall be recorded by the clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book," and it shall be the duty of the mayor and the clerk to authenticate such record by their official signatures. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, all ordinances when legally enacted shall be immediately published by the clerk in the manner provided by this charter for publication of notices, and the clerk shall enter his certificate as to the manner and date of publication under each ordinance in the ordinance book. The council may direct the clerk to make a digest of any ordinance or amendment more than one thousand words in length; and when the council shall approve such digest and shall order its publication, such publication shall be deemed sufficient publication of such ordinance or amendment under this section. The council may adopt any detailed technical regulations (e.g., building code) as a city ordinance by reference to any recognized standard code, official or unofficial, or if such code be written in detail for the city and adopted as an ordinance, the publication of a general statement of the content and purpose, approved by the council, shall be sufficient publication of such ordinance, and any amendment to such adopted code or detailed technical ordinance may be published in the same manner. Any ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number and title only, or any section of any ordinance may be repealed by reference to the number and title of the ordinance and the number of the section to be repealed. If the council shall order a general revision and compilation of all ordinances, the printing and binding of not less than one hundred copies in booklet form shall be sufficient publication. 
State Law reference- Authority to codify, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2); mandatory that charter provide for publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k). 
Section 30. - [Removal of councilmember for cause.] 
    The council shall have the power to prefer charges involving malfeasance or misfeasance in office, violation of any of the provisions of the charter, or willful neglect of the duties of his office against any elective officer of the city; to institute impeachment proceedings; to hear and determine the same; and, if such officer, by a vote of five members of the council be found guilty of such charges, to remove him from his office, except that a member of the council if found guilty may be removed by a majority of the remaining members of the council. In all impeachment proceedings before the council under the provisions of this section, the reason for the expulsion or removal of the officer shall be entered on the records of the council with the names and votes of the members voting on the question. No officer shall be expelled or removed unless first furnished with a copy of the charges in writing at least ten days in advance of a hearing thereon and allowed to be heard in his own defense with aid of counsel. If such officer shall neglect to appear and answer such charges, his failure to do so may be deemed good cause for his removal from office. 
Section 31. - [Investigation of charges against officers; powers.] 
    The council shall have authority, for the purpose of hearing or investigating charges against any officer, or making any other investigation germane to the city government, to require the mayor or a justice of the peace to issue subpoenas or process by warrant to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers or any records before the council or any committee thereof. In case charges are made against any city officer, he shall be entitled to have subpoenas issued in his behalf to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and records. 
Section 32. - [Power to compel witness testimony, administer oaths.] 
    Whenever the council, or any committee of the members thereof, is authorized to compel the attendance of witnesses for a hearing or investigation, the presiding officer of the council, or the chairman of the committee for the time being, shall have power to administer the necessary oaths; and the council or the committee shall have the same power to compel witnesses to testify as is conferred on justices of the peace. 
FINANCE 

Section 33. - [Fiscal year.] 
    The fiscal year of the City shall begin with the first day of July in each year and end with the thirtieth day of June in the following year. 
(Amended by electors, 9-1-64) 
Section 33a. - [Interim fiscal period.] 
    The period from April 1, 1965, to June 30, 1965, inclusive, shall constitute a special interim fiscal, budget and tax period to accomplish the transition from the previously existing fiscal year. A budget for such special fiscal period shall be prepared and adopted and administered in accordance with sections 36 to 53, inclusive, of this Charter, as hereby amended, except that the City Clerk shall submit the budget to the Council on or before March 1, 1965, and the budget shall be adopted not later than March 31, 1965. At the time of the adoption of the budget, the Council shall appropriate the money needed for municipal purposes for the three-month interim fiscal period and shall provide a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for such purposes. Such levy shall not exceed one-fourth of the annual limit of two per cent of the assessed value of all real and personal property subject to taxation in the city. Such levy shall be spread on the tax roll which becomes due and payable on July 1, 1965, in addition to the regular taxes for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 1965, and the amounts of taxes for these two levies may be combined for the purpose of convenience in spreading of the roll and preparation of the tax bills. Taxes for the interim period shall be collected in all respects as provided in this Charter for the collection of city taxes. 
    There shall be an audit of this interim fiscal period in accordance with the provisions of Section 53. 
(Amended by electors, 9-1-64) 
Section 34. - [Preparation, public inspection of assessment roll.] 
    On or before the first Monday in March of each year the assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll of taxable property in the city, and shall submit the roll, over his certificate, to the council. The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under the general law. The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection during the week of the second Monday in March, and notice to that effect shall be published by the clerk at least four days prior to the second Monday in March. Within the inspection period any person may file in writing with the clerk a complaint of any assessment, stating specifically the grounds of the complaint. 
(Amended by electors, 9-1-64) 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for annually levying and collecting taxes, MCL 117.3(g), MSA 5.2073(g); mandatory that Charter provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under general law, MCL 117.3(f), MSA 5.2073(f); property subject to taxation, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq. 
Section 35. - [Meeting of board of review.] 
    The board of review shall meet on the third Monday in March to review the roll and to consider the complaints which may have been filed with the clerk and to hear any complaints which property owners may make in person, or by authorized agent. The board shall continue its meeting on such successive days as may be necessary to hear all complaints. Notice of the meeting of the board of review shall be published by the clerk at least four days prior to the third Monday in March. Before the first Monday in April the board shall complete its review of the roll, which shall, during the next fiscal year, be the basis for the levy and collection of taxes. 
(Amended by electors, 9-1-64) 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a); mandatory that Charter provide for meeting of board of review, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i). 
Section 36. - [Preparation of budget.] 
    Before the third Monday in February, each city officer shall submit to the city clerk an itemized estimate of the expenditures for the next fiscal year of the department or departments under his control. The clerk shall prepare a complete itemized budget for the next fiscal year and shall submit it to the council on or before the third Monday in April. 
(Amended by electors, 9-1-64) 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h), MSA 5.2073(h). 
Section 37. - [Information in budget.] 
    The budget shall include the following information: 
(1)  Detailed estimates of the expense of conducting each department and office of the city for the ensuing fiscal year; 
(2)  Expenditures for corresponding items for the current year and last preceding fiscal year, with reasons for increases and decreases recommended as compared with appropriations for the current year; 
(3)  The value of supplies and materials on hand at the date of the preparation of the estimates, but not including office supplies and minor items generally; 
(4)  The amount of the total and net debts of the city together with a schedule of maturities of bond issues; 
(5)  A statement of the amounts to be appropriated; 
For interest on the city debt, 
For paying off any serial bonds maturing during the year, 
For the aggregate for the year of the installments required to be appropriated during the life of all other bonds of the municipality in order to accumulate sinking funds sufficient to pay off such bonds at maturity; 
(6)  A statement indicating any deficiency in the sinking funds and the amount to be appropriated to replace such deficiency as a whole; or the amount of the annual installment of any such deficiency to be appropriated each year for a specific number of years in order that obligations based on the sinking funds shall be retired as they mature; and a statement of all bonds and interest due but not paid, if any; 
(7)  An itemization of all anticipated income of the city from sources other than taxes and bond issues, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal years; 
(8)  An estimate of the amount of money, to be raised from taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
State Law reference- Uniform budgeting and accounting, MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21) et seq. 
Section 38. - [Public hearing on budget.] 
    A public hearing on the budget shall be held at least one week before its final adoption, at such time and place as the Council shall direct, and notice of such public hearing shall be published at least one week in advance by the clerk. 
Section 39. - [Change in appropriations after budget adopted.] 
    After the budget has been adopted, no appropriation shall be overdrawn, and no appropriation shall be increased except by the affirmative vote of four members of the council. The balance in any appropriation which has not been expended or transferred at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to the general fund. At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year and more often if required by the council, the clerk shall submit to the council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and expenditures to date; and if it shall appear that the income is less than originally estimated, the council shall reduce expenditures accordingly. 
Section 40. - [Separate funds and deposits.] 
    Upon the adoption of the budget by the council the ratios shall be determined of each of the appropriations (1) to pay the annual interest on all loans to the municipality, (2) to pay the installments of the principal of such loans falling due before the time of the following tax collection, and, (3) to make payments required to be made to sinking funds, to the total of all appropriations. Separate funds and deposits shall be established for such (1) interest, (2) principal payments and (3) sinking fund installment appropriations, and there shall be paid into each of such three funds the same proportionate shares of each dollar of taxes collected in the current year on the roll levied for the current year as such appropriations bear to the total of all appropriations as above determined. Such three funds and deposits shall be kept separate and intact from all other funds of the municipality and the investment and use of such funds and deposits shall be subject to the same restrictions as are sinking funds under state law. Nothing in this section shall bar the council from allotting other funds for the purpose of paying any indebtedness of the city and interest thereon, if collections on appropriations made are not sufficient to provide for such indebtedness and interest. Failure to perform such duties shall render any officer charged with any duty in connection with the determination of the amount of taxes to be raised or with the levying of such taxes personally liable to the municipality or to any bondholder for any loss or damage arising from such failure. 
Section 41. - [Adoption of annual tax levy.] 
    Not later than the third Monday in May the council shall, by resolution, adopt the budget for all municipal expenditures for the next fiscal year and such resolution shall provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxation, which shall not exceed two percent of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the city. Upon adoption of the annual tax levy, the assessor shall prepare a tax roll before the twentieth day of June. The taxes thus assessed shall become at once a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amount assessed, together with all charges thereon, shall, on the first day of July, become a lien on the property assessed, of the same character and effect as the lien created by state law for state and county taxes, until paid. 
(Amended by electors, 9-1-64) 
Section 42. - [Payment of city taxes.] 
    One-half of the taxes levied by the city shall be due and payable on the first day of July in each year, and one-half on the first day of October in each year. On and after the 11th day of August, a penalty of 3 percent shall be charged on all unpaid city taxes due July 1; and, in addition, on and after September 30 interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month shall be charged on all such taxes until paid or returned to the county treasurer. On and after the 11th day of November, a penalty of 3 percent shall be charged on all unpaid city taxes due October 1; and, in addition, on and after December 30 interest at the rate of three-fourths of one per cent per month shall be charged on all such taxes until paid or returned to the county treasurer. The city treasurer may receive payments of city taxes prior to the due dates. In returning unpaid city taxes to the county treasurer, the city treasurer shall add all penalties and interest due on said taxes to date; and from and after the date of the return, interest at the rate prescribed by state law for state and county taxes shall be collected by the county treasurer on the whole amount returned against any description of property. 
(Amended by electors, 9-1-64) 
Section 43. - [Special assessments for public improvement.] 
    Whenever the council shall determine that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by an assessment on the owners of land to be benefited thereby, it shall cause the expense of such improvement to be estimated and shall declare by an entry on its journal whether the whole or what portion thereof shall be assessed to such owners and occupants, specifying the sum to be assessed, the number of installments in which it may be paid, and the portion of the city which it deems to be benefited. The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of seven days before the council shall meet to review the roll and hear complaints. The clerk shall give notice in advance by publication of the opening of the roll to public inspection and of the meeting of the council to hear complaints. If at or prior to the hearing, the owners of more than one-half of the property to be assessed shall object in writing to the improvement, the assessment shall not be made without the unanimous vote of the council. Every special assessment ratified and confirmed by the council after such hearing shall be final and conclusive. Should any special assessment prove insufficient to pay for the improvement and related costs of the project for which it was levied, the council may make an additional pro rata assessment. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by less than five per cent, the council may place the excess in the city treasury, if by more than five per cent, the excess shall be refunded pro rata to assessments. Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon shall, from the date of confirmation of the roll, be and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect as the lien created by state law for state and county taxes, until paid. Interest at a rate not to exceed six per cent per annum shall be collected on deferred installments; and the same penalty and interest shall be paid on delinquent installments of such assessments, from such date after confirmation as shall be fixed by the council, as are provided by this charter to be paid on delinquent general city taxes, and such delinquent special assessments returned to the county treasurer for collection shall be handled in the same manner as are delinquent general city taxes. 
State Law reference- Power re assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5, MSA 5.2074, 5.2075, 5.2077, 5.2084. 
Section 44. - [Sale of personal property to satisfy taxes.] 
    The city shall have the right to sell personal property for unpaid personal taxes, and the council may provide for judicial sale of such property. 
Section 45. - [Acquisition, use of property of city.] 
    The council may provide by ordinance or resolution that the clerk shall bid in for the city any lot of land or premises at any sale for taxes or assessments levied or assessed by the city. Under such limitations as are provided by state law, the council may sell or lease in such manner and under such conditions as it may by resolution provide, any property of the city, whether acquired by purchase at tax sales or otherwise, that is not devoted to public use. 
Section 46. - [Levy, collection of taxes in conformance with state law.] 
    The levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes shall be in conformity with state law, except that the council may provide by ordinance for the collection of school taxes at a different time, upon agreement with the school board. 
Section 47. - [Authority to borrow money, issue bonds.] 
    The city council may borrow money on the credit of the city for any purpose within the scope of its powers, and may issue the city's bonds or other evidences of indebtedness therefor; provided, that the authority herein granted shall be subject to all limitations, conditions, restrictions and requirements now or hereafter provided by this charter and the constitution and laws of this state. Bonds which may be issued shall include general obligation bonds; mortgage bonds and revenue bonds for the purpose of acquiring or constructing public utilities, which bonds may be issued beyond the general limitation of bonded indebtedness prescribed by state law when they do not impose any liability upon the city except upon the property and revenues of such public utility; special assessment bonds; bonds for the city's portion of local improvements; bonds issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes actually levied and uncollected; refunding bonds; and emergency bonds. All other types of bonds, notes and other evidences of indebtedness now or hereafter specifically authorized or permitted by state law may be issued as therein provided. Bonds and other evidences of indebtedness of the city shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk under the seal of the city. The coupons evidencing the interest upon the bonds of the city may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the mayor and the clerk. 
State Law reference- City authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1), MSA 5.2014(1). 
Section 48. - [Collection of public utility charges.] 
    The council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public utility charges made by the city. Such ordinance may provide that any sums due the city on utility bills not otherwise paid shall be assessed against the real property on which the service was rendered, and shall be spread on the next regular city tax roll on which collections begin at least 90 days after the date on which such charges shall become due and payable. Such charges so assessed shall be a lien of the same character and effect as the lien created by state and county taxes, until paid. 
Section 49. - [Borrowing from city funds.] 
    The council may borrow in any one year for current purposes such amount as may be permitted by state law. Such money may be borrowed from any city fund which will not be in need of the money previous to its repayment, or on tax anticipation notes as provided by state law. The budget for the next succeeding fiscal year shall include a sum sufficient to pay all such loans and interest and they shall be paid on or before September 1, of such succeeding fiscal year. Any city officer failing to perform any duty of his office in conformity with this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
Section 50. - [Uniform accounting system.] 
    The accounting system of the city shall conform with any uniform system of accounting that may be provided by state law and the council shall make provision for any such accounting system when required. 
State Law reference- Uniform budgeting and accounting, MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21) et seq. 
Section 51. - [Audit of accounts, claims, demands against city.] 
    The council shall audit and allow all accounts chargeable against the city, but no unliquidated account, or claim, or contract shall be received for audit or allowance unless it be accompanied by an affidavit of the person rendering it, to the effect that he verily believes that the services or property therein charged have been actually performed or delivered to the city, and the sums charged therefor are reasonable and just, and that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, no set-off exists, nor payment has been made on account thereof, except as are included or referred to in such account or claim. It shall be a sufficient bar and answer to any action or proceeding in any court for the collection of any demand or claim against said city that it has never been presented to the council for audit or allowance or if on contract, that it was presented without said affidavit and rejected for that reason or that the action or proceeding was brought before the council had a reasonable time to investigate and pass upon it. 
    The City of Grosse Pointe shall not be liable in damages sustained by any person in such city either to his person or property by reason of any defective street, sidewalk, crosswalk, or public highway, or by reason of any obstruction, ice, snow or other encumbrance upon such street, sidewalk, crosswalk or public highway, situated in such city unless such person shall serve, or cause to be served, within sixty (60) days after such injury shall have occurred, a notice in writing upon the clerk or the deputy clerk of such city, which notice shall set forth substantially the time when and place where such injury took place, the manner in which it occurred, and the extent of such injury as far as the same has become known, and that the person receiving such injury intends to hold such city liable for such damages as may have been sustained by him. 
    After such claims and accounts are approved by the council, or in such manner as the council may direct, vouchers shall be drawn upon the proper funds and certified by the city clerk. The city treasurer shall then pay the voucher by check, draft, order or warrant, which shall be signed by the treasurer or deputy treasurer and countersigned by the clerk, and shall specify the account from which payment is to be made. 
(Amended by electors, 9-1-64) 
Section 52. - [Designation of depository for city funds; deposits.] 
    The council shall designate the depository or depositories for city funds, and shall provide by ordinance for the prompt and regular deposit of all city moneys. 
State Law reference- Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12, MSA 3.752; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b, MSA 7.86. 
Section 53. - [Financial, general reports of city officials; audit.] 
    The council may require such financial and general reports from all city officials as it may direct, and shall order an audit of the accounts of the city by certified public accountants at least annually and more frequently if deemed necessary. 
SCHEDULE 
Section 54. - [Effective date of charter for purpose of election of officers.] 
    For the purpose of adopting this charter and electing the first officers under it, this charter shall take effect on Thursday, May 3, 1934. Such election shall be conducted as provided by this charter for regular city elections, with such modifications as may be provided by resolution of the charter commission. 
Section 55. - [Assembly of first council; termination of village government.] 
    The council first elected under this charter shall assemble in the city hall at 8:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, June 4, 1934; when it shall have been called to order by the mayor-elect, the president and council of the Village of Grosse Pointe previously existing shall cease to be and the office of each member thereof shall terminate. 
Section 56. - [Ratification of existing offices.] 
    All elective officers of the Village of Grosse Pointe, except the president and the council, and all appointive officers in office at the time of the adoption of this charter shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and qualified, or until the office is abolished as provided by this charter. 
Section 57. - [Election, qualification of first officers.] 
    All officers first elected under this charter shall hold office until their successors, elected at the regular city election to be held in 1935, have qualified for office as provided by this charter, but the justices of the peace and constable shall hold office until their successors shall qualify and shall succeed to office as provided by state law. 
Section 58. - [Effective date.] 
    For all purposes not otherwise provided for, this charter shall take effect on June 4, 1934. 
Section 59. - [Levy, collection of taxes in accord with village charter for certain period.] 
    The levy and collection of 1934 taxes for city purposes shall be made in accord with the provisions of the charter of the Village of Grosse Pointe and shall be sufficient to cover the period to April 1, 1935. 
Section 60. - [Adjustments to charter during transition.] 
    The first city council elected under this charter shall have authority to make any necessary adjustments under this charter until April 1, 1935, to provide for the convenient and orderly change to the procedure provided in this charter. 
Section 61. - [First reports under charter; period covered.] 
    The first reports for all offices which shall be made under this charter shall cover the period from March 1, 1934 to March 31, 1935. 
Section 62. - [Continuation of village ordinances, resolutions, rules.] 
    All bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the Village of Grosse Pointe, of the village council and of all officers and offices, not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, in force when this charter becomes effective, shall continue in full force until repealed or amended by action of the constituted authority. 
Section 63. - [Severability.] 
    The sections of this charter and the parts thereof are severable, and in the event of any provision being declared unconstitutional or contrary to the general laws of the State of Michigan, it is hereby declared the intent of the charter commission that such unconstitutional or illegal provisions shall not affect the validity of the other provisions of this charter. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Date  Section  
this Charter  5- 3-34 1-63 11- 3-59 14 19  9- 1-64 16 33 33a 34-36 41, 42 51 11- 2-65 18 11- 2-71 18 11- 4-75 11A 11- 8-83 16 11- 3-98(Amend. of) 7 11-03-15(1)(Amend. of) 4 11-03-15(2)(Amend. of) 7 11-03-15(3)(Amend. of) 10 11-03-15(4)(Amend. of) 17  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
    This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Grosse Pointe, Michigan." 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Grosse Pointe, Michigan, effective June 4, 1934, and shall include any amendment to such Charter. 
    City. The word "city" shall denote the municipality of Grosse Pointe, Michigan. 
    City council. The words "city council" or "council" shall mean the council of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
    Code. The expressions "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Grosse Pointe, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1, and as hereafter modified by amendment, revision and by adoption of new chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Wayne in the State of Michigan. 
    Gender. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders. 
    General terms. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority. 
    MCL, MSA. The abbreviations "MCL" and "MSA" refer to the Michigan Compiled Laws and Michigan Statutes Annotated respectively, as amended. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and the words in the plural shall include the singular. 
    Officer, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, department, board, commission or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Grosse Pointe, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, department or other city agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, department or agency shall mean and include such officer, department or agency or deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Person. The word "person" and its derivatives and the word "whoever" shall include a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" or "whoever," as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any place to or upon which the public resorts, or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the state, or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom, or by invitation, express or implied. 
    Shall/may. Whenever the word "shall" appears in this Code it shall be considered mandatory and not directory; except as otherwise provided, "may" is permissive. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
    Street, highway and alley. The terms "street," "highway" and "alley" shall mean the entire width subject to an easement for public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The word "alley" shall mean any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a property. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
State Law reference- Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq., MSA 2.212 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation per state acts. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
Sec. 1-4. - Application to territorial boundaries only. 
    All provisions of this Code are limited in application to the territorial boundaries of the municipal corporation although the same may not be so limited specifically. 
Sec. 1-5. - Headings and captions. 
    Headings and captions used in this Code, other than the chapter, article, division and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and notes. 
    Charter references, cross references, state law references and editor's notes are included by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Application to future legislation. 
    All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 1-8. - Rule of separability. 
    Each chapter, article, division or section or, whenever divisible, subsection of this Code is hereby declared to be separable, and the invalidity of any chapter, article, division, section or divisible subsection shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other chapter, article, division, section or subsection of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section reference is made to another section of this Code, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
Sec. 1-10. - References to offices. 
    Reference to a public office shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of the City of Grosse Pointe exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance levying taxes. 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating money. 
(4)  Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money. 
(5)  Any ordinance establishing utility rates. 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons. 
(7)  Any ordinance authorizing public improvements. 
(8)  Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property. 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing or detaching territory. 
(10)  Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees. 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets. 
(15)  Any ordinance pertaining to zoning. 
(16)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty. 
(a)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The penalty shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition or any injunctive relief or the revocation of any permit or license. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the failure of officers and employees of the city to perform municipal duties required by this Code. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i, MSA 5.2082. 
Sec. 1-14. - Service of notice. 
(a)  Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which if performed by the city may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of this Code, shall be served: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)  By mailing the notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, by posting the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises at least five days before the act or action concerning which the notice is given is required or is to occur. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by the officer to remove the notice. 
(Code 1980, § 1.11) 
Sec. 1-15. - Single-lot assessments. 
    When any expense shall have been incurred by the city upon or in respect to any single premises, which expense is chargeable against the premises and the owner thereof under the provisions of this Code and is not of that class required to be prorated among the several lots and parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor, material and service for which such expense was incurred, with a description of the premises upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner, if known, shall be reported to the treasurer, who shall immediately charge and bill the owner, if known. The council shall, at such times as it may deem advisable, direct the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll covering all such charges reported to it together with a penalty of ten percent. Such roll shall be filed with the clerk who shall advise the council of the filing of the same, and the council shall thereupon set a date for the hearing of objections to such assessment roll. The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of seven days before the council shall meet to review the roll and hear complaints. The city clerk shall give notice in advance by publication of the opening of the roll to public inspection and of the meeting of the council to hear complaints and shall also give like notice to the owners of the property affected by first class mail at their addresses as shown on the current general assessment roll of the city, at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. Such special assessments and all interest and charges thereon shall, from the date of confirmation of the roll, be and remain a lien upon the property assessed, of the same character and effect as a lien created by general law for state and county taxes, until paid. Interest shall be paid on such assessments, when delinquent, from such date after confirmation as shall be fixed by the council, and such assessments, with penalties and interest, shall be added by the treasurer to the next general city tax roll or general county and school tax roll, as shall be convenient, and shall thereafter be collected and returned in the same manner as general city taxes. 
(Code 1980, § 1.13) 
Sec. 1-16. - Municipal civil infraction defined. 
    Any violation of any provisions of the chapters set forth in section 1-17, or any permit, license or exception granted there under, or any lawful order of the code administrator, building inspector, board of zoning appeals, or the city council issued in pursuance of the chapters set forth in section 1-17 shall be a municipal civil infraction. A "violation" includes any act, which is prohibited, made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense under the relevant chapter; and any omission or failure to act when the act is required under the relevant chapter. Each act of violation and every day upon which such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 328, § I, 9-17-01) 
Sec. 1-17. - Violations constituting municipal civil infractions. 
    A violation of the following chapters of the Code of Ordinances of the city shall constitute a municipal civil infraction: 
(1)  Chapter 14, entitled "Buildings and Building Regulations." 
(2)  Chapter 34, entitled "Fire Prevention and Protection." 
(3)  Chapter 42, entitled "Nuisances-Public." 
(4)  Chapter 50, entitled "Parks and Recreation." 
(5)  Chapter 58, entitled "Signs." 
(6)  Chapter 62, entitled "Solid Waste." 
(7)  Chapter 66, entitled "Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places." 
(8)  Chapter 78, entitled "Utilities." 
(9)  Chapter 86, entitled "Waterways." 
(10)  Chapter 90, entitled "Zoning." 
    The code administrator and the building inspector, together with police officers of the city, are the city officials authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this chapter. The code administrator shall be a full time city employee appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 328, § I, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 425, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 1-18. - Prosecution of municipal civil infractions. 
    All violations of an ordinance of the city, which violation constitutes a municipal civil infraction, shall be prosecuted by the city, as plaintiff, in the Grosse Pointe Municipal Court or any other court having jurisdiction, and shall be prosecuted and administered in accordance with Chapter 87 of Act No. 12 of the Public Acts of 1994, being M.C.L. 600.8701, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 328, § I, 9-17-01) 
Sec. 1-19. - Municipal civil infractions-Penalties. 
(a)  A person found responsible for a municipal civil infraction shall be assessed a civil fine according to a schedule or schedules adopted from time to time by the council or, if no applicable schedule exists, a civil fine not to exceed $500.00 as determined by the court. 
(b)  In addition to such civil fine, the defendant may be assessed the costs of such action, which are not limited to the costs taxable in ordinary civil actions and may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the city has been put in connection with the municipal civil infractions, up to the entry of judgment. Costs of not less than $10.00 not more than $500.00 shall be ordered. 
(c)  The penalty and costs shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition or any injunctive relief or the revocation of any permit or license. 
(Ord. No. 328, § I, 9-17-01) 
Sec. 1-20. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
    There is established a municipal ordinance violations bureau, to be located in the City Hall. The customer service representative, or such other person as shall be designated by the city manager, shall be the chief clerk of the municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 328, § I, 9-17-01) 
Sec. 1-21. - Procedure for answering charges; payment of fines. 
    If a specific fine is established by the municipal court for a particular violation, any person who has received such a citation charging a municipal civil infraction may, within the time specified in the citation, answer at the municipal ordinance violations bureau to the charge set forth in the citation by paying the prescribed fine in person or by proxy; by so doing, such person shall be deemed to plead responsible for the violation; to have waived a hearing in court, and to have given power of attorney to the person in charge of the bureau to make such a plea and pay such fine in court. Subject to section 1-19(c) of this chapter, acceptance of the prescribed fine by the bureau shall be deemed complete satisfaction for the violation. 
    If a specific fine is not established for a particular violation, the defendant shall appear and the violation shall be adjudicated under the procedures set forth in section 1-18. 
(Ord. No. 328, § I, 9-17-01) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Corporate powers, §§ 1, 2; elections, §§ 3-10; governmental organization, §§ 11-25; legislation, §§ 26-32; finance, § 33 et seq. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 26; elections, ch. 30; nuisances, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; planning commission, § 54-26 et seq.; zoning, ch. 90; administration and enforcement of zoning, § 90-66 et seq. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Governmental organization, § 11 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Duties of officers. 
    Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law and the Charter and ordinances of the city, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the manager. 
(Code 1980, § 1.221) 
Sec. 2-27. - General responsibilities of department heads. 
    The heads of administrative departments shall be immediately responsible to the manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned thereto. The manager may set aside any action taken by a department head and may supersede him in the functions of his office. In case of a vacancy in office or during the absence of any department head, the manager may designate an interim acting head or perform personally the functions of the office. All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public. 
(Code 1980, § 1.222) 
Sec. 2-28. - Departmental records and reports. 
    Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the manager as he may direct, and an annual report shall be filed with the manager within 60 days after the close of the reporting year. Each department head shall establish a system of records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for periodic reports to the manager. 
(Code 1980, § 1.223) 
Sec. 2-29. - Preservation of public records. 
    Each department head shall be responsible for the preservation of all public records under his jurisdiction and shall provide a system of filing and indexing the same. No public records, reports, correspondence or other data relative to the business of any department shall be destroyed or removed permanently from the files without the knowledge and approval of the manager. 
(Code 1980, § 1.224) 
Sec. 2-30. - Delegation of duties. 
    The manager may direct any department, division or bureau to perform the work for any other department, division or bureau, or may delegate to any officer or employee any duties other than those established for the department, division or bureau to which he may be assigned. 
(Code 1980, § 1.225) 
Sec. 2-31. - Administrative and personnel regulations. 
    The manager is authorized to issue such administrative and personnel regulations, in addition to those embodied in the Charter and this Code, as are necessary to provide for the adequate functioning of all departments. Provided, however, that such regulations shall provide that no "retired participant," as that term is defined in the retirement ordinance, shall be employed by the city in the same office or department where such person was employed prior to the date on which he or she became a retired participant. 
(Code 1980, § 1.226; Ord. No. 372, § I, 1-22-07) 
Sec. 2-32. - Approval of legal documents. 
    The mayor shall sign, the city clerk shall attest to, and the city manager shall approve as to substance, and the city attorney shall approve as to form all legal instruments requiring the assent of the city unless otherwise provided for by law, the Charter or ordinance. 
(Code 1980, § 1.227) 
Secs. 2-33-2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICES 

Sec. 2-46. - Division of administrative service. 
    The administrative service of the city shall be divided into the following offices and departments, each of which shall be the responsibility of and under the control of a head as listed opposite such office or department: 
Office or Department        Official Head Office of clerk City clerk Office of treasurer City treasurer Office of assessor City assessor Department of public safety Director of public safety Department of public works Superintendent of public works Department of engineering City engineer Department of planning City planner Department of building inspection Building inspector Department of parks Superintendent of parks Department of water Superintendent of water Department of health Director of the county health department Department of law City attorney  
(Code 1980, § 1.51) 
Sec. 2-47. - City manager. 
    The city manager shall be chief administrative officer of the city and shall be selected and appointed by the council, by the affirmative vote of four members of the council, on the basis of training, experience and ability. The city manager may, with the approval of the council, or in the event of his failure to act, the city council shall designate an employee of the city to serve as an acting city manager who shall perform the duties of the city manager during his temporary absence or incapacity. The city manager and the acting city manager shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1980, § 1.52) 
Sec. 2-48. - Supervision of other officers. 
    The administrative officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney, and, insofar only as his duties as clerk for the council are concerned, the city clerk, shall in the performance of the duties of their respective offices and positions be subordinate to and under the direction of the city manager and shall report and be directly responsible to him. 
(Code 1980, § 1.53) 
Sec. 2-49. - Duties of manager. 
    Consistent with state laws and the city Charter, the city manager shall be responsible for the performance of the following functions: 
(1)  To see that all laws, ordinances and the provisions of this Code are performed. 
(2)  To manage and supervise all public improvements, works and undertakings of the city. 
(3)  To have charge of the construction, repairs and maintenance of lighting, streets, sidewalks, sewers, water mains and building services and all public buildings or other property owned by the city. 
(4)  To manage and supervise the operation of all city utilities. 
(5)  To be responsible for the preservation of property, tools and appliances of the city. 
(6)  To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility franchise, or in any contract are faithfully kept and performed. 
(7)  To attend all meetings of the council with the right to take part in discussions coming before the council. 
(8)  To be a member ex officio of all committees of the council. 
(9)  To recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary. 
(10)  To be responsible to the council for the efficient administration of all departments of the city government. 
(11)  To act as purchasing agent for the city, or under his responsibility, delegate such duties to some other officer or employee of the city. 
(12)  To assume all the duties of personnel director for all city employees or delegate such duties to some other officer or employee of the city. 
(13)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or by direction of the council, or which are not assigned to some other official in conformity with the provision of the Charter or state laws. 
(Code 1980, § 1.54) 
Sec. 2-50. - Clerk, assessor and treasurer. 
    The clerk, assessor and treasurer shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such offices in the city Charter, this Code and the statutes of the state. 
(Code 1980, § 1.58) 
Sec. 2-51. - Department of health. 
(a)  General functions. The functions of the department of health of the city shall be performed by the county health department. The city shall enter into such agreements with the county health department as may be necessary to ensure the fulfillment of the functions of the city health department, as hereinafter set forth, and in order that the county may be properly compensated for the services of its employees in fulfilling such functions. The director of the county health department shall be deemed the city health officer and shall have all powers accorded such office by the statutes of the state, the Charter of the city or provisions of this Code relating to the public health. 
(b)  Communicable disease control. The health department shall be responsible for the adoption of such measures as will prevent the spread or aid in the prevention of communicable diseases. The director of the county department of health, or his duly authorized representative, shall exercise the power of quarantine and detention within the city. 
(c)  Sanitation. The county health department shall be responsible for the inspection and supervision of the preparation, manufacture, storage and sale of all articles and commodities intended for human consumption and the regulation of all matters pertaining to sanitary conditions affecting the public health. 
(Code 1980, §§ 1.71-1.73) 
Sec. 2-52. - Department of public safety created. 
    There is hereby created the department of public safety for the city. The administrative departments of police and fire are hereby combined and succeeded by the department of public safety pursuant to the authority of section 15 of part A of the city Charter. 
(Code 1980, § 1.81) 
Sec. 2-53. - Director of public safety. 
    The department of public safety shall be directed by the director of public safety, who shall be the commanding officer of the department. He shall direct the fire and police work of the city, be responsible for the enforcement of law and order, the protection of life and property against fire and the performance of other public services of an emergency nature assigned to the department. He shall be appointed by the city manager for an indefinite period and may be so removed at any time his conduct of the activities and operations of the department are not considered acceptable. 
(Code 1980, § 1.82) 
Sec. 2-54. - Functions of public safety department. 
    The public safety responsibilities of the department of public safety shall include, but are not limited to, the following functions: 
(1)  Provide fire and police protection to the public at large where required. 
(2)  The operation of motor and foot patrol units for routine investigations and the general maintenance and enforcement of law and order. 
(3)  The operation of a communications and dispatch facility at the public safety headquarters. 
(4)  The maintenance of the central complaint desk at public safety headquarters in the city hall, the maintaining and supervising of police records, criminal and noncriminal identification, property identification, custody of property and the operation of detention quarters. 
(5)  The investigation of crimes, elimination of illegal liquor and/or drug traffic and vice, and the preparation of cases for the prosecution of criminal offenses in violation of the laws of the state and this Code. 
(6)  The prevention and control of juvenile delinquency, the removal of crime hazards and the coordination of community agencies interested in crime prevention. 
(7)  The control of traffic, traffic educational programs, school patrols, prosecution of traffic violations and policing and reporting traffic accidents. 
(8)  The efficient and prompt extinguishment of fires which endanger or are likely to endanger life, persons or property, the maintenance and operation of firefighting equipment and of such other emergency equipment as may be assigned to it. 
(9)  The investigation and inspection of potential fire hazards and the abatement of existing fire hazards in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
(10)  The investigation of origin, cause and circumstances of all fires. 
(11)  The inspection of fire protection devices, the supervision of fire drills as may be required by law for schools and institutional uses. 
(12)  The maintenance of departmental training programs, records, reports, budget controls and other matters relating to the effective operation and administration of the department. 
(13)  Additional public safety responsibilities may be established by the city council and/or city manager as deemed necessary for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 1.83) 
Sec. 2-55. - Public safety department rules. 
    The director of public safety may prescribe rules for the government of public safety officers of the city, subject to approval by the city manager, which shall be entered in a book of public safety department rules and orders and may be amended or revoked by the director with written notice to the city manager. Such regulations shall become effective 24 hours after posting in the office of the director of public safety. Such rules may establish one or more divisions within the public safety department, each of which divisions may be charged with performing one or more of the functions of the public safety department enumerated in section 2-54. Any such divisions shall be supervised by a deputy, assistant director or command officer of the public safety department, who shall be responsible for the particular functions of the public safety department assigned to the particular divisions supervised by him. It shall be the duty of all members of the public safety department to comply with such rules and orders while effective. 
(Code 1980, § 1.84) 
Sec. 2-56. - Deputies and assistants in public safety department. 
    The director of public safety is authorized to appoint such deputies and administrative assistants as he shall deem necessary for the proper and efficient operation of the department, subject to the approval of the city manager and consistent with budget authorization of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 1.85) 
Sec. 2-57. - Integration of public safety officers. 
    There shall be no distinction between public safety officers assigned to perform duties commonly performed by a police department and members of the department assigned to perform work commonly performed by a fire department. Every public safety officer shall perform either police work or fire work as such duties shall from time to time be assigned to him by the director of public safety. Wherever any duties shall be imposed upon a city police officer or a city firefighter by any statute of the state, or by the Charter or ordinances of the city, such duties shall be imposed upon the public safety officers of the city and all public safety officers shall be "peace officers" within the meaning of such terms as used in the statutes of the state. 
(Code 1980, § 1.86) 
Sec. 2-58. - Retirement rights of public safety officers continued. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall affect any right, privilege or benefit earned by any public safety officer for service as a police officer or firefighter under the employees' retirement system established by the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 1.87) 
Sec. 2-59. - Acting public safety director. 
    In case of the absence from the city of the director of public safety, or his disability or inability from any cause to act as director, the city manager may designate and appoint some other member of the public safety department to act as director during such absence or disability. 
(Code 1980, § 1.88) 
Sec. 2-60. - Law enforcement authority for officers acting under provisions of police mutual aid agreement. 
(a)  Definitions. When used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  The term "law enforcement officer" shall mean any legally appointed police officer or public safety officer of the Cities of Grosse Pointe, Grosse Pointe Farms, Grosse Pointe Park, Grosse Pointe Woods, Harper Woods and the Village of Grosse Pointe Shores, Wayne County, Michigan. 
(2)  The term "police mutual aid agreement" shall mean that agreement entered into between the Cities of Grosse Pointe, Grosse Pointe Farms, Grosse Pointe Park, Grosse Pointe Woods, Harper Woods and the Village of Grosse Pointe Shores, Wayne County, Michigan, which agreement shall be the then current existing agreement which pertains to law enforcement mutual assistance. 
(b)  Law enforcement authority. Any law enforcement officer when acting in any of the communities that are signatories of the police mutual aid agreement by direction of their superiors and in accordance with the plans and procedures of the police operational planning board established under the provisions of the police mutual aid agreement shall have the same law enforcement authority when acting in such communities as the law enforcement officers of that community in which they are operating. 
(Code 1980, § 1.89) 
Sec. 2-61. - Public works department. 
    The public works department shall be headed by the superintendent of public works. He shall be responsible for all matters relating to the management, maintenance and operation of the city equipment pool, sewerage system, streets and sidewalks and refuse collection and disposal. 
(Code 1980, § 1.111) 
Sec. 2-62. - Parks department. 
    The parks department shall be headed by the superintendent of parks. This department shall have charge of the control and regulation of the planting of trees, and of the planting, development, maintenance, management and operation of parks, boulevards and recreation facilities. 
(Code 1980, § 1.115) 
Sec. 2-63. - Building inspection department. 
    The building inspection department shall be headed by the building inspector. This department shall be responsible for the issuance of all permits and the inspection of all work involved in the construction of sewer and water services and the inspection of all work done under the provisions of the heating, electrical, plumbing and building codes of the city and the safety inspection of all premises, including structures thereon, and the enforcement of zoning regulations of the city. This department shall be responsible for the issuance of all permits and the inspection of all work involved in the construction of sidewalks, curb cuts and street openings. 
(Code 1980, § 1.121) 
Sec. 2-64. - Department of water. 
    The department of water shall be headed by the superintendent of the water department. This department shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of city water mains and connections and other facilities pertaining to the water distribution system. It shall have charge of the pumping of water into and through the city water distribution system. 
(Code 1980, § 1.125) 
Sec. 2-65. - Department of law. 
    The department of law shall be headed by the city attorney, who shall be charged with the performance of all legal services of the city, including those of legal advisor to the council and to all departments and officers of the city, and the prosecution of all cases arising out of the violation of the provisions of the city ordinances. He shall also represent the city in matters in which the city is interested coming before any court or tribunal and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the council. He shall be charged with the responsibility for calling to the attention of the city council all matters of law affecting the city. 
(Code 1980, § 1.136) 
Sec. 2-66. - Salary of municipal judge. 
    The annual salary of the judge of the municipal court of the City of Grosse Pointe shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the year commencing November 2, 1999, and ending November 2000 ..... $12,000.00 
(2)  For the year commencing November 7, 2000, and ending November 2001 ..... 12,000.00 
(3)  For the year commencing November 6, 2001, and ending November 2002 ..... 12,000.00 
(4)  For the year commencing November 5, 2003, and ending November 2003 ..... 12,000.00 
Future modifications of the salary set forth in this section may, from time to time, be made by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 271, § 2(1.137), 9-16-91; Ord. No. 315, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-99) 
Sec. 2-67. - Alternate board of review members. 
    The city council may appoint not more than two alternate members to the board of review. The alternate members shall serve for indefinite terms subject to removal by the council. Each alternate member shall be a property taxpayer of the city. Alternate members shall qualify by taking the constitutional oath of office within ten days after appointment. The council may fill any vacancy that occurs in the alternate membership of the board of review. A member of the council is not eligible to serve as an alternate member or to fill any vacancy. A spouse, mother, father, sister, brother, son or daughter, including an adopted child, of the assessor is not eligible to serve as an alternate member or to fill any vacancy. An alternate member may be called to perform the duties of a regular member of the board of review in the absence of a regular member. An alternate member may also be called to perform the duties of a regular member of the board of review for the purpose of reaching a decision in issues protested in which a regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. 
(Ord. No. 423, § I, 2-22-16) 
Secs. 2-68-2-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21) et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-86-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES, CONTRACTS AND SALES 

Sec. 2-96. - Purchasing agent. 
    The city manager shall act as purchasing agent of the city, or, under his responsibility, delegate such duties to some officer or employee of the city, and shall adopt any necessary rules respecting requisitions and purchase orders. 
(Code 1980, § 1.211) 
Sec. 2-97. - Purchases or contracts under $5,000.00. 
    Purchases of services, supplies, materials or equipment, the cost of which is less than $5,000.00, may be made in the open market but such purchases shall, where practicable, be based on at least three competitive bids and shall be awarded to the lowest qualified bidder. The purchasing agent may solicit bids verbally or by telephone, or may contact prospective bidders by written communication. Any or all bids may be rejected. 
(Code 1980, § 1.212) 
Sec. 2-98. - Purchases or contracts over $5,000.00. 
    Any expenditure for supplies, materials, equipment, construction project or contract obligating the city, where the amount of the city's obligation is in excess of $5,000.00, shall be approved by the city council and shall be governed by the following provisions of this section: 
(1)  Such expenditure shall be made the subject of a written contract when directed by the city council. A purchase order shall be a sufficient written contract in cases where the expenditure is in the usual and ordinary course of the city's affairs. 
(2)  The purchasing agent shall solicit bids from a reasonable number of such qualified prospective bidders as are known to him by sending each a copy of the notice requesting bids. Bids shall be solicited by newspaper advertisement when directed by the city council. 
(3)  Unless prescribed by the city council, the manager shall prescribe the amount of any security to be deposited with any bid, which deposit shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check or bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The amount of such security shall be expressed in terms of percentage of the bid submitted. Unless fixed by the city council, the manager shall fix the amount of the performance bond and, in the case of construction contracts, the amount of the labor and materials bond to be required of the successful bidders. 
(4)  Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place designated in the notice requesting bids in the presence of the purchasing agent, the city clerk and at least one other city official, preferably the head of the department most closely concerned with the subject of the contract. The bids shall thereupon be carefully examined and tabulated and reported to the city council with the recommendation of the purchasing agent at the next council meeting. After tabulation all bids may be inspected by the competing bidders. In lieu of the procedure for opening bids specified in this section, the city council may direct that bids be opened at a council meeting. 
(5)  When such bids are submitted to the city council, if the city council shall find any of the bids to be satisfactory, it shall accept the same. Such award may be by resolution or ordinance. The city council shall have the right to reject any or all bids and to waive irregularities in bidding and to accept bids which do not conform in every respect to the bidding requirements. 
(6)  At the time the contract is executed by him, the contractor shall file a bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, to the city, conditioned to pay all laborers, mechanics, subcontractors and materialmen as well as all just debts, dues and demands incurred in the performance of such work and shall file a performance bond when one is required. The contractor shall also file evidence of public liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured in an amount satisfactory to the city manager, and agree to save the city harmless from loss or damage caused to any person or property by reason of the contractor's negligence. 
(7)  All bids and deposits of certified or cashier's checks may be retained until the contract is awarded and signed. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into the contract awarded to him within five days after the same has been awarded, or file any bond required within the same time, the deposit accompanying his bid shall be forfeited to the city, and the city council may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next lower qualified bidder or the contract may be readvertised. 
(Code 1980, § 1.213) 
Sec. 2-99. - Exceptions to competitive bidding. 
    Competitive bidding shall not be required in the following cases: 
(1)  Where the public work or improvement, or the product or material contracted for is not competitive in nature, or no advantage to the city would result from requiring competitive bidding, and the city council, upon written recommendation of the manager, authorizes execution of a contract without competitive bidding. 
(2)  In the employment of professional services. 
(3)  Where the city council shall determine that the public interest will be best served by purchase from, joint purchase with or purchase under supervision of another unit of government. 
(4)  Where the city elects to undertake the work itself. 
(5)  In those cases (including frequently recurring items in excess of $5,000.00) where the council by resolution exempts such items from competitive bidding and/or also exempts such items from the requirements of section 2-98. 
(Code 1980, § 1.214) 
Sec. 2-100. - Inspection of materials. 
    The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all materials, supplies and equipment shall rest with the ordering department. 
(Code 1980, § 1.215) 
Sec. 2-101. - Sale of property. 
    Whenever any city property, real or personal, is no longer needed for corporate or public purposes, the same may be offered for sale. Personal property not exceeding $5,000.00 in value may be sold or applied against the purchasing price of like merchandise by the purchasing agent after receiving quotations or competitive bids therefor for the best price obtainable. Property with a value in excess of $5,000.00 may be sold after advertising and receiving competitive bids, as provided in section 2-98, and after approval of the sale has been given by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 1.216) 
Secs. 2-102-2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUDGET STABILIZATION FUND 

Sec. 2-111. - Created. 
    A budget stabilization fund is hereby created. 
(Code 1980, § 1.241) 
Sec. 2-112. - Appropriations. 
    Monies for the budget stabilization fund shall be appropriated by resolution of the city council in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 30 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 141.441 et seq., MSA 5.3230(1) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1980, § 1.242) 
Sec. 2-113. - Tax limitations. 
    No taxes shall be imposed to produce revenue in excess of that needed in the estimated budget of the city in order to provide money for the budget stabilization fund. 
(Code 1980, § 1.243) 
Sec. 2-114. - Operation in accordance with state law. 
    The amount of money to be appropriated to the budget stabilization fund, the investments of the fund, and the purposes for which the money in the fund may be appropriated shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 30 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 141.441 et seq., MSA 5.3230(1) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1980, § 1.244) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Liquor control act, MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIQUOR LICENSES 

Sec. 6-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverages means any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes. 
    Applicant means any person or legal entity, singular or plural, which does not yet hold a liquor license but has applied or petitioned for such license. 
    License renewal means the issuance of an annual license to an existing licensee as a renewal of the licensee's previously issued liquor license, which remains in full force and effect until such license renewal. 
    License transfer means the issuance of a liquor license to an applicant as a consequence of the transfer of a liquor license and licensed business from a previous licensee to the applicant. 
    Licensee means any person or legal entity, singular or plural, presently holding a liquor license issued by the state liquor control commission. 
    Liquor license means any license or classification of license issued by the state liquor control commission authorizing the sale of an alcoholic beverage or beverages. 
    Person includes any person or legal entity or whatsoever kind or nature, either charitable or profitable, that desires to have or is already possessed of any license issued by the state for the sale and dispensation of alcoholic beverages pursuant to a liquor license of any variety within the city. 
    Proposed establishment means an establishment which was not licensed during the immediately preceding 12-month period and which is now the subject of a liquor license application. 
(Code 1980, § 6.103) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-27. - Purpose. 
    This article is established to cause the greatest benefit to the city in its use of the powers with regard to the issuance, transfer, renewal or revocation of liquor licenses within its jurisdiction. This article is established in order to provide an orderly and nondiscriminatory procedure for the review and approval by the city of any and all requests for liquor licenses or any matter relating thereto, for the sale or dispensation of alcoholic beverages within the city, and each person who desires such license, approval, renewal or transfer of the same shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 6.102) 
Sec. 6-28. - Application for license. 
(a)  Application procedure and applicant information. Applications for a liquor license to sell beer, wine and/or spirits shall be made to the city council in writing on a liquor license application form provided by the city clerk, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a partnership or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information. A fee to be determined by the city council shall be paid by applicant to cover costs to review and process the application. 
(1)  The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; or, in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and an affidavit stating whether or not the corporation is a privately held corporation. If the corporation is a privately held corporation, it shall also file with the commission an affidavit stating the number of shares of stock which it has issued, to whom the stock was issued, the amount of stock issued to each stockholder, the date of issuance of the stock and the individual certificate numbers of the stock issued. 
(2)  The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 
(3)  The character of business and business reputation of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the objectives for which it was organized. This requirement shall be fulfilled by a current certified copy of the articles of incorporation. 
(4)  The length of time the applicant has been in business of that character, or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued. 
(5)  The applicant's financial status and his ability to build and/or operate the proposed facility on which the proposed license is to be applicable. 
(6)  Proof of ownership of the property or lease of the property to be used and operated under such license. Address and legal description of property to be given. 
(7)  A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in the application, and the disposition of such application. 
(8)  A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude, violence or alcoholic liquors, and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter or the laws of the state. 
(9)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States or any ordinance of the city in the conduct of its business. 
(b)  Site location, design, operational and implementation information. In addition to the filing of information as required in subsection (a) of this section, the following information shall be submitted by the applicant: 
(1)  A location map of the property where the license is to be located. The map shall show the relationship of the proposed licensed facility to surrounding property and uses and any church or school building within 500 feet from the proposed facility. 
(2)  A site plan showing the location of the building on the lot wherein the proposed licensed facility is to be operated, the architectural design and building elevations, and other pertinent physical features of the proposed building to be constructed on the premises. 
(3)  The floor plans, seating arrangements, the interior design, and the type of furniture and fixtures to be used in the proposed restaurant facilities. 
(4)  If the building is already constructed, then in addition to the above the applicant shall furnish proposed renovation plans for the interior of the premises or any proposed exterior building alterations. 
(5)  A statement as to when the applicant intends to commence construction or renovation of the proposed building or facility and when the applicant expects to complete such construction. 
(6)  A statement as to proposed hours of operation, menu, staff and culinary facilities and capabilities. 
(7)  Submittal by the applicant of a proposed restaurant improvement plan and ongoing development goals to maintain quality service should a license be approved. 
(c)  Other information. The applicant shall furnish such other information as is pertinent to the license application. 
(Code 1980, § 6.104) 
Sec. 6-29. - Criteria and standards for applicant licensure. 
    The following criteria and standards shall be considered by the city council prior to any decision by the council pertaining to an application. 
(1)  The applicant's personal information, including: 
a.  The applicant's management experience in the alcohol/liquor business. 
b.  The applicant's general business management experience. 
c.  The applicant's general business reputation. 
d.  The applicant's moral character. 
e.  The applicant's financial status and its ability to build and/or operate the proposed facility on which the proposed liquor license is to be located. 
f.  Past criminal convictions of the applicant for crimes involving moral turpitude, violence or alcoholic liquors. 
g.  The applicant's excessive use of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The licensed establishment shall be primarily a restaurant which has the following characteristics: 
a.  Be a bona fide public eating place having city ordinance license pursuant to section 6-29 and a certificate of occupancy for location pursuant to 90-69. All city building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, fire, health, zoning and other codes shall be complied with. 
b.  Have regular hours of operation and complete food menu for serving cooked, full course, daily prepared meals to guests for compensation. This shall be construed to exclude fast food, drive-in type restaurants which have characteristics including, but not limited to, a drive-through window, counter only service, and no waitress or waiter service. 
c.  Food revenue must comprise at least 60 percent of all gross sales for the restaurant. Proof of an establishment complying with this subsection shall be made annually each January on a form provided by the city clerk. 
d.  Have suitable kitchen facilities, approved by the county health department and by the city pursuant to chapter 14, for keeping, cooking and preparing foods required for food service. 
e.  Have quality seating facilities suitable for complete food and beverage service to customers. The seating capacity of the restaurant shall not exceed maximum occupancy limits as established by chapter 34 of this Code. 
f.  May have an associated lounge if there is no separate outside entrance to the lounge. 
g.  May have service of alcoholic beverages to a guest over a bar or counter. However, the total number of seats at the bar or counter may not exceed 20 percent of the total number of seats in the restaurant. 
h.  Consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted only on premises. Carryouts are not permitted. 
i.  May not have live entertainment, except that piano playing, orchestra playing, playing of other types of musical instruments or singing are permitted. 
j.  Off-street parking and loading spaces for the restaurant shall be in compliance with section 90-56 et seq. of this Code. 
(3)  The location of the restaurant as described in subsection (2) must be in either a C-1 or C-2 zoning district permitting such use [sections 90-282(13) and section 90-297 of this Code] and be reviewed under the site plan approval process provided for in those provisions. 
(4)  Proximity to schools and churches shall comply with requirements of Act No. 417 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1977 (MCL 436.17a, MSA 18.988(1)), as amended, and also with reference to possible adverse effects such use may have on surrounding residential, school, playground, playfield, park or church uses. 
(5)  Compatibility of the proposed use with the surrounding land uses with the attention to the effect the proposed location would have on the existing and potential economic development of the surrounding area shall be considered. 
(6)  Compatibility of the proposed use with abutting roadways with attention to vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation in the area and traffic impact on the surrounding area shall be evaluated. Restaurants as described in subsection (2) shall have direct access to a thoroughfare or collector street as defined in the city's comprehensive development plan. 
(7)  The amount of the investment for the building, furnishings and fixtures as part of the proposal and the number of expected employees of applicant, and permanence of the establishment in the community as evidenced by the proposed or actual commitments made by the applicant. Financial resources sufficient to support the establishment shall be disclosed to the city council. 
(8)  Information on the individual or individuals expected to manage the restaurant and beverage service, as well as information as to how the facility would actually be managed. 
(9)  The effect in general the issuance of the license would have on the health, welfare and safety of the general public, and whether the applicant has demonstrated the public need or convenience for the issuance of the liquor license for the business facility at the location proposed. 
(10)  The aforesaid criteria and standards are to be considered as only guidelines for the applicant and the city council, and nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the city council from deleting or adding to such guidelines and requirements in its discretion, and no applicant shall be considered to have acquired any vested interest in the issuance of a license by complying with any of the guidelines and requirements. 
(Code 1980, § 6.105; Ord. No. 291, § 1, 5-23-94) 
Sec. 6-30. - Review procedure; public hearing. 
(a)  Following the receipt of the fully completed application and fee as provided in sections 6-28 and 6-29, the city clerk shall forward the application to the department of public safety, building department, city attorney, city planner and such other departments and individuals as directed by the city manager, which departments and individuals shall make their reports and recommendations prior to final action by the city council. 
(b)  Upon receipt by the city manager of the department and other recommendations, the city clerk shall cause the application to be placed upon the agenda of the city council within 60 days after receipt of the same by the city clerk. All applications are subject to the final approval of the city council. 
(c)  A public hearing shall be established on any application. Notice of any public hearing conducted by the city council shall be given public notice by publication in a local newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the date of hearing, and the applicant shall be notified of the hearing. 
(d)  At the hearing before the city council to consider the application for a liquor license the city council may act as follows: 
(1)  Grant conditional approval of the application. 
(2)  Reject the application. 
(3)  Postpone action on the application. 
(4)  Take other appropriate action in discretion of the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 6.106) 
Sec. 6-31. - Conditional approval and final recommendation. 
(a)  Conditional approval, if granted, will be contingent upon the applicant under this article obtaining building permits and any other necessary permits, licenses or approval from the city within six months from the date of such conditional approval. If construction of new buildings and/or alterations of existing buildings are required, such construction or alterations shall commence within six months after the date of conditional approval, with a completion date of no more than one year after the date of issuance of the relevant building permit. Extensions for completion of construction or alteration may be granted by the city council for good cause. 
(b)  After receipt of a conditional approval by the city council, no floor plan, building elevation, site plan, seating arrangement, kitchen layout or other pertinent facts, drawings or documents submitted to the city council may be changed without the applicant first receiving approval from the city council. 
(c)  Upon completion of the building and/or alterations in accordance with prior conditional approval of the city council, or if the building and/or alterations have not been completed, then subject to final inspection by the city in order to establish that applicant has fully completed the building and/or alterations in accordance with prior conditional approval of the city council as set forth in the plans and specifications that the applicant has previously submitted to the council, the council may, subject to the foregoing conditions, recommend the applicant, above all others, for approval of the liquor license to the state liquor control commission. 
(d)  Reservation of authority. No applicant for a liquor license has a right to the issuance of such license, and the city council reserves the right and authority to exercise discretion to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of a license. 
(Code 1980, § 6.107) 
Sec. 6-32. - Transfer of existing licenses. 
    The transfer of any existing liquor license covered under this article to a different geographic location and/or to a different owner shall be subject to each of the requirements, criteria and procedures, including fees, set forth in this article for the granting of a new liquor license. In addition, the transferee applicant shall furnish a copy of any and all files open to public which may be in the state liquor control commission's possession regarding that commission's investigation of the transferee as a present licensee, or as a previous licensee, or of a license in which transferee has or has had a partial interest. 
(Code 1980, § 6.108) 
Sec. 6-33. - Objections to renewal, requests for revocation. 
(a)  The city council may object to a renewal of a liquor license or request the revocation of a liquor license with the state liquor control commission. 
(b)  Procedure. Pursuant to section 17(3) of the liquor control act (MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq.), before filing an objection to the renewal or request for revocation of a license with the state liquor control commission the city council shall serve the licenseholder, by first class mail, mailed not less than ten days prior to the hearing, a notice of such hearing. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Notice of the proposed action. 
(2)  Reasons for the proposed action. 
(3)  Date, time and place of the hearing. 
(4)  A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony, and may confront witnesses and may be represented by attorney. 
(c)  The hearing may be conducted by the city council as a whole, or by a hearing officer appointed by the city council for such purposes. If a hearing officer is appointed, it shall be that officer's duty to undertake such hearing, and hear and take evidence and testimony of the licensee, or witnesses on its behalf, in opposition thereto. After the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the city council for the latter's ultimate final review and decision. The city council shall submit to the licenseholder and the state liquor control commission a written statement of its ultimate findings and determination. 
(d)  Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. The city council may recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license upon a determination by it that, based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, any of the following exist: 
(1)  A violation of any of the restrictions on licenses set forth in this article. 
(2)  Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises. 
(3)  Failure to make timely payments to city of outstanding or delinquent taxes, utility charges, license fees, services rendered by city or any other charges or monies due. 
(Code 1980, § 6.109) 
Sec. 6-34. - Additional restrictions on licenses. 
    No license under this article shall be issued: 
(1)  To a person whose liquor license has been revoked or not renewed for cause under this article, comparable city or township ordinance, or state law whether in Michigan or otherwise. 
(2)  To a copartnership or partnership, unless all the members of such copartnership or partnership shall qualify to obtain a license. 
(3)  To a corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or stockholder owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation would not be eligible to receive a license under this article for any reason. 
(4)  To a person who has been convicted of a crime punishable by death or imprisonment in excess of one year under the law under which he was convicted; a crime involving theft, dishonesty or false statement (including tax evasion) regardless of punishment; or a crime or administrative violation of a federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances. 
(5)  For premises where there exists a violation of the applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable zoning regulations, applicable public health regulations or any other applicable city ordinance. 
(6)  To a person who fails to make timely payments to city of outstanding or delinquent taxes, utility charges, license fees, services rendered by the city or any other charges or monies due. 
(Code 1980, § 6.110) 
Sec. 6-35. - Hours, days of operation. 
    An on-premises licensee approved by the state liquor control commission shall not sell, give away or furnish alcoholic beverages except as permitted under Rule R 436.1403 of the administrative rules of the state liquor control commission. 
(Code 1980, § 6.111) 
Sec. 6-36. - Interpretation, conflicts. 
    Whenever any provision of this article imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Code 1980, § 6.114) 
Sec. 6-37. - Reservation of authority. 
    No applicant for a liquor license has a right to the issuance of such license and the city council reserves the right and authority to exercise discretion to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of a license. 
(Code 1980, § 6.115) 
Sec. 6-38. - Preemption. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to conform to all present and future rules, regulations and requirements of the state liquor control commission and all statutes, rules, and regulations of the state. 
Sec. 6-39. - Severability. 
    Should any section or part thereof of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or null or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections or parts of this chapter. 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinances, MCL 287.290, MSA 12.541; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq., MSA 28.244 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Cruelty to animals. 
    No person shall cruelly treat or abuse any animal or bird. 
(Code 1980, § 9.81) 
Sec. 10-2. - Poisoning animals. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed public or private place where it endangers, or is likely to endanger, any animal or bird. 
(Code 1980, § 9.82) 
Sec. 10-3. - Molesting wild birds, animals, nests. 
    No person, except a public safety officer acting in his official capacity, shall molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird or animal, or molest or disturb any wild bird's nest or the contents thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 9.83) 
Sec. 10-4. - Keeping domestic animals and fowl generally. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall keep or house any animals or domestic fowl within the city except dogs, cats, birds, fowl or animals commonly classified as pets. 
(Code 1980, § 9.84) 
Sec. 10-5. - Restrictions on keeping dogs, cats, kennels and apiaries. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or to suffer or permit to be kept or maintained, upon any premises owned or controlled by him, any dog, or cat, male or female, kept mainly for breeding purposes, within 100 feet of any place of business and dwelling house other than that of the owner or person in control of such dog or cat. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or suffer or permit to be kept or maintained, upon premises owned or controlled by him, in the city, more than two dogs over the age of eight months and two cats over the age of four months. For the purposes of this section, keeping or maintaining an animal shall mean harboring or having it in one's care or permitting it to remain in or about one's premises for a period of five or more days. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or suffer or permit to be kept or maintained, upon premises owned or controlled by him in the city, any hive of bees within 200 feet of any place of business and dwelling house other than the dwelling house of the owner or person in control of such bees. 
(Code 1980, § 9.85; Ord. No. 297, § 1, 11-20-95) 
Secs. 10-6-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dog means any dog, whether male, female or unsexed. 
    Owner, when applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every person having a right of property in such dog, and every person who keeps or harbors such dog or has it in his care, and every person who permits such dog to remain in or about any premises occupied by him for a period of five or more days. 
    Vicious dog means one that has committed an unprovoked attack on a person or animal, that has approached a person in an apparent attitude of attack when unprovoked or that has bitten a person or animal. 
(Ord. No. 277, § 1(9.91), 9-21-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-27. - Duty to confine and to clean up after dog. 
(a)  No owner of any dog may permit such dog to stray beyond his premises unless the dog is on a leash of no longer than ten feet in length which leash is properly held by a person capable of restraining the actions of such dog, or unless such dog is in an enclosed vehicle or container. No owner may permit such dog to leave his premises under any conditions, unless such dog has been immunized against rabies; provided, nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prevent an owner from taking his dog to the offices of a veterinarian, for purposes of having the dog immunized. 
(b)  No owner of any dog may permit such dog to defecate on property other than his own property unless such owner immediately removes any fecal matter deposited by the dog; and every such owner shall have in his possession an adequate container for such matter and shall cause the removal of it in a sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 277, § 1(9.98), 9-21-92) 
Sec. 10-28. - Responsibility for damages. 
    Every owner of a dog shall be liable for damages for any and all injuries to person or property caused by such dog, to be determined and collected in appropriate civil proceedings, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose any liability upon the city, its agents or employees, for damages caused by such dog. 
(Code 1980, § 9.99) 
Sec. 10-29. - Barking dog. 
    No person shall harbor or keep any dog which, by loud or frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, shall cause a serious annoyance to the neighborhood, or to people passing to and fro upon the street. 
(Code 1980, § 9.100) 
Sec. 10-30. - Vicious dog, rabid dog. 
    No person shall own or harbor a fierce or vicious dog, or a dog that has been bitten by any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies. All dogs found to be vicious and all rabid dogs shall be destroyed, unless otherwise disposed of by the owner thereof. 
(Code 1980, § 9.101) 
Sec. 10-31. - Confining dog for observation. 
    Any person who shall have in his possession a dog which has contracted rabies, or which has been subjected to the same, or which is suspected of having rabies, or which has bitten any person, shall upon demand of the public safety department produce and surrender up such dog to the public safety department, to be held in the city dog pound for treatment and observation for a period of ten days. In lieu of such delivering up of the dog as aforesaid, the person shall have the option of delivering such dog to an approved kennel, there to be held for treatment and observation for the ten-day period, and shall furnish to the public safety department written evidence that the dog has been so delivered; provided, however, that if the dog is confined to a private kennel, such confinement shall be at the sole expense of the owner of the dog, and without expense or risk on the part of the city. If the dog is kept in the city pound, the owner shall be liable for the board of the dog as provided in this article for an impounded dog. 
(Code 1980, § 9.102) 
Sec. 10-32. - Dog bitten by another dog. 
    It shall be the duty of any person owning or harboring a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or other animal showing symptoms of rabies to immediately notify the public safety department that such person has such dog in his possession, and the person shall comply with all lawful orders and requirements of the public safety department. 
(Code 1980, § 9.103) 
Sec. 10-33. - Destruction of vicious dog. 
    Whenever a dog is brought to the pound for having bitten a person, the public safety department may, if deemed necessary and advisable, and after holding such dog a sufficient length of time to meet the requirements of the health department for investigation, cause the dog to be destroyed as a vicious dog. Unless waived in writing, notice of intent to so destroy the dog shall be given to the owner if known, and the owner shall have 48 hours in which to seek a review by the municipal court of the city of the order of the public safety department for the destruction of the dog. 
(Code 1980, § 9.104) 
Sec. 10-34. - Impoundment. 
    It shall be the duty of the public safety department of the city, and every person employed by the city manager for that purpose, to take up, seize and place in the dog pound all dogs that may be found running at large or being kept or harbored in any place within the city contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 9.105) 
Sec. 10-35. - Payment of fines; release of impounded dogs. 
(a)  No dog shall be released from the pound, unless the owner or his authorized agent shall make payment to the violations bureau of the city as follows: 
(1)  For release of a licensed dog, properly immunized against rabies, a fine as set from time to time by order of the judge of the municipal court. 
(2)  Payment of the cost of boarding the dog, at the rate paid by the city to the animal shelter at which the dog is boarded. 
(b)  No dog shall be released from the animal shelter unless the same is properly immunized and licensed, and the cost of such immunization and licensing shall be paid by the owner in addition to the fees provided in this section. The public safety department shall keep a record of all seizures of dogs and the collection of all fees and other monies and shall make monthly reports thereof to the city manager, and shall deliver all fees collected to the city treasurer. 
(c)  For violations of section 10-27, violators shall pay a fine as set from time to time by order of the judge of the municipal court. 
(d)  Subsections (a)(1) and (c) shall not apply to owners committing repeated violations as described in section 10-39. That section shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 277, § 1(9.106), 9-21-92) 
Sec. 10-36. - Unclaimed dogs. 
    All dogs not claimed and released within 72 hours after being impounded shall be destroyed, or, if the animal is deemed valuable, the same may be sold by the public safety department provided the dog is properly immunized and licensed at the cost of the purchaser. Dogs impounded having been exposed to rabies, or any dog that has attacked a person shall be kept until such time and under such conditions as shall be required by the public safety department or the health department. 
(Code 1980, § 9.107) 
Sec. 10-37. - Quarantine. 
    The health officer of the city is hereby authorized to require that any dog be quarantined, or that a quarantine be established in the city for any defined period, when in his opinion such measures are necessary in order to protect the health of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 9.108) 
Sec. 10-38. - Violation notices. 
    The department of public safety and any person employed as dog warden for the enforcement of this chapter are hereby authorized, upon witnessing of violations of sections 10-27 and 10-29, or 10-51 through 10-56, to issue to the owner of the dog a written notice of the violation. The owner of the dog may, within 72 hours, present the notice at the violation bureau of the city, and there pay the penalties as provided in section 10-35. Such violations shall be municipal civil infractions. If the owner of the dog fails to appear within 72 hours, the person issuing the notice shall forthwith file a complaint in the municipal court of the city, and secure a warrant for the arrest of the owner of the dog, and all further proceedings shall be had in accordance with the rules and practice of the court. Payment of any penalty in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be deemed full satisfaction for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 277, § 1(9.109), 9-21-92; Ord. No. 430, § I, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 10-39. - Repeated violations. 
    No person may settle more than two violations of any of sections 10-27 through 10-29 and 10-51 through 10-56 within any calendar year, by payment of fees as provided in section 10-38; subsequent violations shall be dealt with by misdemeanor complaint in the municipal court and those violators shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 277, § 1(9.110), 9-21-92; Ord. No. 430, § I, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 10-40. - Violations regarding vicious or dangerous dogs. 
    Section 10-38 shall not apply to violations of sections 10-30 through 10-33 and anyone violating any of sections 10-30 through 10-33 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 277, § 1(9.111), 9-21-92) 
Secs. 10-41-10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-51. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess or harbor any dog four months old or over in the city unless the dog is licensed as provided in this division, or to own, harbor or possess any dog four months old or over that does not at all times wear a collar or harness with suitable tag attached. All dogs shall be immunized against rabies prior to issuance of a license under this division. 
(Code 1980, § 9.92) 
Sec. 10-52. - Term. 
    All licenses issued under the terms of this division shall be valid and operative for a term beginning March 1 in the calendar year for which such license is issued, and terminating on the last day of February in the following year. 
(Code 1980, § 9.93) 
Sec. 10-53. - Application. 
    The city clerk shall accept applications for and issue licenses for any license year commencing with the preceding January 1. It shall be the duty of the owner of the dog, on or before March 1 of each year, to file with the city clerk an application for a dog license, setting forth the name and residence of the applicant, the breed, sex, age and color of dog, and such other information as may be required. The applicant shall also present to the clerk a certificate in form acceptable to the clerk, stating that the dog has been properly immunized against rabies subsequent to December 15 immediately preceding the calendar year for which the license is to be issued if tissue vaccine was used or subsequent to December 15 of the second preceding calendar year from the year in which the license is issued if modified live rabies virus of chick embryo was used. 
(Code 1980, § 9.94) 
Sec. 10-54. - Fees. 
    License fees under this division shall be as prescribed in sections 18-98 and 18-99 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 9.95) 
Sec. 10-55. - Applications after March 1. 
    Any person becoming the owner after March 1 of any year of any dog four months old or over which has not already been licensed, or any person owning a dog which becomes four months old after March 1 of any year, shall forthwith apply for and secure a license for such dog. The license shall be issued without penalty if such application is made within 30 days after the applicant has acquired such dog, or after such dog has reached the age of four months. 
(Code 1980, § 9.96) 
Sec. 10-56. - Issuance; wearing of tag. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a dog license, together with the certificate of immunization, and the license fees above provided, the clerk shall issue to the applicant a license for such dog for the then calendar year, and at the same time shall deliver to the applicant a suitable tag which shall be dated as to year, and bear a serial number, together with the words "License, Grosse Pointe, Michigan," and such serial number shall be inscribed upon the license so issued. The tag shall be attached to the collar or harness upon the dog for which the same is issued, and shall be worn by such dog at all times, and no person shall remove any license tag from any dog without the consent of the owner, or the person to whom the license was issued. Such tag shall be nontransferable, and shall not be used on the collar or harness of any dog other than that of the dog for which such tag was issued. 
(Code 1980, § 9.97) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; dangerous structures, § 42-31 et seq.; planning, ch. 54; signs, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- State Construction Code Act, MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - RESIDENTIAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 387, § I, adopted June 15, 2009, amended article I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article I, §§ 14-1-14-4, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 360, § I, 4-24-06. 

Sec. 14-1. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Residential Code, and in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Michigan Residential Code as currently in effect under Michigan State law, incorporating the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings and the Michigan Uniform Energy Code, is adopted by reference, except as modified below. The building official of the City of Grosse Pointe is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Grosse Pointe under the Code. The City of Grosse Pointe assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Code throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 387, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 417, § I, 1-26-15) 
Sec. 14-2. - Copies on file. 
    Complete printed copies of the Michigan Residential Code adopted in this article are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 387, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 417, § I, 1-26-15) 
Sec. 14-3. - References in code. 
    All references in the Michigan Residential Code to the "name of jurisdiction" shall be read as referring to the City of Grosse Pointe. All references to the "building official" shall be read as referring to the city manager of the City of Grosse Pointe or such representative as he may designate, including the City of Grosse Pointe building inspector. All references to the "legal officer" of the jurisdiction shall be read as referring to the city attorney of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 387, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 417, § I, 1-26-15) 
Sec. 14-4. - Changes in code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Michigan Residential Code are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like-numbered sections of the Michigan Residential Code. 
Section R108.1. Section R108.1 is modified to read as follows: 
    R108.1 Fees: Fees for inspections and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be collected by the city treasurer in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. The amounts of such fees shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council, and shall cover the cost of the inspection, supervision and enforcement under the Code. 
Section R112. Section R112 is amended and re-stated in its entirety as follows: 
    R112.1 Application for appeal: The application for appeal, except in respect to insecure and unsafe building and equipment requiring immediate action, shall be referred to the board of appeals, and such board shall proceed to hear and determine the appeal. 
    The person taking the appeal shall pay a fee of $100.00. If the appeal shall be decided against such person, the fee shall be retained by the board and paid into the department. If the appeal shall be decided in favor of such person, the fee shall be returned to such person. 
    R112.2. Membership of the board: The board of appeals shall consist of the duly elected members of the city council of the City of Grosse Pointe as from time to time constituted. 
    The mayor shall be the chairperson of the board. Four members shall be necessary for a quorum, with the chairperson entitled to vote. The city clerk shall act as the secretary of the board. 
    R112.3. Notice of meeting: The secretary of the board shall, at the order of the chairperson, call meetings of the board and shall notify the members thereof in writing at least two working days in advance of such meetings. 
    R112.4. Board decision: No matter shall be determined except by a majority of all members present and in no case shall any motion be passed without at least four affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 387, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 417, § I, 1-26-15) 
Secs. 14-5-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL/COMMERCIAL BUILDING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 382, § I, adopted June 15, 2009, amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article II, §§ 14-26-14-30, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 361, § I, 4-24-06. Subsequently, Ord. No. 396, § I, adopted May 16, 2011, amended said article to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 14-26. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Building Code, and in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972 (MCL 125.1508(a)), as amended, the Michigan Building Code as currently in effect under Michigan State Law, MCL 125.1504, incorporating the International Building Code, is adopted by reference, except as modified below. The building official of the City of Grosse Pointe is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Grosse Pointe under the Code. The City of Grosse Pointe assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Code throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 382, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 396, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-27. - Copies on file. 
    Complete printed copies of the Michigan Building Code adopted in this article are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 382, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 396, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-28. - References in code. 
    All references in the Michigan Building Code to the "name of jurisdiction" shall be read as referring to the City of Grosse Pointe. All references to the "building official" shall be read as referring to the City Manager of the City of Grosse Pointe or such representative as he may designate, including the City of Grosse Pointe Building Inspector. All references to the "legal officer" of the jurisdiction shall be read as referring to the City Attorney of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 382, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 396, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-29. - Changes in code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Michigan Building Code are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like-numbered sections of the Michigan Building Code. 
Section 108.1. Section 108.1 is modified to read as follows: 
    108.1 Fees : Fees for inspections and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be collected by the city treasurer in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. The amounts of such fees shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council, and shall cover the cost of the inspection and supervision from the enforcement of this chapter. 
Section 112. Section 112 is added as follows: 
    112.1. Application for appeal: 
    The application for appeal, except in respect to insecure and unsafe building and equipment requiring immediate action, shall be referred to the board of appeals, and such board shall proceed to hear and determine the appeal. 
    The person taking the appeal shall pay a fee of $100.00. If the appeal shall be decided against such person, the fee shall be retained by the board and paid into the department. If the appeal shall be decided in favor of such person, the fee shall be returned to such person. 
    112.2. Membership of the board: The board of appeals shall consist of the duly elected members of the City Council of the City of Grosse Pointe as from time to time constituted. The mayor shall be the chairperson of the board. Four members shall be necessary for a quorum, with the chairperson entitled to vote. The city clerk shall act as the secretary of the board. 
    112.3. Notice of meeting: The secretary of the board shall, at the order of the chairperson, call meetings of the board and shall notify the members thereof in writing at least two working days in advance of such meetings. 
    112.4. Board decision: No matter shall be determined except by a majority of all members present and in no case shall any motion be passed without at least four affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 382, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 396, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-30. - Site plan approval. 
    Any building located in an R-T, C-1 or C-2 zoning district (or a Planned Unit Development in any district), requiring a building permit for construction or alteration, shall first obtain site plan approval in accordance with provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city as set out in chapter 90. 
(Ord. No. 382, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 396, § I, 5-16-11) 
Secs. 14-31-14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLUMBING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 385, § I, adopted June 15, 2009, amended article III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article III, §§ 14-51-14-59, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 364, § I, 4-24-06. Subsequently, Ord. No 399, § I, adopted May 16, 2011, amended said article to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 14-51. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 8b(6) of Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1508a), as amended, the Michigan Plumbing Code, as currently in effect under Michigan State Law, MCL 125.1504, incorporating the International Plumbing Code is hereby found and declared to be an acceptable code and is hereby adopted by reference as modified in this article, for the purpose of providing reasonable safeguards and regulating the design and installation of plumbing systems, including sanitary and storm drainage, sanitary facilities, water supplies, storm water and sewage disposal of all buildings and structures and shall apply to existing or proposed buildings and structures in the city. 
(Ord. No. 385, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 399, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-52. - Copies on file. 
    A copy of the Michigan Plumbing Code, as adopted in this article, is available for public use and inspection of the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 385, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 399, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-53. - References in code. 
    All references in the Michigan Plumbing Code to the "name of jurisdiction" shall be read as referring to the City of Grosse Pointe. All references to the "code official" shall be read as referring to the City Manager of the City of Grosse Pointe or such representative as he may designate, including the City of Grosse Pointe Plumbing Inspector. All references to the "legal officer" of the jurisdiction shall be read as referring to the City Attorney of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 385, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 399, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-54. - Changes in code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Michigan Plumbing Code adopted in this article are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like-numbered sections of the Michigan Plumbing Code. 
Section 106.6. Section 106.6 is modified to read as follows: 
    106.6 Fees: Fees for inspections and the issuance of required permits shall be collected by the city treasurer in advance of the issuance of such permits. The amounts of such fees shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council, and shall cover the cost of the inspection and supervision from the enforcement of this chapter. 
Section 108.4. Section 108.4 is amended and re-stated as follows: 
    108.4. Violations; Remedies: Any person or anyone acting on behalf of such person violating any provision of this code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, or repair plumbing equipment or systems in violation of an approved plan or directive of the plumbing official, or of a permit issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 and such other relief as provided in section 1-19 of the City Code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 108.5. Section 108.5 is amended and re-stated as follows: 
    108.5. Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 and such other relief as provided in section 1-19 of the City Code. 
Section 109. Section 109 is added as follows: 
    109.1. Application for appeal: The application for appeal, except in respect to insecure and unsafe building and equipment requiring immediate action, shall be referred to the board of appeals, and such board shall proceed to hear and determine the appeal. 
    The person taking the appeal shall pay a fee of $100.00. If the appeal shall be decided against such person, the fee shall be retained by the board and paid into the department. If the appeal shall be decided in favor of such person, the fee shall be returned to such person. 
    109.2. Membership of the board: The board of appeals shall consist of the duly elected members of the City Council of the City of Grosse Pointe as from time to time constituted. The mayor shall be the chairperson of the board. Four members shall be necessary for a quorum, with the chairperson entitled to vote. The city clerk shall act as the secretary of the board. 
    109.3. Notice of meeting: The secretary of the board shall, at the order of the chairperson, call meetings of the board and shall notify the members thereof in writing at least two working days in advance of such meetings. 
    109.4. Board decision: No matter shall be determined except by a majority of all members present and in no case shall any motion be passed without at least four affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 385, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 399, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-55. - Public systems available. 
    A public water supply system and/or public sewer shall be deemed available to premises used for human occupancy if such premises are within 1,000 feet, measured along a street, alley, or easement, of the public water supply or sewer system, and a connection conforming with the standards set forth in this code may be made thereto. 
(Ord. No. 385, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 399, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-56. - Freezing. 
    Water service piping and sewers shall be installed below recorded frost penetration but not less than five feet zero inches below grade for water piping and five feet zero inches below grade for sewers. Plumbing piping in exterior building walls shall be adequately protected against freezing by insulation or heat or both. 
(Ord. No. 385, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 399, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-57. - Contractor's license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage as an independent contractor in the installation, alteration or service of any plumbing system, in or about buildings and/or structures located within the city without first having secured a valid license and registered it with the city. 
(Ord. No. 385, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 399, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-58. - Fees for licenses. 
    Fees for licenses shall be as prescribed in sections 18-98 and 18-99. The issuance, expiration, renewal and transfer of such licenses shall be in accordance with section 18-51 et seq., except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. No plumbing contractor licensed under the provisions of this article shall secure permits for any plumbing work to be done by any person not employed by such plumbing contractor. 
(Ord. No. 385, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 399, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-59. - Liability. 
    This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any plumbing devices and/or plumbing material for damages to person or property caused by any defect therein nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized in this article, or a certificate of inspection issued as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 385, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 399, § I, 5-16-11) 
Secs. 14-60-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 383, § I, adopted June 15, 2009, amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IV, §§ 14-81-14-93, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 363, § I, 4-24-06. Subsequently, Ord. No. 397, § I, adopted May 16, 2011, amended said article to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 14-81. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the State of Michigan Construction Code Act, Act No. 230, PA 1972 (MCL 125.1508a), as amended, the National Electrical Code, as currently in effect under Michigan State Law, MCL 125.1504, is hereby adopted by reference. Said code is adopted for the purpose of regulating the installation, alteration, repair, servicing, maintenance and use of electrical equipment and provide practical safeguards of persons and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity in the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-82. - Copies on file. 
    Complete printed copies of the National Electrical Code adopted in this article are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-83. - References in code. 
    All references in the National Electrical Code to the "name of the jurisdiction" shall be read as referring to the City of Grosse Pointe. All references to the "code official" shall be read as referring to the City Manager of the City of Grosse Pointe or such representative as he may designate, including the City of Grosse Pointe Electrical Inspector. All references to the "legal officer" of the jurisdiction shall be read as referring to the City Attorney of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-84. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be applied to electrical power supply companies or communications agencies in respect to the generation, transmission, or distribution of electrical power and light, to public communication transmission systems, to operation of signal systems used exclusively by public service agencies, to installation of equipment used by railway utilities and public carriers or to radio transmission systems, other than the equipment and wiring for power supply and the installation of radio towers and antennae whether erected on buildings or on the ground. Radio and television receiving sets and equipment may be installed by other than licensed electrical contractors and journeyman electricians, but such installations shall otherwise conform to this article. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-85. - Permits. 
    No alterations or additions shall be made in the existing wiring of any building, nor shall any building be wired for the placing of any electric lights, motors, heating devices or any apparatus requiring the use of electrical current at a potential over 30 volts, nor shall any alterations be made in the wiring in any building after inspection, without first notifying the building official, and securing a permit therefor. Applications for such permit, describing the work, shall be made by the person installing the work, and the permit, when issued, shall be to such applicant. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-86. - Inspection. 
    Upon the completion of the wiring of any building, it shall be the duty of the person installing the same to notify the building official, who shall inspect the installations. All wires which are to be hidden from view shall be inspected before concealment, and any person installing such wires shall notify the building official, giving him sufficient time in which to make the required inspection before such wires are concealed. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-87. - Fees for permits and inspection. 
    Upon application for a permit as required in section 14-85, a fee shall be paid in accordance with the electrical permit fee schedule established from time to time by resolution of the city council. This section shall supersede comparable provisions of the code. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-88. - Access to building. 
    The building official shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of making any inspection or test of the installation of electric wiring, electric devices and/or electric material contained therein, and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all electric supply and to cut or disconnect, in cases of emergency, any wires where such electrical currents are dangerous to life or property. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-89. - Contractor's license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage as an independent contractor in the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of electrical wiring, equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat or power purposes where the electromotive force exceeds 30 volts in or about buildings and/or structures located within the city, without first having secured a valid license and registered it with the city. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-90. - Journeyman's license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of trade of journeyman electrician in the installation, alteration, maintenance or repair of electrical wiring equipment, apparatus or fixtures for light, heat, power or medical purposes where the electromotive force exceeds 30 volts in or about buildings and/or structures within the city, without first having secured a valid license and registered it with the city. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-91. - Issuance of license. 
    The State of Michigan shall be responsible for the issuance and administration of licenses for electricians and electrical workers in the city pursuant to the State Construction Code, MCL 125.1508(b) and the Electrical Administrative Act, MCL 338.883 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-92. - Liability. 
    This Code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical wiring, electric devices and/or electric material for damages to person or property caused by any defect therein nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized in this article, or certificate of inspection issued as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-93. - Application for appeal. 
(1)  The application for appeal, except in respect to insecure and unsafe building and equipment requiring immediate action, shall be referred to the board of appeals, and such board shall proceed to hear and determine the appeal. 
The person taking the appeal shall pay a fee of $100.00. If the appeal shall be decided against such person, the fee shall be retained by the board and paid into the department. If the appeal shall be decided in favor of such person, the fee shall be returned to such person. 
(2)  Membership of the board: The board of appeals shall consist of the duly elected members of the City Council of the City of Grosse Pointe as from time to time constituted. The mayor shall be the chairperson of the board. Four members shall be necessary for a quorum, with the chairperson entitled to vote. The city clerk shall act as the secretary of the board. 
(3)  Notice of meeting: The secretary of the board shall, at the order of the chairperson, call meetings of the board and shall notify the members thereof in writing at least two working days in advance of such meetings. 
(4)  Board decision: No matter shall be determined except by a majority of all members present and in no case shall any motion be passed without at least four affirmative votes. 
(5)  This section shall supersede comparable provisions of the code. 
(Ord. No.383, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 397, § I, 5-16-11) 
Secs. 14-94-14-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 384, § I, adopted June 15, 2009, amended article V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article V, §§ 14-116-14-122, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 362, § I, 4-24-06. Subsequently, Ord. No. 398, § I, adopted May 16, 2011, amended said article to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 14-116. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1508a), as amended, the Michigan Mechanical Code, as currently in effect under Michigan State Law, MCL 125.1504, incorporating the International Mechanical Code is hereby found and declared to be an acceptable code and is hereby adopted by reference as in this article modified, for the purpose of regulating the design, installation, maintenance, alteration and inspection of mechanical systems, including heating systems, water heaters, process piping, boilers and pressure vessels, appliances utilizing gas, liquid or solid fuel, chimneys and vents, mechanical refrigeration systems, fireplaces, barbecues, incinerators, crematories and air pollution systems, and shall apply to all buildings and structures, existing and proposed, in the city. 
(Ord. No. 384, § I, 6-15-09, Ord. No. 398, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-117. - Copy of file. 
    A copy of the Michigan Mechanical Code adopted in this article is available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 384, § I, 6-15-09, Ord. No. 398, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-118. - References in code. 
    All references in the Michigan Mechanical Code to the "name of jurisdiction" shall be read as referring to the City of Grosse Pointe. All references to the "mechanical official" shall be read as referring to the City Manager of Grosse Pointe or such representative as he may designate, including the city mechanical inspector. All references to the "legal officer" of the jurisdiction shall be read as referring to the City Attorney of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 384, § I, 6-15-09, Ord. No. 398, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-119. - Changes in code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Michigan Mechanical Code adopted in this article are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like-numbered sections of the Michigan Mechanical Code. 
Sections 106.5, 108.4, and 108.5. Sections 106.5, 108.4, and 108.5, and all subsections of those sections are modified to read as follows: 
    106.5 Fees: Fees for inspections and the issuance of required permits shall be collected by the city treasurer in advance of the issuance of such permits. The amounts of such fees shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council, and shall cover the cost of the inspection for the enforcement of this chapter. 
Section 108.4. Section 108.4 is modified to read as follows: 
    108.4 Violation; penalties: Any person or anyone acting in behalf of any person violating any provision of this code or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair mechanical equipment or systems in violation of an approved plan or directive of the mechanical official, or of a permit issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 and such other relief as provided in section 1-19 of the City Code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 108.5. Section 108.5 is modified to read as follows: 
    108.5 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 and such other relief as provided in section 1-19 of the City Code. 
Section 109. Section 109 is modified and amended to read: 
    109.1 Application for appeal: The application for appeal, except in respect to insecure and unsafe building and equipment requiring immediate action, shall be referred to the board of appeals, and such board shall proceed to hear and determine the appeal. 
    The person taking the appeal shall pay a fee of not to exceed $100.00. If the appeal shall be decided against such person, the fee shall be retained by the board and paid into the department. If the appeal shall be decided in favor of such person, the fee shall be returned to such person. 
    109.2 Membership of the board: The board of appeals shall consist of the duly elected members of the City Council of the City of Grosse Pointe as from time to time constituted. The mayor shall be the chairperson of the board. Four members shall be necessary for a quorum, with the chairperson entitled to vote. The city clerk shall act as the secretary of the board. 
    109.3 Notice of meeting: The secretary of the board shall, at the order of the chairperson, call meetings of the board and shall notify the members thereof in writing at least two working days in advance of such meetings. 
    109.4 Board decision: No matter shall be determined except by a majority of all members present and in no case shall any motion be passed without at least four affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 384, § I, 6-15-09, Ord. No. 398, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-120. - Contractor's license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage as an independent contractor in the installation, alteration or service of any mechanical system in or about buildings and/or structures located within the city without first having secured a valid license and registered it with the city. 
(Ord. No. 384, § I, 6-15-09, Ord. No. 398, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-121. - Fees for licenses. 
    Fees for licenses shall be prescribed in sections 18-98 and 18-99. The issuance, expiration, renewal and transfer of such license shall be in accordance with section 18-51 et seq., except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. No mechanical contractor licensed under the provisions of this article shall secure permits for any mechanical work to be done by any person not employed by such mechanical contractor. 
(Ord. No. 384, § I, 6-15-09, Ord. No. 398, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-122. - Liability. 
    This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operation, controlling or installing any mechanical devices and/or mechanical materials for damages to person or property caused by any defect therein nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 384, § I, 6-15-09, Ord. No. 398, § I, 5-16-11) 
Secs. 14-123-14-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RATPROOFING 

Sec. 14-146. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved means that which the building inspector by rule and/or regulation designates acceptable as a device, apparatus or method which by demonstration and/or test has proven workable for its intended use. 
    Building means any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted to or used for dwelling occupancy as defined in the housing law of the state; for the transaction of business; for the rendering of professional service, amusement, the display or sale or storage of goods, wares, merchandise, articles or equipment; for office buildings, public buildings, stores, theatres, markets, restaurants, grain processors, sheds, barns, and/or other structures or premises used as an accessory to any such uses. 
    Building inspector means the building inspector of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Food and foodstuffs means, besides human food, grain and other feed for animals or fowl. 
    Rat control means the distribution of rat poison and/or the setting of rat traps and/or fumigation and/or such other method of rat eradication as may be approved by the building inspector. 
    Rat harborage means any condition under which rats may find shelter or protection. 
    Ratproof or ratproofing means a form of construction which will prevent the ingress or egress of rats to or from a given space or building, or gaining access to food, water or harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed by the use of material impervious to rat gnawing of every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings and other places that may be reached and entered by rats by climbing, burrowing or other methods. 
(Code 1980, § 8.131) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-147. - Ratproofing required. 
    Every building and every alteration, addition, extension, enlargement or repairs thereto shall be ratproofed and maintained in such condition, and all vacant or unimproved property shall be kept free of rat harborage at all times. The owner or owners of such building, vacant or unimproved property shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1980, § 8.132) 
Sec. 14-148. - Rat harborage materials. 
    All building material, lumber, boxes, cartons, barrels, bottles, cans, containers, machinery, raw material, junk, fabricated goods, food, foodstuffs and similar things which may afford harborage or food for rats shall be kept, stored or handled in a manner or method approved by the building inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 8.133) 
Sec. 14-149. - Combatting infestation. 
    Whenever there is a rat infestation in any building, open area or other premises the occupants thereof, and in the case of a multiple dwelling the owner or owners thereof, shall immediately institute rat control and shall continuously maintain such measures until any such building, open area or other premises are declared by the building inspector to be free of rat infestation. 
(Code 1980, § 8.134) 
Sec. 14-150. - Food establishments. 
    No building or part thereof shall be used as a place where food and/or foodstuff is stored, processed, prepared or manufactured, sold or offered for sale unless such building or part thereof is free from vermin and rodents. 
(Code 1980, § 8.135) 
Sec. 14-151. - Food establishment licenses; approval prerequisite. 
    No license shall be issued for the storing, processing, preparing, manufacturing, selling or offering for sale of any food, foodstuff or food products until the applicant therefor secures a certification from the building inspector that the place where such operation is to be conducted is of ratproof construction or has been rendered ratproof. 
(Code 1980, § 8.136) 
Sec. 14-152. - New openings in buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, contractor, public utility, or any other person in making alterations, additions, extensions, enlargements or repairs, or in making installation of wires, conduits, pipes or like installations, or for any other purpose, to remove and fail to restore in like condition the ratproofing from any building or to make new openings therein that are not ratproofed. 
(Code 1980, § 8.137) 
Sec. 14-153. - Bird feeders. 
    No person shall feed wild birds other than in approved containers for the food elevated at least 48 inches above the ground level. 
(Code 1980, § 8.138) 
Sec. 14-154. - Additional regulations. 
    The building inspector is empowered to promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations for carrying out the purpose and intent of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 8.139) 
Secs. 14-155-14-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 14-176. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Swimming pool means a structure either above or below grade, useable for swimming, which has a normal water depth at any point in excess of 11/2 feet. 
(Code 1980, § 8.151) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-177. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain an outdoor swimming pool without first making application to the city clerk and obtaining a permit. 
(Code 1980, § 8.152) 
Sec. 14-178. - Permit application. 
    The application for a swimming pool permit shall show the name of the owner, the location of the proposed pool, the manner in which its use shall be supervised, the safety precautions to be made to protect those making use thereof, or who might be endangered thereby, and shall be accompanied by such other information necessary for the protection of the public health and safety as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 8.153) 
Sec. 14-179. - Safety measures. 
    No swimming pool shall be constructed, operated or conducted out-of-doors unless it is located within a fenced or walled enclosure of not less than four feet in height which is to be locked at all times when unattended or unless such other protection is provided as may be determined by the city manager to be reasonably expected to prevent trespassing children or adults from entering upon the premises and being injured, and which shall be of such construction as is approved by the building inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 8.154) 
Sec. 14-180. - Supervision. 
    No person shall maintain an outdoor swimming pool on his premises without providing adequate supervision at all times when the pool is in use so that no person may be injured or drowned therein. 
(Code 1980, § 8.155) 
Sec. 14-181. - Sanitation. 
    No outdoor swimming pool shall be used unless adequate public health measures are periodically taken to insure that the use thereof will not cause the spread of disease. The water of all pools shall be sterilized by chlorinated water. The current standards set by the state department of public health and the county department of public health to protect public health in the use of such swimming pools are hereby adopted and made a part of this article. During water shortages, the filling of swimming pools shall be regulated by the standards for lawn sprinkling. 
(Code 1980, § 8.156) 
Sec. 14-182. - Violations. 
    Any swimming pool installed, operated or maintained in violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a nuisance, and the city may, in addition to the penalties provided in section 1-13, maintain any proper action for the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 8.157) 
Secs. 14-183-14-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 365, § I, adopted April 24, 2006, amended article VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article VIII, §§ 14-206-14-214, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from §§ 8.193, 8.195-8.199 of the 1980 Code; Ord. No. 282, § 2(8.191), (8.192), (8.194), 8-16-93; Ord. No. 326, § 1, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 345, § I, 12-15-03. Subsequently, Ord. No. 401, § I, adopted May 16, 2011, amended said article to read as herein set out. 

Sec. 14-206. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 3(k) of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.3(k), as amended, the International Property Maintenance Code, as currently in effect under Michigan State Law, published by International Code Council, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as the "Property Maintenance Code"), is hereby found and declared to be an acceptable code and is hereby adopted by reference, as in this article modified, for the purpose of protecting the health, safety and welfare in buildings in the city and on the premises hereinafter provided by: 
(1)  Establishing minimum maintenance standards for all existing structures residential and non residential and on all existing premises for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating and sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, for safety from fire; for space, use and location; and for safe and sanitary maintenance of all structures and premises. 
(2)  Fixing the responsibilities of owner, operators and occupants of all structures. 
(3)  Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 365, § I, 4-26-06; Ord. No. 401, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-207. - Copy of file. 
    Complete printed copies of the Property Maintenance Code adopted in this article are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 365, § I, 4-24-06) 
Sec. 14-208. - References in code. 
    All references in the code adopted in this article to the "jurisdiction" and to any and all of the personnel, bureaus and/or subdivisions to the building department shall be read as referring to the City Manager of Grosse Pointe and such representative(s) as he may expressly designate, including the City Code official (building inspector). All references to the jurisdiction's attorney-at-law shall be read as referring to the City Attorney of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 365, § I, 4-26-06; Ord. No. 401, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-209. - Changes in code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Property Maintenance Code adopted in this article are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like-numbered sections of the Property Maintenance Code. 
Section 101.1. Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows: 
    101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Grosse Pointe hereinafter referred to as "this code". 
Section 103.2. Section 103.2 is amended to read as follows: 
    Section 103.2 Appointment: The code official shall be appointed by the city manager. 
Section 103.5. Section 103.5 is amended to read as follows: 
    103.5 Fees: The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be determined by the code official and set forth in a schedule. 
Section 106.4. Section 106.4 is modified to read as follows: 
    106.4 Violation penalties: The penalty for violations of the property maintenance code shall be as provided in section 1-19 of the Grosse Pointe City Code. 
Section 111.1. Section 111.1 is modified and amended to read as follows: 
    111.1 Application for appeal: The application for appeal, except in respect to insecure and unsafe buildings and equipment requiring immediate action, shall be referred to the board of appeals, and such board shall proceed to hear and determine the appeal. Such appeal must be filed within 30 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. 
    The person taking the appeal shall pay a fee of $100.00. If the appeal shall be decided against such person, the fee shall be retained by the board and paid into the department. If the appeal shall be decided in favor of such person, the fee shall be returned to such person. 
Section 111.2. Section 111.2 and all subsections of section 111.2 are modified to read as follows: 
    111.2 Membership of the board: The board of appeals shall consist of the duly elected members of the City Council of the City of Grosse Pointe as from time to time constituted. The mayor shall be the chairperson of the board. Four members shall be necessary for a quorum, with the chairperson entitle to vote. The city clerk shall act as the secretary to the board. 
Section 111.3. Section 111.3 is modified to read as follows: 
    111.3 Notice of meeting: The secretary of the board shall, at the order of the chairperson, call meetings of the board and shall notify the members thereof in writing at lease two working days in advance of such meetings. 
Section 111.4. Section 111.4 is deleted and reserved. 
Section 111.5. Section 111.5 is deleted and reserved. 
Section 111.6. Section 111.6 is modified to read as follows: 
    111.6 Board decision: No matter shall be determined except by a majority of all members present and in no case shall any motion be passed without at least four affirmative votes. 
Section 202. Section 202 is modified and amended to include the following: 
    Section 202 General definitions: For the definition of "dwelling" and "family" to be used as part of this chapter, see chapter 90, pertaining to zoning, of the City Code. If there is any conflict between a definition in this chapter and a definition in chapter 90 of the City Code, the definition in chapter 90 of the City Code shall control. 
Section 302.3. Section 302.3 is modified to read as follows: 
    Section 302.3 Public areas: Sidewalks on public rights-of-way shall be maintained in accordance with chapter 66 of the City Code. All other sidewalks and driveways shall be maintained in a manner that prevents them from falling into a state of disrepair or becoming unsafe. 
Section 304.11. Section 304.11 is modified and amended to include the following: 
    Section 304.11 Chimneys and towers: All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. All chimneys shall be equipped with a screen cover. 
Section 304.13.2. Section 304.13.2 is modified and amended to include the following: 
    Section 304.13.2 Openable windows: Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. Windows need not open if room is provided with adequate ventilation through air conditioning or other appropriate means. 
Section 304.14. Section 304.14 is amended and restated as follows: 
    Section 304.14 Insect screens: During the period from April 1 to October 31, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
    Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
Section 307.3. Section 307.3 and all subsections of 307.3 are modified to read as follows: 
    307.3 Disposal of garbage: Requirements of chapter 62 of the City Code shall apply. 
Sections 402.1 and 403.1. Sections 402.1 and 403.1 are modified to read as follows: 
    402.1 and 403.1 Habitable spaces: Every bedroom shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every bedroom shall be ten percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any bedroom and such obstructions are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the bedroom, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the bedroom. Every other habitable room shall have adequate light provided by natural or artificial means. 
Section 602.3. Section 602.3 is modified to read as follows: 
    602.3 Heat supply: Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 1 to June 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F (18° C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
    Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
Section 602.4. Section 602.4 is modified to read as follows: 
    602.4 Occupiable work spaces: Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with the heat during the period from September 1 to June 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F (18° C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
    Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(Ord. No. 365, § I, 4-26-06; Ord. No. 401, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-210. - Certificate of occupancy, conformance with minimum standards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or for any owner or agent thereof to permit the occupation of any dwelling or structure or part thereof, for any purpose, unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building department with respect to such dwelling or structure under a date which is not more than three years prior to the date of the occupation. The certificate of occupancy shall state that the building department has inspected the dwelling or structure and that the department has determined that the dwelling or structure may be occupied. The certificate of occupancy shall bear this legend in capital letters or boldface type: "THIS CERTIFICATE DOES NOT CONSTITUTE ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY AS TO THE CONDITION OF THE DWELLING OR OTHER STRUCTURES ON THE PREMISES DESCRIBED HEREIN (OR ANY ASPECT OF SUCH CONDITION), AND INTERESTED PERSONS ARE ADVISED AND ENCOURAGED TO MAKE THEIR OWN INSPECTION OF THE PREMISES IN ORDER TO DETERMINE THE CONDITION THEREOF." 
    This section shall not apply to any occupancy in existence on October 21, 1974. 
(Ord. No. 365, § I, 4-26-06; Ord. No. 401, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-211. - Application and fee for certificate of occupancy. 
    Application for a certificate of occupancy may be made by the owner, or his designated agent, of a dwelling upon a form provided by the building department and the payment of an inspection fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 365, § I, 4-26-06; Ord. No. 401, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-212. - Inspection; conformance with minimum standards. 
    Upon receipt of the application and fee for a certificate of occupancy, an inspector shall inspect the owner's dwelling within ten days and, if such dwelling is in conformance with the minimum standards set forth in the code adopted in this article, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. If the dwelling is not in conformance with the aforementioned minimum standards, the inspector shall request remedy thereof and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such standards are complied with to the reasonable satisfaction of the inspector. 
(Ord. No. 365, § I, 4-26-06; Ord. No. 401, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-213. - Conditional certificate of occupancy. 
    If for any reason an owner or purchaser requests that a certificate of occupancy is issued prior to complete conformance with the minimum standards of this Code and if the absence of complete conformance does not, in the judgment of the inspector, constitute material health or safety hazards, a conditional certificate of occupancy may be issued upon the condition that complete conformance be achieved within a reasonable time specified by the inspector, not less than seven days, and the owner's or purchaser's assurance that complete conformance will be achieved by deposit with the city of an amount determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. In the event of issuance of a conditional certificate of occupancy, the owner or purchaser shall notify the inspector, by or before the end of the time period specified by the inspector for achieving conformance, that the conformance has been achieved, and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued and the owner's or purchaser's bond returned if the inspector is satisfied as to the owner's or purchaser's compliance. If the owner or purchaser fails to comply as agreed, the building department may use so much of the cash or bond necessary to instigate legal action to secure conformance or to undertake the specified work with return of any balance to the owner or purchaser. If the amount of cash or the bond is not sufficient to cover the entire cost of conformance, then any additional cost shall be charged against the premises and the owner of the premises, and shall be collected as provided for single-lot assessments in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 365, § I, 4-26-06; Ord. No. 401, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-214. - Access for repairs. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or structure shall give the owner or his authorized agent (which may include the building department or its designees effecting repairs or alterations pursuant to cash or bond) access to the dwelling and any accessory building at any reasonable time for purposes of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to ensure compliance with this article and enable the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 365, § I, 4-26-06; Ord. No. 401, § I, 5-16-11) 
Secs. 14-215-14-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE 

Sec. 14-236. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 3(k) of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.3(k), as amended, the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., National Energy Conservation Code/1993, seventh edition (referred to in this article as the BOCA National Energy Conservation Code), is hereby found and declared to be an acceptable code and is adopted by reference in this article to provide effective minimum requirements for the efficient consumption of energy resources in buildings and structures, existing and proposed, in the city. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 1(8.301), 8-16-93) 
Sec. 14-237. - Copies on file. 
    Complete printed copies of the BOCA National Energy Conservation Code adopted in this article are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 2(8.302), 8-16-93) 
Sec. 14-238. - References in code. 
    All references in the BOCA National Energy Conservation Code adopted in this article to the "name of jurisdiction" shall be read as referring to the City of Grosse Pointe. All references to the "building official" shall be read as referring to the City Manager of Grosse Pointe or such representative as he may designate, including the city building inspector. All references to the "legal officer" of the jurisdiction shall be read as referring to the City Attorney of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 3(8.303), 8-16-93) 
Secs. 14-239-14-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HOUSE MOVING 

Sec. 14-261. - Permit. 
    No person shall move, transport or convey any building, machinery, truck or trailer, more than eight feet eight inches wide or higher than 13 feet six inches above the surface of the roadway, into, across or along any street, or other public place in the city, without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector. The applicant shall file written clearances from the light, telephone, gas and water utilities, stating that all connections have been properly cut off and, where necessary, all obstructions along proposed route of moving will be removed without delaying moving operations. In addition, clearance shall be obtained from the public safety department, approving the proposed route through the city streets and the time of moving, together with an estimated cost to the public safety department due to the moving operations. The applicant shall deposit with the city the total estimated cost to the public safety department and department of public works, plus a cash deposit as required by section 66-28 and shall file with the city a liability insurance policy in the amount of $100,000.00 for injury to one person and $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person and property damage insurance in the amount of $300,000.00. 
(Code 1980, § 4.26) 
Secs. 14-262-14-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - MICHIGAN REHABILITATION CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 400, § I, adopted May 16, 2011, amended Article XI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Article XI, §§ 14-271-14-274, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 386, § I, 6-15-09. 

Sec. 14-271. - Adoption of code by reference. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings, and in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972 (MCL 125.1508a), as amended, the Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings as currently in effect under Michigan State Law, incorporating the International Existing Buildings Code, is adopted by reference, except as modified below. The Building Official of the City of Grosse Pointe is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Grosse Pointe under the Code. The City of Grosse Pointe assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said code throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 386, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 400, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-272. - Copies on file. 
    Complete printed copies of the Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings adopted in this article are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 386, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 400, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-273. - References in code. 
    All references in the Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings to the "name of jurisdiction" shall be read as referring to the City of Grosse Pointe. All references to the "building official" shall be read as referring to the city manager of the City of Grosse Pointe or such representative as he may designate, including the City of Grosse Pointe Building Inspector. All references to the "legal officer" of the jurisdiction shall be read as referring to the city attorney of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 386, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 400, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 14-274. - Changes in code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like-numbered sections of the Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings. 
Section R108.1. Section R108.1 is modified to read as follows: 
    R108.1 Fees: Fees for inspections and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be collected by the city treasurer in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. The amounts of such fees shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of the city council, and shall cover the cost of the inspection, supervision and enforcement under the Code. 
Section R112. Section R112 is amended and re-stated in its entirety as follows: 
    R112.1 Application for appeal: The application for appeal, except in respect to insecure and unsafe building and equipment requiring immediate action, shall be referred to the board of appeals, and such board shall proceed to hear and determine the appeal. 
    The person taking the appeal shall pay a fee of $100.00. If the appeal shall be decided against such person, the fee shall be retained by the board and paid into the department. If the appeal shall be decided in favor of such person, the fee shall be returned to such person. 
    R112.2. Membership of the board: The board of appeals shall consist of the duly elected members of the City Council of the City of Grosse Pointe as from time to time constituted. The mayor shall be the chairperson of the board. Four members shall be necessary for a quorum, with the chairperson entitled to vote. The city clerk shall act as the secretary of the board. 
    R112.3. Notice of meeting: The secretary of the board shall, at the order of the chairperson, call meetings of the board and shall notify the members thereof in writing at least two working days in advance of such meetings. 
    R112.4. Board decision : No matter shall be determined except by a majority of all members present and in no case shall any motion be passed without at least four affirmative votes. 
(Ord. No. 386, § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 400, § I, 5-16-11) 
Secs. 14-275-14-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 14-300. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Alarm system. The term alarm system shall mean an assembly of equipment and devices, or a single device, except for an alarm system on a motor vehicle, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention to which the public safety department is expected to respond. 
    False alarm. The term false alarm means the activation of an alarm system causing a sound or visual signal through mechanical failure, faulty equipment, malfunction, improper installations, or the negligent or improper or mistaken use by the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents which shall be established when there is no evidence of criminal activity, or illegal entry or an attempt thereof, fire or need for medical attention upon the activation of the alarm system with the following exceptions: 
(1)  False alarms caused by severe storm conditions. 
(2)  Alarm system malfunction, if corrective measures have been taken or installed within five days thereafter, and a copy of a repair order by a licensed alarm system contractor is provided within 30 days of the false alarm. 
(3)  False alarms that can be substantiated as being activated by disruption or disturbance of utility company facilities. 
(4)  False alarms caused by testing of the alarm system when prior notification has been received by the public safety department. 
(5)  Where the false alarm has been excused by the director of public safety because there has been a request for waiver due to documented extenuating circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 394, § I, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 14-301. - Automatic dialing prohibited. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell, install, use, operate, adjust, arrange for, or contract to provide a device or combination of devices that will, upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by other means initiate the automatic calling, dialing or connection directly to the public safety department telephone number without the express written consent of the public safety department. 
(Ord. No. 394, § I, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 14-302. - Registration required by owner. 
    Any person, firm or corporation who owns, leases or occupies premises in which an alarm system is installed, used, or maintained shall register such alarm system with the department of public safety on forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 394, § I, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 14-303. - Registration fees. 
    An annual registration fee of $20.00 is set to cover administrative costs to record the alarm location and contact personnel. Failure to annually register an alarm system shall result in a fine of $50.00. 
(Ord. No. 394, § I, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 14-304. - Name, address and phone numbers required. 
    A person, firm or corporation who registers a system with the department of public safety shall provide name, telephone number and address of the premises where the alarm system is located, and also the name and telephone number of at least one other person, firm or corporation who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who, within a reasonable response time, can open the premises in which the alarm system is installed and deactivate the audible and/or visible signal. This information is to be updated at least annually with a re-registration of the alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 394, § I, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 14-305. - Automatic shutoff required. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation to maintain and operate an alarm system equipped with audible signal(s) (bells, horns, sirens, etc.) that is not equipped with a shutoff device that automatically silences the audible signal(s) within ten minutes of said signal activation. This section shall not apply to fire alarm systems. 
(Ord. No. 394, § I, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 14-306. - Existing alarm systems. 
    Persons, firms or corporations using, owning, leasing, or occupying a premises in which an alarm system exists on January 2, 2011 shall comply with the requirements of this article by June 1, 2011, and shall be jointly and severally liable for violations of this section. 
(Ord. No. 394, § I, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 14-307. - Violations. 
    Except as specified in section 14-300(b), the occurrence of a false alarm or other prohibition of this article shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be punishable as a civil infraction by imposition of civil fines as follows: 
(a)  First activation requiring a response by public safety department within a fiscal year (July 1-June 30) ..... No charge 
(b)  Second and each subsequent activation requiring a response by the public safety department, within a fiscal year (July 1-June 30): 
Residential ..... $30.00 
Commercial ..... $100.00 
(c)  Late fees of two percent per month or part of month shall apply to any outstanding balance 30 days past the invoice date or older. 
(d)  In the event the above-specified fees are not paid by the June 1 subsequent to the invoice, then all such fees and penalties shall become a lien upon the land where the alarm system is located and may be collected by the addition of same to the tax rolls or assessments imposed by the city on the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 394, § I, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 14-308. - Licensing and regulation of alarm installers. 
(a)  License required by installer. It shall be a violation of this section for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the business of installing an alarm system unless such person has been licensed by the State of Michigan in accordance with Public Act No. 190 of 1975 as amended (MCL 338.1051). 
(b)  Misrepresentation by alarm contractor. It shall be a violation of this section for any person, firm or corporation who is an alarm contractor, or its agent, to knowingly misrepresent any services rendered to an alarm user. 
(c)  Violations. All violations of this section by any person, firm or corporation shall be considered a civil infraction and punishable by a civil fine of up to $500.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 394, § I, 12-13-10) 
Secs. 14-309-14-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - FLOOD-PRONE HAZARD AREAS 

Sec. 14-400. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Code Official of the City of Grosse Pointe is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Grosse Pointe under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Grosse Pointe assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act through out the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 403, § I, 1-23-12) 
Sec. 14-401. - Code appendix enforced. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 403, § I, 1-23-12) 
Sec. 14-402. - Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled "Wayne County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)" and dated 2/2/12 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26163C0145E dated 2/2/12 are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 403, § I, 1-23-12) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; adult business uses, § 42-90 et seq.; alcoholic liquors, ch. 6; private contractors collecting refuse, § 62-31 et seq.; zoning, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONDUCT OF BUSINESS OR LABOR ON SUNDAY 

Sec. 18-26. - Sunday sales. 
    No person shall conduct or engage in the public selling, or any auctioneering, public or private, of furniture in the city on the first day of each week, commonly called Sunday; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any person who conscientiously believes that the seventh day of the week, from sunset Friday to sunset Saturday, shall be observed as the Sabbath and actually refrains from performing secular business or labor on that day. 
(Code 1980, § 9.121) 
Sec. 18-27. - Permitting use of premises for sales. 
    No person shall allow premises in the city of which he is in possession be used for the public selling, or any auctioneering, public or private, of furniture on the first day of each week, commonly called Sunday; provided that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any person who conscientiously believes that the seventh day of the week, from sunset Friday to sunset Saturday, should be observed as the Sabbath and actually refrains from performing secular business or labor on that day. 
(Code 1980, § 9.122) 
Sec. 18-28. - Conducting or engaging in business or labor for profit or operating a place of business open to public on Sunday. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or anyone acting in behalf of any person, whether owner, proprietor, agent or employee, in the city, to conduct or engage in business or labor for profit or to operate a place of business open to the public except from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., and with further exception that drug stores, which have available for sales drugs, medical and surgical supplies available for purchase on the written prescription of a licensed medical doctor of doctor of dentistry, restaurants and automobile service stations may operate from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, on the first day of the week, commonly called Sunday. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to works of necessity and charity. The provisions contained in this section shall not be applicable to any persons who conscientiously believe that the seventh day of the week should be observed as the Sabbath and actually refrain from such secular business or labor on that day. 
(Code 1980, § 9.123(a); Ord. No. 295, § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 306, § 1, 12-15-97) 
Sec. 18-29. - Penalty. 
    Any person or anyone acting in behalf of any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment in accordance with terms and provisions of section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, § 9.123(b)) 
Secs. 18-30-18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES 

Sec. 18-51. - Required. 
    No person shall engage or be engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which any license is required by any provision of this Code without first obtaining such license from the city in the manner provided for in this chapter. Any person duly licensed on the effective date of this Code shall be deemed licensed under this chapter for the balance of the current license year. 
(Code 1980, §§ 7.1, 7.31) 
Sec. 18-52. - Multiple businesses. 
    The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting or carrying on any trade, profession, business or privilege which contains within itself, or is composed of, trades, professions, businesses or privileges which are required by this Code to be licensed shall not relieve the person to whom such license or permit is granted from the necessity of securing individual licenses or permits for each such trade, profession, business or privilege. 
(Code 1980, § 7.2) 
Sec. 18-53. - State-licensed businesses. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall not exempt such person from the necessity of securing a license or permit from the city if such license or permit is required by this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 7.3) 
Sec. 18-54. - Application. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, every person required to obtain a license from the city to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall make application for license to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city clerk and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such license. 
(Code 1980, § 7.4) 
Sec. 18-55. - License year. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter as to certain licenses, the license year shall begin March 1 of each year and shall terminate at midnight on the last day of February of the following year. 
(b)  Original licenses shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee. License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued for a period of 15 days prior to the annual expiration date. In all cases where the provisions of this Code permit the issuance of licenses for periods of less than one year, the effective date of such licenses shall commence with the date of issuance of the license. 
(Code 1980, § 7.5) 
Sec. 18-56. - Conditions for issuance. 
(a)  No license or permit required by this Code shall be issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the state, until the person shall submit evidence of such state license or permit and proof that all fees appertaining thereto have been paid. No license shall be granted to any applicant until the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this Code applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which application for license is made. 
(b)  The city council shall cause the city clerk to issue any license required by this chapter upon the council finding that: 
(1)  The person, owner or proprietor applying therefor shall not within a period of three years have been found guilty of violating any law, including this Code, relating to the carrying on of any business. 
(2)  The operation by the applicant of the business, store, counter or service will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the city. 
(3)  The applicant is not in arrears to the city in respect to the payment of any previous license fee or city taxes. 
(Code 1980, §§ 7.6, 7.32) 
Sec. 18-57. - Where certification required. 
    No license shall be granted where the certification of any officer of the city is required prior to the issuance thereof, until such certification is made. 
(Code 1980, § 7.7) 
Sec. 18-58. - Health officer's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the health officer is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the person making application and the premises in which he proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the sanitary requirements of the state and of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 7.8) 
Sec. 18-59. - Compliance with fire regulations. 
    In all cases where the certification of the director of public safety (acting as fire chief) is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the premises in which the person making application for such license proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the fire regulations of the state and of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 7.9) 
Sec. 18-60. - Director of public safety's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the director of public safety (acting as police chief)is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon a finding that the person making application for such license is of good moral character. 
(Code 1980, § 7.10) 
Sec. 18-61. - Building inspector's certificate. 
    In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a license therefor shall not be issued until the building inspector shall certify that the proposed use is not prohibited by chapter 54 or chapter 90 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 7.11) 
Sec. 18-62. - Bonds. 
    Where the provisions of this Code require that the applicant for any license or permit furnish a bond, such bond shall be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the proper city officer, or, where the amount thereof is specified in the schedule of fees and bonds set out in this chapter or elsewhere in this Code, in the amount so required; the form of such bond shall be acceptable to the city attorney. In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one or more policies of insurance in the same amounts and providing the same protection as called for in any such bond. Any such policies of insurance shall be approved as to substance by the city official issuing the license or permit and as to form by the city attorney. 
(Code 1980, § 7.12) 
Sec. 18-63. - Late renewals. 
    All fees for the renewal of any license which are not paid at the time the fees are due may be paid without penalty for the first 30 days that the license fee remains unpaid. Thereafter the license fee shall be that stipulated for such licenses under this chapter, plus 50 percent of the fee. 
(Code 1980, § 7.13) 
Sec. 18-64. - Right to issuance. 
    If the application for any license is approved by the proper officers of the city, as provided in this Code, the license shall be granted and shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed for the license. 
(Code 1980, § 7.14) 
Sec. 18-65. - Payment of fees. 
    The fee required by this Code for any license or permit shall be paid at the office of the city treasurer upon or before the granting of the license or permit. 
(Code 1980, § 7.15) 
Cross reference- Fees and bonds, § 18-96 et seq. 
Sec. 18-66. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any license issued by the city may be suspended by the city manager for cause, and any permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the issuing authority for cause, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code. The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city council on any such action of the city manager, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within five days after receipt of the notice of such suspension. The city council may confirm the suspension or revoke or reinstate any such license. The action taken by the city council shall be final. The same procedure shall apply where a license application is denied. Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee therefor shall not be refunded. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new license for the trade, profession, business or privilege for a period of one year after such revocation. 
(Code 1980, § 7.16) 
Sec. 18-67. - "Cause" defined. 
    The term "cause," as used in this chapter, shall include the making of fraudulent or false statements in the application and/or the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist in connection with any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license or permit is granted under the provisions of this Code, or upon any premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is: 
(1)  Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public. 
(2)  Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature. 
(3)  Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit granted. 
(4)  Forbidden by the provisions of this Code or any duly established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license or permit has been granted. 
(Code 1980, § 7.17) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-68. - Renewal. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Code 1980, § 7.18) 
Sec. 18-69. - Exhibition of license generally. 
    No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter upon his person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted; except, that where such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, the license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in his place of business. Every licensee shall produce his license for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any city public safety officer or by any person representing the issuing authority. 
(Code 1980, § 7.19) 
Sec. 18-70. - Exhibition on vehicle, machine. 
    No licensee shall fail to display conspicuously on each vehicle or mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this Code such tags or stickers as are furnished by the city clerk for such purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 7.20) 
Sec. 18-71. - Displaying invalid license. 
    No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1980, § 7.21) 
Sec. 18-72. - Hours of operation of businesses. 
    Any trade, profession, business or privilege required to be licensed under this Code shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., except that any business required to be licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission as an "on premise" licensee shall be closed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. After application and hearing before the city council, the city council may amend the hours stated above if the city council determines it to be in the interest of the public health and welfare to allow the business to operate during the prohibited hours. 
(Ord. No. 254, § 1(7.23), 3-20-89; Ord. No. 428, § I, 1-23-17) 
Sec. 18-73. - Transferability; misuse. 
    No license or permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code. No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, transfer or attempt to transfer his license or permit to another nor shall he make any improper use of the same. 
(Code 1980, § 7.22) 
Sec. 18-74. - Business license fee. 
    All businesses located in the city that engage in the sale of food, goods, wares, and/or merchandise in the usual course of business are required to pay an annual license fee set by resolution of the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1980, § 7.33; Ord. No. 393, § I, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 18-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 393, § II, adopted December 13, 2010, repealed § 18-75, which pertained to additional license fees and derived from § 7.34 of the 1980 Code. 
Secs. 18-76-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-121. - Uninvited entry prohibited. 
    The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by canvassers, solicitors, so-called agents, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of the private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, and/or for the purpose of disposing of and/or peddling or hawking the same, and/or for the purpose of displaying such goods, wares and merchandise, and/or for the purpose of soliciting or procuring contributions or donations in exchange for or in connection with the distribution of goods, wares, merchandise or other things, having become persistent, frequent and common, being a great annoyance to such owner or occupant and to the public at large, as well as in many instances resulting in the defrauding of such owner or occupant, and in some instances various violations of the laws while upon such premises, and being in general injurious to the public welfare, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and is prohibited and punishable, as such public nuisance, as a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 7.51) 
Secs. 18-122-18-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PEDDLERS 

Sec. 18-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler shall include any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or other conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, or other vehicle or conveyance. Any person who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a peddler. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
(Code 1980, § 7.61) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-132. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of peddler without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the director of public safety. If the applicant proposes to peddle food, no license shall be issued until he has obtained a foodhandlers card as required by chapter 38. 
(Code 1980, § 7.62) 
Sec. 18-133. - Fixed stands prohibited. 
    No peddler shall stop or remain in any one place upon any street, alley or public place longer than necessary to make a sale to a customer wishing to buy. Any peddler using a vehicle, when stopped, shall place his vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the curb and shall depart from such place as soon as he has completed sales with customers actually present. 
(Code 1980, § 7.63) 
Sec. 18-134. - Prohibited areas. 
    No peddler, in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or driveway except as may be necessary and reasonable to consummate a sale, nor remain, barter, sell, offer or expose for sale any goods, wares or merchandise in front of or at the side of any property against the wish or desire of the property owner or the tenant or occupant of the property. No peddler shall engage in peddling on any street, alley or public place after having been requested to desist by any public safety officer of the city because of congested or dangerous traffic conditions. 
(Code 1980, § 7.64) 
Sec. 18-135. - Attention-getting practices prohibited. 
    No peddler shall shout or cry out his goods or merchandise, nor blow any horns, ring any bell or use any other similar device to attract the attention of the public. 
(Code 1980, § 7.65) 
Sec. 18-136. - Curb service prohibited. 
    No person shall operate or maintain any stand, vehicle, store or place of business on or near to any highway in such a manner that the customers of or traders with such person occupy or congregate within the limits of any street, lane, highway or public place within the city. No person shall be permitted to use the streets, alleys, lanes or public places of the city for the service of customers or for the transaction of business, or to use any stands, stores or other places of business in any manner that shall require the customer, when transacting business, to stand within the limits of the streets, highways, alleys or public places of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 7.66) 
Sec. 18-137. - Exempt persons. 
    The following shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this division but shall be subject to the other provisions of this division: 
(1)  Any person under 18 years of age, when engaged in peddling on foot in the neighborhood of his residence under the direct supervision of any school or recognized charitable or religious organization. 
(2)  Food peddlers licensed under the provisions of state statutes. 
(Code 1980, § 7.67) 
Secs. 18-138-18-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOLICITORS 

Sec. 18-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Solicitor shall include any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, books or magazines, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, and such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The word "solicitor" shall include the word "canvasser." 
(Code 1980, § 7.81) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-152. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of solicitor within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the director of public safety. 
(Code 1980, § 7.82) 
Sec. 18-153. - License application. 
    The license application filed under the provisions of this division shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, is manufactured or produced, where the goods or products are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches in size, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners of the county who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business respectability, or, in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(Code 1980, § 7.83) 
Sec. 18-154. - License fees. 
    The fees for a solicitor's license shall be as specified in section 18-74. No fee for a solicitor's license shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, he may apply to the city manager for an adjustment of the fees so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. The application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the city manager may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on commerce. The city manager shall then conduct an investigation, comparing the applicant's business with other businesses of like nature, and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee fixed for the solicitor's license is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to the applicant's business and shall fix as the license fee for the applicant an amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or, if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the city manager shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or any other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the fee as prescribed by section 18-74. Should the city manager determine the gross sales measure of the fee to be the fair basis, he may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of the applicant's business in the city or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross sales and pay the amount of fee therefor; provided, that no additional fee during any one license year shall be required after the licensee has paid an amount equal to the annual license fee as prescribed in section 18-74. 
(Code 1980, § 7.84; Ord. No. 393, § III, 12-13-10) 
Sec. 18-155. - Exempt persons. 
    Persons under 18 years of age, when engaged in soliciting on foot in the neighborhood of their residence under the direct supervision of any school or recognized charitable or religious organization, shall be exempt from the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1980, § 7.85) 
Secs. 18-156-18-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAXICABS AND TAXICAB DRIVERS 

Sec. 18-176. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle designed for transportation of ten or fewer persons for hire upon a trip or mileage basis, and not operating on regularly scheduled runs. 
(Code 1980, § 7.101) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-177. - Taxicab license. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating or causing to be operated any taxicab upon the streets, alleys or public ways of the city without first having obtained a license for each such taxicab. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the director of public safety and upon approval of the city council. Picking up passengers within the city shall be deemed engaging in the taxicab business, but discharging passengers in the city when the trip originated from a point outside the city shall not be so construed. 
(Code 1980, § 7.102) 
Sec. 18-178. - Taximeters. 
    No license shall be issued until a taximeter has been installed in the taxicab to be licensed and the taximeter has been inspected, tested and approved by the director of public safety or by such person as he may designate. After issuance of any license, taximeters shall be inspected, tested and approved at such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by the director of public safety by regulation adopted pursuant to the terms of this article. A service fee of $2.00 shall be charged for each inspection. Every taximeter shall have the case thereof sealed and the cover and gear thereof intact. Every taximeter shall be sealed by or under the direction of the director of public safety. No person shall remove or tamper with the seal of any taximeter. No person shall engage in business with any taxicab when the taximeter affixed thereto is not in proper working order or the seal of the taximeter is broken or has been tampered with. Every taximeter shall be so affixed that the amount of the fare is plainly visible to the passengers and after sundown the taximeter shall be clearly illuminated. Upon any rate change made pursuant to this article, every taximeter shall be reinspected and tested and approved. No such rate change shall be effective as to any taxicab until approval and resealing of the taximeter of such taxicab by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1980, § 7.103) 
Sec. 18-179. - New licenses. 
    Upon application made for any new taxicab license, as distinguished from any renewal thereof, the city council shall first consider the question of whether public convenience and necessity require the operation of such taxicab. The council shall consider the number of taxicabs operating in the city and whether the demands of the public require additional taxicab service; traffic conditions on the streets of the city and whether the additional taxicab service will result in a greater hazard to the public and such other relevant facts as the council may deem advisable. The judgment of the council on the question of public necessity and convenience shall be conclusive. 
(Code 1980, § 7.104) 
Sec. 18-180. - Change in ownership; effect on license. 
    When the ownership of any taxicab shall change, whether by operation of law or otherwise, the taxicab license pertaining to such taxicab shall be automatically revoked. Any transfer of, or attempt to transfer, a taxicab license to any other person shall automatically revoke the license. 
(Code 1980, § 7.105) 
Sec. 18-181. - Transfer of license between vehicles. 
    The owner of any licensed taxicab who desires to transfer such license to another vehicle owned by him shall make application to the city clerk on forms provided therefor, and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts as may be required for, or applicable to, such transfer. Upon approval of the director of public safety such transfer shall be granted. 
(Code 1980, § 7.106) 
Sec. 18-182. - License plates. 
    Upon issuance of any taxicab license, the city clerk shall furnish the licensee a metal license plate for each vehicle so licensed. 
(Code 1980, § 7.107) 
Sec. 18-183. - Insurance. 
    Before any license is issued under this article, the applicant therefor shall furnish one or more policies of insurance issued by responsible insurance companies providing indemnity for the insured in the amounts specified in this section and agreeing to pay, within the limits of the amounts on behalf of the insured, all sums which the insured shall become obligated to pay by reason of the liability imposed upon the insured by law, for damages because of bodily injury, including death, at any time resulting therefrom, or for damages to property, or both, sustained by any person other than the employees of the insured and caused by accident and arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of the licensed taxicab. The minimum amount of insurance coverage as to any one licensed taxicab shall be: 
(1)  On account of injury to, or death of, any person in any one accident: $100,000.00. 
(2)  On account of any one accident resulting in injury to, or death of, more than one person: $300,000.00. 
(3)  On account of damage to property in any one accident: $300,000.00. 
(Code 1980, § 7.108) 
Sec. 18-184. - Surety bonds. 
    In lieu of insurance required by section 18-183, the licensee may furnish a surety company bond, in a form to be approved by the city attorney, in penal sums of not less for each taxicab than the amounts specified for insurance, and binding the principal and surety to the same conditions as are required in insurance policies as set forth in section 18-183. 
(Code 1980, § 7.109) 
Sec. 18-185. - Insurance cancellation notice. 
    Every insurance policy or bond required pursuant to this article shall contain a clause obligating the insurer or surety to give the city clerk, by registered mail, at least ten days' written notice before the cancellation, expiration, lapse or other termination of each insurance policy or bond or the withdrawal of surety from any such bond. 
(Code 1980, § 7.110) 
Sec. 18-186. - Rates. 
    All fares and charges for the use of taxicabs shall be determined by resolution of the city council following a hearing held by the council at a regular meeting. All taxicab licensees shall be notified of any such hearing by mail. The term "waiting time" as used in any schedule of rates and charges shall include time when the taxicab is not in motion beginning with the arrival at the place to which it has been called, or the time consumed while standing at the direction of any passenger, but shall not include time lost because of inefficiency of the taxicab or its operator, or time consumed by premature response to a call or by traffic delays. 
(Code 1980, § 7.111) 
Sec. 18-187. - Taxicab driver licenses. 
    No person shall drive a taxicab on the streets of the city without first having obtained a taxicab driver license. Applications for such license shall be made to and licenses issued by the department of public safety. No such license shall be granted except upon certification by the director of public safety, and unless a photograph and complete set of the fingerprints of the applicant therefor are on file in the noncriminal identification file of the department of public safety. Two photographic pictures of each applicant shall be furnished at the time of application. The size and form of such photographs shall be prescribed by the department of public safety. That part of section 18-69 requiring licensees to carry licenses on their persons shall not apply to taxicab drivers. The license issued to a taxicab driver shall be conspicuously displayed on the inside of the taxicab operated by him and illuminated at night. Every applicant shall be 21 years of age or over and able to read and write. Every applicant shall furnish the public safety department with such information as it may require and as may be reasonably necessary in order to investigate the background and character of the applicant. As an additional reason for refusal of certification, in the case of taxicab drivers, the director of public safety shall refuse to certify any person whose record of previous driving violations is such as to indicate that he is not habitually a careful, skilled and prudent driver. In the discretion of the director of public safety, a temporary taxicab driver license, valid for a period not to exceed 20 days, may be issued to any applicant pending certification by the director. 
(Code 1980, § 7.112) 
Sec. 18-188. - Physical examination of drivers. 
    Each applicant for a taxicab driver license shall at his own expense be required to submit to a medical examination by a duly licensed physician of his own choosing, and the results of such examination shall be reduced to writing by such physician on a form furnished by the public safety department. Such report of examination signed by the physician shall be attached to the application for a taxicab driver license. Upon any application for a taxicab driver license from a person who then holds such a license, the physical examination required by this section shall be waived, unless no such examination shall have been had, and a report thereof furnished to the city, for longer than two years immediately preceding the application. 
(Code 1980, § 7.113) 
Sec. 18-189. - Misuse of driver licenses. 
    No person having a taxicab driver license shall allow any other person to use or attempt to use such license, for any purpose. No person shall use or have in his possession, while operating a taxicab in the city, any taxicab driver license which has been issued to any other person. No taxicab licensee shall permit any person not having a taxicab driver license to operate any taxicab. 
(Code 1980, § 7.114) 
Sec. 18-190. - Reciprocal recognition. 
    Any taxicab or taxicab driver lawfully licensed to be operated or to drive a taxicab in any municipality in the county may be operated or permitted to drive a taxicab in the city upon registration of the taxicab license or the taxicab drivers' license with the city clerk. Registration fees shall be as stated in sections 18-98 and 18-99 and shall expire concurrently with the license of the issuing municipality. This section shall not apply unless the ordinance under which the license is issued is substantially equal to the requirements of this Code, nor unless the licensing municipality reciprocates in recognizing taxicab and taxicab drivers' licenses issued under the provisions of this Code by granting the same operating and driving privileges upon registration. 
(Code 1980, § 7.115) 
Sec. 18-191. - Lost articles. 
    Every taxicab driver, immediately after the termination of any hiring or employment, shall carefully search such taxicab for any property lost or left therein, and any such property unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner shall be taken to the headquarters of the public safety department and deposited with the officer in charge within 24 hours after the finding of the article. 
(Code 1980, § 7.116) 
Sec. 18-192. - Passengers. 
    Every taxicab driver shall have the right to demand payment of the legal fare in advance, and may refuse employment until so prepaid, but no taxicab driver shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon request anywhere in the city unless previously engaged or unable to do so. No driver of any licensed taxicab shall carry any other person than the passenger first employing a taxicab without the consent of the first passenger. 
(Code 1980, § 7.117) 
Sec. 18-193. - Soliciting bus passengers. 
    No driver of any taxicab shall solicit persons who are waiting to take passage on a bus at an established loading point for such bus. 
(Code 1980, § 7.118) 
Sec. 18-194. - Operating rules and regulations. 
    The director of public safety is hereby empowered, subject to approval by the city council, to make such rules and regulations regarding the dress and conduct of drivers and the maintenance, marking and operation of taxicabs as may be necessary in the interest of providing safe and orderly service to passengers, and no person shall fail to comply with any such rule or regulation. Upon adoption or change in any such rule or regulation, notice shall be furnished to each taxicab licensee and taxicab driver licensee. The director of public safety may require periodic reports to be submitted by operators and drivers in order to assist in the enforcement of such rules and regulations or the terms of this article. Until changed or added to in the manner provided in this section, the following rules and regulations shall be applicable to taxicabs and taxicab drivers: 
(1)  It shall be the duty of every person driving or operating a taxicab to be courteous, to refrain from smoking while actually carrying passengers in his taxicab, to refrain from swearing, loud talking or boisterous conduct, to drive his motor vehicle carefully and in full compliance with the traffic regulations of the city and orders of the public safety officers of the city, to promptly answer all court notices, traffic violation notices or public safety notices, to deal honestly with the public and with his employer. 
(2)  Any taxicab licensee who is a member of any cooperative association shall furnish the public safety department with the name of such association and shall notify the public safety department of any change in his membership or affiliation within 48 hours after such change. 
(3)  All taxicabs shall be kept in good running condition and clean and fit for public use and each taxicab shall be inspected at such intervals as the director of public safety may direct. 
(4)  Only licensed taxicabs in such number as may be designated on any taxicab stand sign shall remain at any stand to which such sign refers while waiting for employment, and each taxicab shall be parked in single file. The taxicab standing at the head of such parked line shall not be permitted to refuse to carry any orderly person who offers to hire such taxicab and agrees to pay the proper rate of fare, but any person desiring to hire any taxicab shall be free to select any taxicab he may desire on the stand whether it is at the head of the line or not. As the taxicabs leave the taxicab stand with passengers, those in the rear shall move up, and any taxicab entering such stand shall enter at the rear and shall move up as closely as possible to the last taxicab on the stand. 
(5)  No person shall charge any fare for the hire of any taxicab other than in accordance with the current schedule of rates. 
(6)  No taxicab, while awaiting employment by passengers, shall stand on any public street or place other than upon a taxicab stand, nor shall any taxicab driver seek employment by repeatedly and persistently driving his taxicab to and fro in a short space before, or by otherwise interfering with the proper and orderly access to or egress from, any theater, hall, hotel, public resort, bus station or other place of public gathering, or in any other manner obstructing or impeding traffic; but any taxicab driver may solicit employment by driving through any public street or place without stops other than those due to traffic and at such speed as not to interfere with or impede traffic and may pass and repass any theater, hall, hotel, public resort, bus station or other place of public gathering, provided that after passing such public place he shall not turn and repass until he has gone a distance of two blocks beyond such place. 
(7)  No person shall solicit passengers for a public taxicab upon the streets of the city except the driver of the taxicab when sitting upon the driver's seat of the vehicle. Every taxicab driver shall remain on the driver's seat or inside his vehicle at all times when the vehicle is standing upon any taxicab stand or when actually engaged in carrying passengers, except that every taxicab driver shall be permitted to leave his taxicab to assist passengers into or out of the taxicab. Any taxicab driver may leave his taxicab on a taxicab stand to take care of the calls of nature and during such absences his taxicab shall be parked at the rear of the taxicab stand and no such absence shall be longer than 30 minutes. 
(8)  Any taxicab licensee may place advertising matter on or in any licensed taxicab but the form and content thereof shall first be approved by the director of public safety. 
(9)  No taxicab driver shall drink any intoxicating beverage while on duty, nor immediately prior thereto. 
(Code 1980, § 7.119) 
Secs. 18-195-18-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATE POLICE AGENCIES 

Sec. 18-216. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private police agency means the business of furnishing police protection through furnishing the services of watchmen, private police officers or guards. 
(Code 1980, § 7.131) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-217. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating a private police agency without first obtaining a license therefor. No license shall be granted except upon certification by the director of public safety, and licenses shall be issued by the public safety department. The fingerprints of every person financially interested in any private police agency shall be furnished to the city for filing in the noncriminal identification file of the public safety department. 
(Code 1980, § 7.132) 
Sec. 18-218. - Identification cards. 
    Every person employed by any private police agency as watchman, police officer or guard, before entering upon his duties, shall obtain from the public safety department an employee identification card upon application therefor. Applicants for the identification card shall submit, in addition to such general information as the director of public safety may require, a photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches in size, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner, which picture shall be affixed to the identification card if issued. The applicant shall also furnish a full set of fingerprints for filing in the noncriminal identification file of the public safety department. No identification card shall be issued except upon certification by the director of public safety. Identification cards shall be renewed at the time licenses are renewed. No person licensed to operate any private police agency shall employ as a watchman, police officer or guard any person who does not possess a valid and current identification card. 
(Code 1980, § 7.133) 
Sec. 18-219. - Bond required. 
    Before any license to operate a private police agency is issued, the applicant shall furnish a corporate surety bond in the penal sum of $5,000.00, which bond shall be conditioned for the due observance during the time of the license, by the licensee and each of his employees acting as watchmen, police officers or guards, of all laws of the state and all ordinances of the city. Any person aggrieved by the action of any such licensee or his employees shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 90 days after the expiration or cancellation of any such license and until the conclusion of any action on the bond commenced while it was in force. 
(Code 1980, § 7.134) 
Secs. 18-220-18-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OPEN AIR BUSINESSES 

Sec. 18-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Open air business means any business conducted for profit so conducted that one-third or more of the stock or one-third or more of the sales on the average are conducted outside of any permanent structure. 
(Code 1980, § 7.151) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-242. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in or conduct an open air business within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be issued except upon certification of the director of public safety and the building inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 7.152) 
Sec. 18-243. - Cleanliness of premises. 
    Every licensee under this article shall maintain the premises on which any open air business is conducted in a clean and sanitary manner. Upon the expiration of the license the licensee shall return the premises to a clean and sanitary condition and remove all refuse, debris and similar material from the premises. 
(Code 1980, § 7.153) 
Secs. 18-244-18-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROHIBITED AMUSEMENTS 

Sec. 18-266. - Enumeration; declaration of public nuisance. 
    The following listed amusements are each and all, and every component or part thereof, hereby declared to constitute public nuisances contrary to the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public and as such are forbidden and prohibited in the city as provided in chapter 42, chapter 46 and section 82-26 et seq., which amusements are commonly known as: 
(1)  Street shows, including medicine shows. 
(2)  Shooting galleries. 
(3)  Endurance contests. 
(4)  Freak shows, where artificial or natural curiosities are exhibited. 
(5)  Billiard rooms, pool halls, bowling alleys and slot car racing establishments. 
(6)  Mechanical and electrical amusement devices. The term "mechanical and electrical amusement device" as used in this section shall mean any machine which, upon insertion of a coin, slug, token or similar item, may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement. It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, video games, skill ball, air hockey and all similar mechanical or electrical machines or devices and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated, and whether operated by hand or electric power, or a combination thereof. 
(7)  Any amusement of a like or similar nature to those specifically enumerated in this section. 
(Code 1980, § 7.195) 
Secs. 18-267-18-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SERVICE STATIONS 

Sec. 18-286. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant and operator of any automobile service station, gas station or public garage (as defined in chapter 90) to: 
(1)  Comply with any and all regulations set forth in chapter 90 of this Code. 
(2)  Keep the premises free of dirt and litter. 
(3)  Prevent excessive noise and rowdiness. 
(4)  Maintain peace, order and safety on the premises. 
(Code 1980, § 7.225) 
Sec. 18-287. - Hours of operation. 
    Automobile service stations, gas stations and public garages shall not be open or operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1980, § 7.226) 
Secs. 18-288-18-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PROHIBITION OF MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-300. - Prohibition of marihuana establishments. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of section 6.1 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (the "Act"), marihuana establishments, as defined by the Act, are completely prohibited within the boundaries of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(b)  Any applicant for a state or local license to establish a marihuana establishment, as defined by the Act, within the boundaries of the City of Grosse Pointe shall be deemed to be not in compliance with this article or with the Code of Ordinances amended by this article. 
(c)  This section does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to the transportation of marihuana through the City of Grosse Pointe to the extent provided by the Act. 
(Ord. No. 435, § I, 12-17-18) 
Chapter 22 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS 
  

Sec. 22-1. - Authority of city to grant franchises; findings; intent of chapter. 
(a)  The city, pursuant to applicable federal and state law, is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable television systems within the city limits. 
(b)  The city council finds that the development of cable television and communications systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of Grosse Pointe. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city shall designate. 
(c)  It is the intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable television service to the public and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.1, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Broadcast basic cable service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and educational and government access signals. 
    Cable television service means the total of the following: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service. 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable television system, system, cable communications system, and cable system mean a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service and which may include video programming, data transmission and other services, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations. 
(2)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any public rights-of-way. 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming, data transmission and other services directly to subscribers. 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    Channel and cable channel mean a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Cities means the Cities of Harper Woods, Grosse Pointe Woods, Grosse Pointe, Grosse Pointe Farms and Grosse Pointe Park. 
    Data transmission means any service which involves interactive communication of data and information between the grantee and subscriber. 
    Educational or government access facilities means the following: 
(1)  Channel capacity designated for educational or governmental use. 
(2)  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. 
    Franchise agreement means a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters. 
    Franchise fee means the fee imposed by grantor on a grantee or cable subscriber, or both, pursuant to section 22-17. 
    Grantee means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter, under a granting franchise agreement, and his lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
    Grantor and city mean the City of Grosse Pointe as represented by the council or any delegate acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
    Gross annual receipts means the annual gross receipts received by a grantee from all sources of operations of the cable television system within the city utilizing the public streets and rights-of-way for which a franchise is required in order to deliver such cable service, excluding refundable deposits, rebates or credits. Any sales, excise or other taxes or charges imposed on the grantee in addition to its franchise obligations and collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government shall not be included. 
    Initial service area means the area of the city which will receive service initially, as set forth in any franchise agreement. 
    Installation means the connection of the system to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of service. 
    Service area and franchise area mean the entire geographic area within the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
    Street means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public and are located within the city limits: streets, roads, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas, that the grantor shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time. 
    Subscriber means any person who elects to subscribe for any purpose to a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system and who pays the charges therefor. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.2, 10-18-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-3. - Purposes of franchise. 
    A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall encompass the following purposes: 
(1)  Engaging in the business of providing cable television service, and such other services as may be permitted by applicable law, to subscribers within the designated service area. 
(2)  Erecting, installing, constructing, repairing, rebuilding, reconstructing, replacing, maintaining and retaining cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of a cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets within the designated service area. 
(3)  Maintaining and operating the franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services and for data transmission and other services. 
(4)  Providing and maintaining a permanently installed automatic start engine generator and transfer switch system at the headend, which generator system will be automatically exercised weekly to confirm readiness status and which generator will automatically provide power in the event of commercial power failure within the headend. 
(5)  Providing, upon request, a parental control device which allows parents to lock out both audio and video from pay television programming. 
(6)  Setting forth the obligations of a grantee under the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.3, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-4. - Franchise required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable television system in the city within any public street without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.4, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-5. - Term of franchise. 
(a)  A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor's adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise. 
(b)  A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law and of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.5, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-6. - Franchise territory. 
    Any franchise shall be valid within all the territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.6, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-7. - Construction and amendment of chapter; effect of other laws. 
(a)  This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws. Whenever any duly authorized federal or state agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over any specific provisions of this chapter, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city. 
(b)  If the state or federal government has discontinued or hereafter discontinues preemption in any area of cable communications over which it formerly exercised or currently exercises jurisdiction, in such manner as to expand rather than limit municipal regulatory authority, the grantor may, if it so elects, adopt rules and regulations in those areas to the extent permitted by law. No such rules and regulations or other rules and regulations of the grantor shall apply to any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter prior to their adoption to the extent precluded by the express terms of the franchise agreement. The grantor may regulate rates and charges as provided under applicable law. 
(c)  This chapter and, to the extent permitted in subsection (b) of this section, any rules or regulations as may be promulgated from time to time, shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed. 
(d)  The city may amend this chapter, except that no amendment shall alter any provision of any franchise granted before the effective date of the amendment. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.7, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-8. - Franchise nontransferable. 
(a)  The grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the council. Consideration of any such transaction shall not be unreasonably delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the council shall be null and void. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, shall not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section. 
(b)  The restrictions of subsection (a) of this section shall apply to any change in control of grantee. The definition of "any change in control of grantee" shall be set forth in the applicable franchise agreement. 
(c)  The grantee shall notify the grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of the franchise property. Such notification shall be considered by the grantor as notice that a change in control or ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of the grantor to such change in control or ownership shall apply. 
(d)  For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change or transfer, the grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee, and the grantee shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry. In seeking the grantor's consent to any change of ownership, the grantee shall have the responsibility of ensuring that the transferee completes an application in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the grantor, which application shall include the information required under subsections (a) through (h) of section 22-13. An application shall be submitted to the grantor not less than 60 days prior to the date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the qualifications and financial and technical capability to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If, after considering the legal, financial, character and technical qualifications of the applicant and determining that they are satisfactory, the grantor finds that such transfer is acceptable, the grantor shall transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise. Consideration of any such transaction shall not be unreasonably delayed. 
(e)  Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable television system, in the event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, such financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation within 30 days of assuming such control that will ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the grantor in its discretion, and during such period of time it shall have the right to petition the grantor to transfer the franchise to another grantee. 
(f)  Upon transfer, the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for the grantor's reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with a transfer of the franchise or of control of the franchise, including without limitations costs of administrative review; financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee; consultants, including technical and legal experts; notice and publication; and document preparation expenses as provided in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.8, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-9. - Geographical coverage. 
(a)  The grantee shall be obligated to serve all residents of the city. The grantee shall extend service to new subscribers at the normal installation charge and monthly rate for customers of that classification where there are an average of 70 homes per each linear mile of new cable construction. 
(b)  If the requirements of subsection (a) of this section are not met, extensions of service shall be required only on a basis which is reasonable and compensatory. 
(c)  After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within 30 days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such 30-day period on reasonable terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.9, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-10. - Nonexclusive franchise. 
    Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system or any component thereof as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted by the grantor on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than any other franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.10, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-11. - Multiple franchises. 
(a)  The grantor may grant one or more franchises for a service area. The grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations such as: 
(1)  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple coaxial cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage. 
(2)  The benefits that may accrue to cable subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved services. 
(3)  The impact on the community of having multiple franchises. 
(4)  The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights-of-way. 
(5)  The demonstrated capability of the applicant to obtain the necessary funds to erect, maintain and operate the proposed system for the duration of the franchise term. 
(b)  Each grantee awarded a franchise to serve the entire city shall offer service to all residences in the city, in accordance with construction and service schedules mutually agreed upon between the grantor and the grantee, and consistent with applicable law. 
(c)  Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two cable systems in accordance with the provisions of section 22-18(m). 
(d)  The grantor may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in the grantor's opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables. 
(e)  Any additional franchise granted by the city to provide cable television service in a part of the city in which a franchise has already been granted and where an existing grantee is providing service shall require the new grantee to provide service throughout its service area within a reasonable time and in a sequence which does not discriminate against lower income residents. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.11, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-12. - Franchise application-Required, fee. 
    Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable application fee established by the city shall accompany the application or renewal application to cover all costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review; financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant; consultants, including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts; notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application; and document preparation expenses. If such costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant shall pay the difference to the city within 30 days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.12, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-13. - Same-Contents. 
    An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system shall contain where applicable: 
(1)  A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area. 
(2)  A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of the applicant in the cable television field. 
(3)  A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each shareholder, if a corporation. 
(4)  A list of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person. 
(5)  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant. 
(6)  A current financial statement of the applicant verified by an audit by a certified public accountant or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city. 
(7)  The proposed construction and service schedule. 
(8)  Any reasonable additional information that the city deems applicable. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.13, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-14. - Same-Consideration. 
(a)  Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city manager shall prepare a report and make his recommendations respecting such application to the council. 
(b)  A public hearing shall be set prior to any franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the council. Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.14, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-15. - Franchise renewal. 
    Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law, including, but not necessarily limited to, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, or other applicable law. The grantor and the grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.15, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-16. - Consumer protection and service standards. 
    The grantee shall comply with the consumer protection and customer service standards as set forth in the applicable franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.16, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-17. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  The grantee shall, during each year of operation under this chapter, pay to the grantor a franchise fee in an amount specified in its franchise agreement. 
(b)  The grantor, on a semiannual basis, shall be furnished a statement within 60 days of the close of the six-month period, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross receipts and all payments, and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon ten days' prior written notice, the grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of the grantee's records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures, and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such an audit. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
(d)  If any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in the ordinance or franchise agreement, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the prime lending rate of NBD Bank, N.A., plus one percent during the period for which the payment was due. In addition, the grantee shall pay an additional amount of $250.00 per day as liquidated damages for each day the payment is past due; provided, however, no liquidated damages shall accrue or be payable to the grantor when the grantee pays the past due amount within the five-day grace period permitted under section 22-29(1). 
(e)  All payments due from the grantee to the grantor shall be made quarterly by April 30, July 31, October 31 and January 31 for the preceding three-month period. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.17, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-18. - Design and construction requirements. 
(a)  The grantee shall construct its cable system using material of good and durable quality and all work involved in the construction, installation, maintenance and repair of the cable system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner. Any municipal property damaged or destroyed shall be promptly repaired or replaced by the grantee and restored to serviceable condition. 
(b)  The grantee's system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or interfere with any improvements the grantor may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements, or public property. 
(c)  However, if the grantor shall annex further territory as authorized by law, then, subject to section 22-9, the grantee shall extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of the grantor so annexed within an acceptable time thereafter, unless additional time is granted by the city council upon request of the grantee for good cause shown. 
(d)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(e)  In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the grantor, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before such work was commenced. 
(f)  The grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where they will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixture, water hydrant or main, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curbline, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on the alley and then in such manner as not to interfere with the travel on the street, alleys and public ways. 
(g)  The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the grantor, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(h)  The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee, all trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of the grantor and at the expense of the grantee. 
(i)  The grantee shall provide, upon request and without charge, all nonpremium services to any municipal buildings owned and operated by the city and to any certified public, private and parochial educational facilities. This shall mean only an energized cable to such building. The cost of any internal wiring shall be borne by the institution. 
(j)  The grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until the grantee has secured the necessary permits from the grantor or other cognizant public agencies. 
(k)  In those areas of the city where transmission or distribution facilities of the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground. 
(l)  In those areas of the city where the grantee's cables are located on the aboveground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at the grantee's cost. Certain of the grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed aboveground, may continue to remain in aboveground enclosures. 
(m)  In new residential developments in which the electric power and telephone utilities are underground, the following procedure shall apply with respect to access to and utilization of underground easements: 
(1)  The developer shall be responsible for contacting and surveying all grantees to ascertain which grantees desire to provide cable television service to that development. The developer may establish a reasonable deadline to receive each grantee's response. The final development map shall indicate the grantees that have agreed to serve the development. 
(2)  If one or two grantees wish to provide service, they shall be accommodated in the joint utilities trench on a nondiscriminatory shared basis. If fewer than two grantees indicate interest, the developer shall provide conduit to accommodate two sets of cable television cables and dedicate to the grantor any initially unoccupied conduit. The developer shall be entitled to recover the cost of such initially unoccupied conduit in the event that the grantor subsequently leases or sells occupancy or use rights to any grantee. 
(3)  The developer shall provide at least ten working days' notice of the date that utility trenches will be open to the grantees that have agreed to serve the development. When the trenches are open, the grantees shall have two working days to begin the installation of their cables, and five working days after beginning installation to complete installation. 
(4)  The final development map shall not be approved until the developer submits evidence that: 
a.  It has notified each grantee that underground utility trenches are to open as of an estimated date, and that each grantee will be allowed access to such trenches, including trenches from proposed streets to individual homes or home sites, on specified nondiscriminatory terms and conditions; and 
b.  It has received a written notification from each grantee that the grantee intends to install its facilities during the open trench period on the specified terms and conditions or such other terms and conditions as are mutually agreeable to the developer and grantee or has received no reply from a grantee within ten days after its notification to such grantee, in which case the grantee will be deemed to have waived its opportunity to install its facilities during the open trench period. 
(5)  Sharing the joint utilities trench shall be subject to compliance with state regulatory agency and utility standards. If such compliance is not possible, the developer shall provide a separate trench for the cable television cables, with the entire cost shared among the participating operators. With the concurrence of the developer, the affected utilities and the grantees, alternative installation procedures, such as the use of deeper trenches, may be utilized, subject to applicable law. 
(6)  Any grantee wishing to serve an area where the trenches have been closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and associated costs. 
(7)  The grantor reserves the right to grant an encroachment permit to a cable franchise applicant to install conduit and/or cable in anticipation of the granting of a franchise. Such installations shall be at the applicant's risk, with no recourse against the grantor if the pending franchise application is not granted. The grantor may require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit and/or cable, at the applicant's cost. The construction of such a separate trench, if provided, shall be coordinated with, and subject to, the developer's overall construction schedule. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.18, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-19. - Technical standards. 
(a)  All facilities and equipment of the grantee shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the National Electrical Safety Code, Federal Communications Commission technical standards, and such applicable ordinances and regulations set forth by the grantor and/or any other local, state or federal agencies. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon request, a written report of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise standards and guidelines. 
(b)  Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.19, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-20. - Program content restrictions. 
    The grantee may offer subscribers optional services on a per program or per channel basis, also known as pay cable. The grantee shall not, however, program or in any way display obscene material such as X-rated motion pictures. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.20, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-21. - Hold harmless. 
    The grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold the grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from all liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, for bodily injury and property damage arising from operations of the grantee, its officers, agents or employees, under the franchise and arising from installation, maintenance and ownership of the cable system. The grantee shall at its sole cost and expense, upon demand of the grantor, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other legal proceeding brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities, against the grantor, its officers, agents or employees, and arising out of any conduct of the grantee, its agents or employees which is within the scope of this indemnity. The grantor shall also have the benefit of any other indemnification of any insurance provision contained in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.21, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-22. - Insurance. 
(a)  On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall obtain policies of liability, workers' compensation and property insurance from companies authorized to transact business in the state. 
(b)  The policy of liability insurance shall: 
(1)  Be issued to the grantee and name the grantor, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds; 
(2)  Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to this chapter by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to: 
a.  Negligent acts or omissions of the grantee and its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations; and/or 
b.  Use of motor vehicles; 
(3)  Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement. Such insurance policy shall be subject to review and approval by the city manager subject to review by the council; and 
(4)  Be noncancellable without 30 days' prior written notice thereof directed to the grantor. 
(c)  The policy of workers' compensation insurance shall: 
(1)  Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the state insurance commissioner. 
(2)  Cover all employees of the grantee who in the course and scope of their employment are to conduct the franchise operations. 
(3)  Provide for every benefit and payment presently or hereinafter conferred by the labor code of the state upon an injured employee, including vocational rehabilitation and death benefits. 
(d)  The policy of property insurance shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by the grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable the grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance. 
(e)  The grantee shall file with the grantor prior to commencement of franchise operations either certified copies of these insurance policies or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing the policy or by a broker authorized to issue such a certificate, certifying that the policy is in force and providing the following information with respect to the policy: 
(1)  The policy number; 
(2)  The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire; 
(3)  The names of the named insureds and any additional insured required by this chapter or the franchise agreement; 
(4)  The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and 
(5)  The amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance. 
(f)  Conduct of franchise operations shall not commence until the grantee has complied with subsections (a) through (e) of this section. 
(g)  If the grantee fails to maintain any of the policies described in this section in full force and effect, the grantor shall, upon 48 hours' notice to the grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from the grantee. The grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that the grantee fails to maintain the policies in full force and effect. In order to account for increases in consumer prices, no more than once during any five-year period, the grantor shall have the right to order the grantee to increase the amounts of the insurance provided for in the franchise agreement. Such order may be made by the grantor after conducting a duly noticed public hearing. Increases in insurance coverage shall be no greater than any increase in the Detroit Metropolitan Area Consumer Price Index (all consumers) for the five-year period. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.22, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-23. - Records required and grantor's right to inspect. 
(a)  The grantee shall at all times maintain: 
(1)  A record of all service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call, provided further, that such record and the specific information contained therein shall be kept confidential by the grantee in compliance with the privacy provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended. 
(2)  A full and complete set of plans, records and as-built maps showing the location of the cable television system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscribers' homes. 
(3)  If requested by the grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within 30 days following its request in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor. 
(b)  The grantor may impose reasonable requests for additional information, records and documents from time to time, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights under this chapter or the grantee's franchise agreement. 
(c)  Subject to the provisions of section 22-25(b), upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, the grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor of all franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of the grantee situated within or without the city, and all records relating to the franchise provided such examination is necessary to enable the grantor to discharge its regulatory responsibilities under this chapter or the franchise agreement. The grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.23, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-24. - Annual reports. 
(a)  Upon request, the grantee shall submit a written end of the year report to the grantor, with respect to the preceding calendar year, containing the following information: 
(1)  A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the cable system, including but not limited to services begun or discontinued during the reporting year. 
(2)  A list of the grantee's officers, members of its board of directors, and other principals of the grantee. 
(3)  A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the voting interest in the grantee. 
(4)  Information as to the number of the basic cable and pay subscribers. 
(b)  All annual reports required under this chapter shall be available for public inspection in the grantee's offices during normal business hours. 
(c)  All reports and records required under this chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.24, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-25. - Copies of federal and state communications. 
(a)  The grantee, upon request, shall submit to the grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by the grantee to any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body as well as copies of all responses thereto which are nonroutine in nature and which will materially affect its cable television operations within the franchise area. The grantee shall submit such documents to the grantor simultaneously with their submission to such court, agency and/or body; or within five days after their receipt from such court, agency and/or body. Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by the grantee, which is submitted to the grantor, shall be retained in confidence by the grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee shall have no obligation to provide copies of documents to the grantor which contain trade secrets of the grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to the grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from the grantor that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence by the grantor. To the extent possible, the grantee will provide the grantor with summaries of any required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on the grantee to establish the confidential nature of any information submitted. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.25, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-26. - Remedies for franchise violations. 
    If the grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by this chapter or a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, following notice from the grantor and an opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of section 22-29 and the franchise, the grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion: 
(1)  Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the security fund established in this chapter if such violation is not cured within 30 days after written notice to the grantee of the grantor's intention to cure and draw upon the security fund. 
(2)  Assess against the grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement for any such violation. 
(3)  For repeated and verifiable violations of consumer service standards of this chapter or the franchise agreement which have materially degraded the quality of service, the grantor may request the grantee to issue rebates or credits to subscribers, in an amount to be determined by the grantee. Credits shall be reasonably related to the nature of the degradation in service and measured by the period of the degradation, to provide monetary relief substantially equal to the reduced quality of service resulting from the grantee's failure to perform. 
(4)  Initiate proceedings to revoke the franchise, in accordance with the provisions of section 22-28. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.26, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-27. - Security fund. 
(a)  The grantor may require the grantee to deposit into an interest bearing account established by the grantor and the grantee a sum established in the franchise agreement as a security fund. This sum shall be held by a neutral party experienced in acting as an escrow agent, and shall be maintained on deposit for a term as provided in the franchise agreement, with any interest payable to the grantee. 
(b)  The security fund shall be available to the grantor as provided in section 22-26 to satisfy all claims, liens and/or taxes due the grantor from the grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a franchise breach, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement. 
(c)  The security fund requirements may be satisfied by conveyance of an irrevocable letter of credit to the grantor or by provision of a corporate surety bond in a form approved by the grantor. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.27, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-28. - Grantor's power to revoke franchise. 
    The grantor reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by the grantee and a material breach under the franchise grant: 
(1)  The grantee shall default in the performance of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and shall continue such default after receipt of due notice and opportunity to cure the default in accordance with the provisions of section 22-29. 
(2)  The grantee shall violate any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee's franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by the grantee by appropriate proceedings conducted in good faith. 
(3)  The grantee practices any fraud upon the grantor, as determined by a court of law. 
(4)  The grantee persistently fails to remedy defaults for which lesser penalties have previously been imposed. 
(5)  The grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt. 
The termination and forfeiture of the grantee's franchise shall in no way affect any right of the grantor to pursue any remedy under this chapter, the franchise agreement or any provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.28, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-29. - Procedure for remedying franchise violations. 
    Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against the grantee specified in this chapter, the grantor shall give the grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The grantor shall first notify the grantee of the violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than five days in the case of the failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the grantor under this chapter or the grantee's franchise and 30 days in all other cases. If the grantee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed, the grantor shall then give written notice of not less than 20 days of a public hearing to be held before the council. Such notice shall specify the violations alleged to have occurred. 
(2)  At the public hearing, the council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision. 
(3)  If the council finds that the grantee has corrected the violation or has diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from the grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, or that no material violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed. 
(4)  If the council finds that material violations exist and that the grantee has not corrected the violations in a satisfactory manner or has not diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof from the grantor and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation, the council may impose one or more of the remedies specified in this chapter as it, in its discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
(5)  If the grantor elects to assess liquidated damages, pursuant to the provisions of the franchise agreement, then such election shall constitute the grantor's exclusive remedy for a period of 30 days. Thereafter, if the grantee remains in noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter and/or the franchise agreement, the grantor may pursue any available remedy. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.29, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-30. - Force majeure; grantee's inability to perform. 
    If the grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is prevented by a cause or event not within the grantee's control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from any liability under section 22-26(3), pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of the grantee shall include without limitation acts of God, strikes, power failure or loss of other utility services which are necessary for the operation of the system, sabotage, riots and civil disturbances, actions of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of the grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable communications system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.30, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-31. - Abandonment or removal of franchise property. 
(a)  If the use of any property of the grantee within the franchise area or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of 60 days, the grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that franchise property. 
(b)  The grantor, upon such terms as the grantor may impose, may give the grantee permission to abandon without removing any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned aboveground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and shall restore any affected street to its former state at the time such facilities and equipment were installed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. The grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public ways, public places, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and the security fund as provided for in this chapter shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(c)  Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the franchise property abandoned. 
(d)  At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for in this chapter, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the grantor shall have the right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all aboveground portions of the cable television system from all streets and public ways within the city within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than 180 days. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other cable grantee. 
(f)  Except for an event of force majeure, if the grantee fails to operate the system for 60 days without prior approval or subsequent excusal of the grantor, the grantor may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the grantee or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor should fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills such obligation, the grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantees shall indemnify the grantor against any damages the grantor may suffer as a result of such failure. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.31, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-32. - Restoration by grantor; reimbursement of costs. 
    In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any restoration work required by this chapter or by the franchise agreement, and if such work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of written notice thereof from the grantor or, if more than 30 days are reasonably required thereafter, if the grantee does not commence such work within such 30-day period and diligently complete the work thereafter, except in cases of emergency constituting a threat to public health, safety or welfare, the grantor may cause such work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor the costs thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs, or the grantor may recover such costs through the security fund provided by the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.32, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-33. - Extended operation and continuity of services. 
    Upon either expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have discretion to permit the grantee to continue to operate the cable television system for an extended period of time not to exceed nine months from the date of such expiration or revocation, unless extended by mutual agreement of the grantor and the grantee. The grantee shall continue to operate the system during such period under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.33, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-34. - Receivership and foreclosure. 
(a)  A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall, at the option of the grantor, cease and terminate 60 days after the appointment of receivers or trustees to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of the 60 days, or unless: 
(1)  Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 60 days after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, and the receivership or trustees within the 60 days shall have remedied all the faults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such faults which is satisfactory to the grantor; and 
(2)  Such receivers or trustees shall, within the 60 days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise granted. 
(b)  In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the franchise property or any material part thereof, the grantor may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the franchise granted and all rights and privileges of the grantee under this chapter shall cease and terminate 30 days after service of such notice, unless: 
(1)  The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner that this chapter provides; and 
(2)  Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.34, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-35. - Rights reserved to grantor. 
(a)  In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this chapter, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any law or under the franchise. 
(b)  The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines that it is in the public interest to do so and that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or the subscribers. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites. 
(c)  The grantor shall have the right to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained in this chapter and existing applicable ordinances, such additional ordinances pertaining to the health, safety and welfare, and of general applicability as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the police power. 
(d)  The city shall have the right, during the life of this chapter, to maintain upon the poles or in the underground conduits of the grantee within the city limits wire and fixtures necessary for a traffic signal control system and/or a police and fire alarm system. Such wires and fixtures shall be installed and maintained at the sole expense of the city and in such manner that there shall be a minimum danger of contact or conflict between the wires and fixtures of the grantee and wires and fixtures used by the city. 
(e)  In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the council or the council's designee, make available its facilities to the city for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period. 
(f)  The grantor shall not be liable for any damage occurring to the property of the grantee caused by employees of the grantor in the performance of their duties, except for damage caused to the grantee's facilities by the negligence of the grantor's employees. The grantor shall not be liable for the interruption of service by actions of grantor's employees in the performance of their duties, nor shall the grantor be held liable for the failure of the grantee to be able to perform normal services due to acts of God or other factors beyond the control of the grantor. 
(g)  Nothing in this chapter shall grant to the grantee any right of property in the city owned property, nor shall the city be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any fashion other than in the city's judgment its own business or needs may require. 
(h)  Except for emergencies, the grantee shall not open any street nor erect any permanent obstruction on any public right of way without obtaining all necessary permits required by local law. The grantor shall have the right to inspect any such construction and the grantee shall have the right to be present at any such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.35, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-36. - Rights of individuals. 
(a)  The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or sex. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, relating to nondiscrimination. 
(b)  The grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by the grantee, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the city. 
(c)  The grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations, or any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage, provided that nothing in the chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled or the establishment of customized bulk and commercial billing arrangements. The grantee may at its own discretion waive, reduce or suspend connection fees for specific or indeterminate periods and/or monthly service fees for promotional purposes. 
(d)  The grantee must notify all subscribers 30 days prior to any rate change. 
(e)  The grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time. 
(f)  The grantee shall comply with the privacy provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, and all other applicable laws. 
(g)  No cable line, wire, amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by the grantee shall be installed by the grantee on the subscriber's premises without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber's property shall be presumed. Where a property owner or his predecessor has granted an easement including a public utility easement or a servitude to another and the servitude by its terms contemplates a use such as the grantee's intended use, the grantee shall not be required to secure the written permission of the owner for the installation of cable television equipment. 
(h)  The grantee or its subcontractors will not interrupt the transmission of signals of the cable system except for necessary maintenance or emergencies. Unless otherwise authorized by the grantor, charges shall abate if service to a subscriber is interrupted for more than 24 hours upon request of the subscriber. Interruption of service shall include system reception, except that degradation, due to natural phenomena, of basic service satellite signals, shall not be considered an interruption of service for purposes of this section only. 
(i)  It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.36, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-37. - Unauthorized connections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any physical connection to any franchised cable television or cable communication system operating in the city that is not authorized by the operator of such system. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage, destroy, remove, obstruct or interfere with any part of any franchise cable television or cable communication system operating in the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any modification to system equipment or to any system connected equipment so as to induce any uncompensated franchised cable television or cable communications system service or level of service for which the operator has established compensation rates. 
(d)  Violation of any provision of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of a continuing violation may be charged and punished as a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.37, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-38. - Advisory board. 
(a)  The grantee shall establish an advisory board which shall consist of one member representing each community comprising part of its service area and the provider of local origination. Each member to the advisory board shall be appointed annually by his or her respective community or provider of local origination. 
(b)  The advisory board shall meet at least once each calendar quarter with the grantee to review the community's comments and complaints regarding the cable system. The grantee shall be responsive to those comments and complaints. 
(c)  The advisory board may also make recommendations to a grantee concerning all aspects of the franchise, its operational standards, rules governing local access, content, programming, proposed new services and pricing structure. 
(d)  The grantee shall also submit a written annual report to the advisory board, including such topics as programming, finances, technical matters and future directions of the grantee. 
(e)  The advisory board may also make recommendations to the communities concerning the grantee's performance and comment upon requests by the grantee of a renewal or extension of its franchise. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 1.38, 10-18-93) 
Sec. 22-39. - Uniform ordinance. 
    This chapter is based upon a uniform ordinance promulgated jointly by all five of the cities. It is intended that, to the greatest extent possible, the provisions of the separate ordinances enacted by each of the cities, based upon the uniform ordinance, be construed in a consistent and uniform manner. The effective date of this chapter is March 1, 1994. 
(Ord. No. 285, § 2.1, 10-18-93; Ord. No. 288, § 1, 12-31-93) 
Sec. 22-40. - Rate regulation. 
(a)  The City of Grosse Pointe adopts by reference rules of the Federal Communications Commission set forth in Subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of Part 76 (Cable Television Service) of Chapter I of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and associated equipment, as amended. 
(b)  After a cable operator has submitted for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs or a proposed increase in these rates, the clerk shall publish a public notice of the rates and costs giving interested parties, including the cable operator, a reasonable opportunity to file written comments which shall be available in the office of the Grosse Pointe City Clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(c)  The City of Grosse Pointe adopts by reference procedures set forth in 47 CFR 0.459 regarding confidential business information submitted by a cable operator in a rate regulation proceeding. 
(d)  A cable operator which willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order directed specifically at the cable operator shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture not to exceed $25,000.00 for each violation or each day of a continuing violation not to exceed $250,000.00 as determined by the city council for the City of Grosse Pointe following the procedures set forth in 47 USC §§ 503(2)(D), (3)(A) & (B), (4)(A), (B) & (C) which the City of Grosse Pointe adopts by reference. 
(e)  A copy of the rules and procedures adopted by reference in this section are available in the office of the Grosse Pointe city clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(f)  In the event of a conflict between this section and a cable television franchise, the provisions of this section shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 286, §§ 1-6, 10-18-93) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Emergency preparedness act, MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Regulation of minors. 
(a)  During time of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public emergency, or reasonable apprehension of immediate danger thereof, when public safety is imperiled in the city, the mayor or in his absence or unavailability, the director of public safety, may declare a curfew for minors under the age of 18 in the city or any part thereof. Such curfew and amendments thereto shall be posted in at least five public places within the city. 
(b)  The mayor, or in the absence or unavailability of the mayor, then the director of public safety, may amend, modify or rescind, in whole or in part, the terms and provisions of the curfew during pendency of the emergency, and upon cessation of the emergency shall rescind and terminate the curfew and post notice thereof in the same manner as the original curfew; provided, however, that persons charged with the violation of any of the terms of any curfew pursuant to this section may be prosecuted, convicted and punished as provided in this chapter, after the issuance of notice of cessation of the emergency. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, legal guardian, or other adult person having the care or custody of a minor under 18 years of age to knowingly permit such minor to violate any provision of this section. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict with the state laws relative to employment of minors. 
(e)  The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  A minor accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or other adult having responsibility for the care or custody of the minor; or 
(2)  A minor going to or returning from work; provided that the minor's hours of employment do not violate state law; provided further that the minor possess a signed statement issued by his or her employer setting forth the minor's hours of employment; and provided further that such minor shall be exempt from the requirements of this section for not more than one hour before the minor's work day begins and not more than one hour after the minor's work day ends; or 
(3)  A minor going to or returning from night school; provided that the minor possesses proof of enrollment in a public or private school, college, or other educational institution licensed or recognized as an educational institution by the Michigan Department of Education; provided further, that such minor shall be exempt from the requirements of this section for not more than one hour before the minor's class begins at such recognized educational institution, and for not more than one hour after the minor's class ends at such educational institution. 
(Code 1980, § 9.141; Ord. No. 342, § I, 10-13-03) 
Sec. 26-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imposition of a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by imposition of both fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 9.142) 
Chapter 28 - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
ARTICLE I. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ESTABLISHED 

Sec. 28-1. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Downtown Development Authority Ordinance" of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 377, § I, 7-21-08) 
Sec. 28-2. - Determination of necessity; purpose. 
    The city council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the public to create a public body corporate which shall operate to halt property value deterioration, eliminate the causes of that deterioration, increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the city, and promote economic growth, pursuant to Act 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan, 1975, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 377, § I, 7-21-08) 
Sec. 28-3. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as given to them in Act 197 or as hereinafter in this section provided unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this article: 
    Authority means the City of Grosse Pointe Downtown Development Authority created by this article. 
    Act 197 means Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975, as amended. 
    Board or board of directors means the board of directors of the authority, the governing body of the authority. 
    Chief executive officer means the mayor of the city. 
    City means the City of Grosse Pointe, Wayne County, Michigan. 
    City council means the city council of the city. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district designated by this article, as now existing or hereafter amended, and within which the authority shall exercise its powers. 
(Ord. No. 377, § I, 7-21-08) 
Sec. 28-4. - Creation of authority. 
    There is hereby created pursuant to Act 197 a downtown development authority for the city. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under title of the "CITY OF GROSSE POINTE DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY". The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purposes of its incorporation as provided by this article and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this article or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the article. 
(Ord. No. 377, § I, 7-21-08) 
Sec. 28-5. - Termination. 
    Upon completion of its purposes, the authority may be dissolved by the city council. The property and assets of the authority, after dissolution and satisfaction of its obligations, shall revert to the city. 
(Ord. No. 377, § I, 7-21-08) 
Sec. 28-6. - Description of downtown district. 
    The downtown district shall consist of the territory in the city described in Exhibit A*, attached hereto and made a part hereof, subject to such changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this article and Act 197. 
(Ord. No. 377, § I, 7-21-08) 
*A copy of Exhibit A can be found in the city offices. 
Sec. 28-7. - Board of directors. 
    The authority shall be under the supervision and control of the board. The board shall consist of the chief executive officer and nine members. Members shall be appointed by the chief executive officer, subject to approval by the city council. Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district. Not less than one of the members shall be a resident of the downtown district, if the downtown district has 100 or more persons residing within it. Members shall be appointed to serve for a term of four years, except that of the members first appointed, an equal number, as near as is practicable, shall be appointed for terms of one year, two years, three years, and four years. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed and qualified. Before assuming the duties of office, a member shall qualify by taking and subscribing to the constitutional oath of office. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the chief executive officer for the unexpired term only. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The chairperson of the board shall be elected by the board. The board shall adopt bylaws governing its procedures subject to the approval of the city council. In the event that the board determines to employ a director of the authority, such director shall furnish a bond in the penal sum of $100.00 payable to the authority for use and benefit of the authority and shall file the same with the city clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 377, § I, 7-21-08) 
Sec. 28-8. - Powers of authority. 
    Except as specifically otherwise provided in this article, the authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by law and herein. 
(Ord. No. 377, § I, 7-21-08) 
Sec. 28-9. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on July 1st of each year and end on June 30th, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The board shall prepare annually a budget and shall submit it to the city council for approval in the manner and at the time, and which budget shall contain the information, required of municipal departments. The board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the city council. 
(c)  The authority shall submit financial reports to the city council at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the city council. 
(Ord. No. 377, § I, 7-21-08) 
Secs. 28-10-28-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN 

Sec. 28-20. - Findings. 
(a)  The development plan and tax increment financing plan on file with the city clerk (the "plan") meets the requirements set forth in the Act. 
(b)  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(c)  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act. 
(d)  The land included within the development area to be acquired, if any, is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and the purposes of the Act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
(e)  The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city. 
(f)  Public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the project area. 
(g)  Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and utilities, to the extent required by the plan, are reasonably necessary for the project and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 380, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 421, § II, 7-20-15) 
Sec. 28-21. - Public purpose. 
    The city council hereby determines that the plan constitutes a public purpose. 
(Ord. No. 380, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 421, § II, 7-20-15) 
Sec. 28-22. - Best interest of the public. 
    The city council hereby determines that it is in the best interests of the public to proceed with the plan in order to halt property value deterioration, to increase property tax valuation, to eliminate the causes of the deterioration in property values, and to promote growth in the downtown district. 
(Ord. No. 380, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 421, § II, 7-20-15) 
Sec. 28-23. - Approval and adoption of plan. 
    The plan, as re-stated on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, is hereby approved and adopted. A copy of the re-stated plan and all later amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 380, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 421, § II, 7-20-15) 
Sec. 28-24. - Preparation of base year assessment roll. 
(a)  Within 60 days of the publication of this article, the city assessor shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll. The base year assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in the development area on the effective date of this article, the initial assessed value of each parcel of property within the development area, and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on property in the development area. 
(b)  The city assessor shall transmit copies of the base year assessment roll to the city treasurer, county treasurer, the authority and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the base year assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this article and the tax increment financing plan contained in the plan approved by this article. 
(Ord. No. 380, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 421, § II, 7-20-15) 
Sec. 28-25. - Preparation of annual tax increment assessment roll. 
    Each year within 15 days following the final equalization of property in the development area, the city assessor shall prepare the tax increment assessment roll. The tax increment assessment roll shall show the initial assessed value of each parcel of property within the development area and the amount by which the current assessed value as finally equalized for all taxable property in the development area exceeds the initial assessed value of the property as shown on the base year assessment roll (the "captured assessed value"). Copies of the annual tax increment assessment roll shall be transmitted by the assessor to the city treasurer, the county treasurer, the authority and the treasurer of each taxing jurisdiction within the development area, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with this article and the plan. 
(Ord. No. 380, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 421, § II, 7-20-15) 
Sec. 28-26. - Establishment of project fund; approval of depositary. 
    The treasurer of the authority shall establish a separate fund which shall be kept in a depositary bank account or accounts in a bank or banks approved by the treasurer of the city, to be designated downtown development authority project fund. All moneys received by the authority pursuant to the plan shall be deposited in the project fund. All moneys in the project fund and earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with the plan. 
(Ord. No. 380, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 421, § II, 7-20-15) 
Sec. 28-27. - Payment of tax increments to authority. 
    The city treasurer, and the county treasurer shall, as ad valorem and specific taxes are collected on the property in the development area, pay that proportion of the taxes, except for penalties and collection fees, that the captured assessed value bears to the initial assessed value to the treasurer of the authority for deposit in the project fund. The payments shall be made on the date or dates on which the city treasurer and the county treasurer are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 380, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 421, § II, 7-20-15) 
Sec. 28-28. - Use of moneys in the project fund. 
    The moneys credited to the project fund and on hand therein from time to time shall be used annually in the following manner and following order of priority: 
    First, to pay into the debt retirement fund, or funds, for all outstanding series of bonds issued pursuant to the plan an amount equal to the interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal whether by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund. 
    Second, to establish a reserve account for payment of principal of and interest on bonds issued pursuant to the plan to the extent required by any resolution authorizing bonds. 
    Third, to pay the administrative, auditing and operating costs of the authority and the city pertaining to the downtown district, including planning and promotion, to the extent provided in the annual budget of the authority. 
    Fourth, to repay amounts advanced by the city for project costs, including costs of preliminary plans, and fees for other professional services. 
    Fifth, to pay the cost of completing the remaining public improvements, if any, as set forth in the plan to the extent those costs are not financed from other sources. 
    Sixth, to pay the cost of any additional improvements to the plan that are determined necessary by the authority and approved by the city council in accordance with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 380, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 421, § II, 7-20-15) 
Sec. 28-29. - Annual report. 
    Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the authority shall submit to the city council, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a report on the status of the project fund. The report shall include the amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount and purpose of expenditures from the account, the amount of principal and interest on any outstanding indebtedness, the amount in any bond reserve account, the initial assessed value of the development area, the captured assessed value of the development area and the amount of captured assessed value retained by the authority, the tax increments received and the amount of any surplus from the prior year, and any additional information requested by the city council or deemed appropriate by the authority. The secretary of the authority shall cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 380, § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 421, § II, 7-20-15) 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VOTING PRECINCTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 311, § 1, adopted December 21, 1998, deleted §§ 30-26-30-30 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 30-26. - Established. 
    In accordance with the laws of the state and the Charter of the city, the city shall consist of one ward and two precincts, the boundaries of which shall be defined in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 1.31; Ord. No. 311, § 1, 12-21-98) 
Sec. 30-27. - Precinct no. 1. 
    Precinct no. 1 shall consist of the following territory: beginning at a point on the easterly rear lot line of the subdivided lot abutting on the southeasterly corner of Lakeland Avenue and Kercheval Avenue; thence southerly along the rear lot lines of subdivided lots fronting on the easterly side of Lakeland Avenue to the middle of St. Paul Avenue; thence westerly along the middle of St. Paul Avenue to the westerly rear lot line of the subdivided lot on the southwesterly corner of Lakeland Avenue and St. Paul Avenue; thence southerly along the rear lot lines of subdivided lots fronting on the westerly side of Lakeland Avenue, continuing in a straight line to shoreline of Lake St. Clair; thence westerly along the shoreline of Lake St. Clair to the westerly boundary of the City of Grosse Pointe; and thence northerly along the westerly boundary of the City of Grosse Pointe to the northerly boundary of the City of Grosse Pointe, which is in Mack Avenue; thence in an easterly and northerly direction along the northerly boundary of the City of Grosse Pointe to the point of its intersection with the easterly rear lot line of the subdivided lot on the south easterly corner of Mack Avenue and University Place; thence southerly along the rear lot lines of the subdivided lots fronting on the easterly side of University Place to the middle of Charlevoix Avenue; thence westerly along the middle of Charlevoix Avenue to the westerly rear lot line of the subdivided lot on the southwest corner of Charlevoix Avenue and University Place; thence southerly along the westerly rear lot lines of the subdivided lots fronting on the westerly side of University Place to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1980, § 1.34; Ord. No. 311, § 1, 12-21-98) 
Sec. 30-28. - Precinct no. 2. 
    Precinct no. 2 shall consist of the following territory: beginning at a point on the westerly rear lot line of the subdivided lot on the southwesterly corner of Waterloo Avenue and University Place; thence southerly along the westerly rear lot lines of the subdivided lots fronting on the westerly side of University Place to the middle of St. Paul Avenue; thence along the middle of St. Paul Avenue to the easterly rear lot line of the subdivided lot on the southwesterly corner of St. Paul Avenue and Lakeland Avenue; thence southerly along the rear lot lines of the subdivided lots fronting on the westerly side of Lakeland Avenue and continuing in a straight line to the shoreline of Lake St. Clair; thence easterly along the shoreline of Lake St. Clair to the easterly boundary of the City of Grosse Pointe; and thence northerly, easterly and northerly all along the easterly boundary of the City of Grosse Pointe to the northerly boundary of the City of Grosse Pointe, which is Mack Avenue; thence in a westerly and southerly direction along the northerly boundary of the City of Grosse Pointe to the point of its intersection with the easterly rear lot line of the subdivided lot on the southeasterly corner of Mack Avenue and University Place; thence southerly along the rear lot lines of the subdivided lots fronting on the easterly side of University Place to the middle of Charlevoix Avenue; thence westerly along the middle of Charlevoix Avenue to the easterly rear lot line of the subdivided lot on the southwest corner of Charlevoix Avenue and University Place; thence southerly along the easterly rear lot lines of the subdivided lots fronting on the westerly side of University Place to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1980, § 1.33; Ord. No. 311, § 1, 12-21-98) 
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 26; subdivisions, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- State fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq., MSA 28.397 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq., MSA 28.437 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 34-26. - Adoption by reference. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 3(k) of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.3(k)), as amended, the International Fire Code, as currently in effect under Michigan State Law, published by International Code Council, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as the Fire Prevention Code), is hereby found and declared to be an acceptable code and is hereby adopted by reference, as in this article modified, for the purpose of prescribing minimum requirements and controls to safeguard life, property or public welfare from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of substances, materials or devices and from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the use of or occupancy of all buildings and structures, existing and proposed, in the city. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 1(8.201), 8-16-93; Ord. No. 325, § 1, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 402, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 34-27. - Copy on file. 
    A copy of the Fire Prevention Code adopted in this article is available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1980, § 8.202; Ord. No. 325, § 1, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 402, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 34-28. - References in code. 
    All references in the Fire Prevention Code adopted in this article to the "name of jurisdiction" shall be read as referring to the City of Grosse Pointe. All references to the "code official" shall be read as referring to the City Manager of the City of Grosse Pointe or such representative as he may designate, including the City of Grosse Pointe Fire Inspector. All references to the "legal officer" of the jurisdiction shall be read as referring to the City Attorney of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Code 1980, § 8.203; Ord. No. 325, § 1, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 402, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 34-29. - Changes in code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Fire Prevention Code adopted in this article, are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like-numbered sections of the Fire Prevention Code. 
Section F-103.2. Section F-103.2 is amended to read as follows: 
    F-103.2 Appointment: The code official shall be appointed by the city manager. 
Section F-108.1. Section F-108.1 is amended and restated as follows: 
    F-108.1 Application for appeal: An application for appeal, except in respect to insecure and unsafe building and equipment requiring immediate action, shall be referred to the board of appeals, and such board shall proceed to hear and determine the appeal. 
    The person taking the appeal shall pay a fee of $100.00. If the appeal shall be decided against such person, the fee shall be retained by the board and paid into the department. If the appeal shall be decided in favor of such person, the fee shall be returned to such person. 
Section F-108.2. Section F-108.2 is amended and restated as follows: 
    F-108.2 Membership of the board: The board of appeals shall consist of the duly elected members of the city council as from time to time constituted. The mayor shall be the chairperson of the board. Four members shall be necessary for a quorum, with the chairperson entitled to vote. The city clerk shall act as the secretary of the board. 
Section F-108.3. Section F.108.3 is amended and restated as follows: 
    F-108.3 Notice of meeting: The secretary of the board shall, at the order of the chairperson, call meetings of the board and shall notify the members thereof in writing at least two working days in advance of such meetings. 
Section F-108.4. Section F.108.4 is added as follows: 
    F-108.4 Board decision: No matter shall be determined except by a majority of all members present and in no case shall any motion be passed without at least three affirmative votes. 
Section F-109.3. Section F.109.3 is amended and restated as follows: 
    F-109.3 Violation; penalties: Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to the penalties and remedies provided for in Section 1-13 of the Grosse Pointe City Code. 
Section F-111.4. Section F.111.4 is amended and restated as follows: 
    F-111.4 Failure to comply: Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalties and remedies provided for in Section 1-13 of the Grosse Pointe City Code. 
Section F-307.2. Section F-307.2 is modified to read as follows: 
    F-307.2 Allowable burning: Open burning shall be allowed without prior notification to the code official for highway safety flares, smudge pots and similar occupational needs. 
Section F-307.3. Section F-307.3 is modified to read as follows: 
    F-307.3 Permit required: Open burning shall be allowed after obtaining a permit or other proper authorization from the code official for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, and providing heat for outworkers. 
Section F-307.4. Section F-307.4 are amended and restated as follows: 
    F-307.4 Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fire: Bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires are hereby prohibited in the city. 
Section F-308.4. Section F308.4 shall be amended and restated as follows: 
    F-308.4 Torches for removing paint: Torches or other flame-producing devices for removing paint from a structure shall be prohibited. 
Section F-308.4.1 shall be deleted. 
Section F-506. Section F-506 shall be amended and restated as follows: 
    F-506 Secure Access Devices. 
(a)  For purposes of this Section, the term "secure access device" shall refer to an approved system by which a door key or other means of access into a building may be affixed to the exterior of such building in a secure location and accessible, via a confidential entry code, only by the building's owner(s) or occupant(s) (and any authorized representatives of such owner(s) and/or occupant(s)) and by the Public Safety Department of the City of Grosse Pointe. A "secure access device" shall include a "Knox Box" or other system(s) approved from time to time by the Director of Public Safety. 
(b)  The utilization of a secure access device is designed, among other things, (a) to expedite access into a structure in the event of a fire, explosion, or other actual or suspended public safety emergency, and (b) to minimize the property damage and associated costs attendant with the need to gain immediate access into structures in the event of a fire, explosion, or other actual or suspended public safety emergency. Nevertheless, the placement of a secure access device on any structure (whether on a voluntary basis or as required under this Section) shall not restrict in any manner the right of authorized public safety personnel, in the case of any actual or suspended public safety emergency, to gain access to a structure via all available means, and in no event shall the City or any public safety personnel be responsible or liable in any manner for the failure to utilize a secure access device. Any civil liability for costs or expenses imposed by the provisions of the International Fire Code 2006 (as amended and supplemented by this Ordinance) shall continue in full force and effect whether or not a secure access device was utilized in any given instance. 
(c)  Secure access devices shall not be required for structures in any residential zoning district (excepting any business structures located in a residential district). For all structures in all other zoning districts (and including any business structures located in a residential district), secure access devices shall be phased in according to the following schedule: 
(1)  For all structures having a common wall with any other structure, a secure access device must be installed as soon as practicable after the effective date of this Ordinance; 
(2)  Upon any change in occupancy of any structure, a secure access device must be installed prior to the issuance of a new certificate of occupancy; and 
(3)  For all structures not covered by subparagraphs (1) or (2) above, a secure access device must be installed not later than June 30, 2011. 
(d)  A property owner or occupant may, in any case of practical difficulty, appeal to the City Council any decision of the Director of Public Safety requiring the installation of a secure device in connection with a specific structure. Any such appeal shall be in writing and shall state the reason(s) therefor. Upon such appeal, the City Council may affirm the decision of the Director of Public Safety or may modify the application of the requirements of this section. 
Section F-907.21. Section F-907.21 is added to read as follows: 
    F-907.21 Residential smoke detectors: Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a smoke detector, installed to the specifications of the International Electrical Code, capable of sensing visible or invisible products of combustion. The detector shall be approved by a recognized independent testing laboratory and, when actuated, shall provide an alarm suitable to warn occupants within the individual dwelling unit. A minimum of one smoke detector shall be located on or near the ceiling, outside of, but in close proximity to each separate sleeping area. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "separate sleeping area" shall be defined as follows: "Sleeping area means the areas of the family living unit in which the bedrooms (or sleeping rooms) are located. Bedrooms (or sleeping rooms) separated by other use areas, such as kitchen or living rooms (but not bathrooms) shall be considered as separate sleeping areas for the purpose of this standard." Each dwelling unit shall be brought in compliance with this section prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or at the time of any addition or renovation to a dwelling unit, requiring a building permit and costing $2,500.00 or more. 
Section F-2206.2. Section F-2206.2 is amended and restated to read as follows: 
    F-2206.2 Outside fuel oil storage aboveground: The storage of class I, II and III A flammable liquids in aboveground storage vessels outside of buildings is hereby prohibited in the city. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 2(8.204), 8-16-93; Ord. No. 325, § 1, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 402, § I, 5-16-11) 
Sec. 34-30. - Reserved. 
Sec. 34-31. - Life safety code adopted. 
    The Code for Safety to Life from Fire in Buildings and Structures, NFiPA 101-1991, commonly referred to as the Life Safety Code, 1991 edition, is hereby found and declared to be an acceptable code and is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 4(8.206), 8-16-93) 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HEALTH OFFICER 

Sec. 38-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Communicable disease means the diseases listed as reportable in the regulations for the control of communicable diseases of the state department of health, as in effect on the adoption of this Code, and as may be amended. 
(Code 1980, § 6.4) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-27. - Purpose. 
    The health officer, in accordance with section 2-51, shall have general supervision over the health of the city and shall from time to time take such steps as he shall deem proper to promote the cleanliness and sanitary conditions of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 6.1) 
Sec. 38-28. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Subject to the orders of the city council, the health officer shall have power and it shall be his duty to: 
(1)  Make, or cause to be made, diligent inquiry in respect to all nuisances, sources of filth and causes of sickness of every description in this city which are or may be injurious to the public health, and to abate the same. 
(2)  Detain and examine, or to cause to be detained or examined, every person coming from a place infected with any communicable disease when, in his opinion, such detention and examination are necessary in order to prevent the introduction of the same into the city. 
(3)  Cause any person within the city who is infected with any communicable disease to be removed to a hospital or any place provided for the detention of such persons, if in the opinion of the health officer the removal of such person is necessary for the preservation of the public health and can be effected with safety to the patient. No person shall resist the health officer in the performance of his duties, nor escape or attempt to escape from the place of detention, unless discharged by the health officer. 
(4)  Isolate and quarantine, when in his judgment the public welfare so requires, any person infected with any communicable disease or whom the health officer has good reason to believe has been exposed to any such disease. No person shall tear down, remove, mutilate or destroy any quarantine placard or other sign or notice posted by the health officer or under his direction, until the health officer orders the same removed. 
(b)  The health officer shall, subject to the orders of the city council, be actively in charge of all matters pertaining to the public health of the city except as may be otherwise provided by state statute, the Charter or this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 6.2) 
Sec. 38-29. - Compliance with state laws, rules, regulations. 
    The statutes of the state relating to the public health, sanitation and the prevention of disease and the spreading thereof, and the rules and regulations of the state department of health, and all amendments and additions thereto, and as hereafter amended or added to, are expressly incorporated into and made a part of this Code. Any person violating any such law, rule or regulation shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 6.3) 
Sec. 38-30. - Isolation and quarantine. 
    Any physician, upon discovering a case or suspected case of communicable disease, shall immediately report the same to the health officer and shall direct the patient or the person in charge of the care of the patient, that the patient be isolated pending official action by the health officer. Such physician shall advise the person in charge of the household, and the person in charge of the building in which the household may be located, as to what precautionary measures should be taken to prevent spread of the disease. 
(Code 1980, § 6.5) 
Sec. 38-31. - Public toilet facilities. 
    Every commercial establishment within the city having any toilet facilities available for use by its customers or other members of the public shall keep the facilities in a clean condition, in good repair, well lighted and ventilated. Sanitary toilet paper and towels shall be provided. The use of a common towel is prohibited. The health officer shall follow the inspection procedure specified in this chapter in the enforcement of this section. If the commercial establishment is licensed under this Code such license shall be subject to suspension and revocation as prescribed in this chapter for any violation of this section and the licensee shall also be subject to punishment as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, § 6.6) 
Sec. 38-32. - Private yards. 
    If any premises become a health hazard or cause the presence of vermin due to the accumulation of trash, debris or other materials, the health officer or his authorized representative may, after inspection of the premises, direct methods for cleanup or other action to correct or eliminate the health hazard. If the occupant of the premises, or the owner if the premises are unoccupied, fails to comply with the directions of the health officer or his authorized representative within ten days from receipt of notice, he shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and may be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. Any such hazard may also be abated. 
(Code 1980, § 6.7) 
Chapter 42 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; health and sanitation, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 62; vegetation, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Public nuisances, MCL 600.3801. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - General definition, prohibition. 
    Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this chapter. No person shall commit, create or maintain any nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 9.1) 
Sec. 42-2. - Nuisances enumerated. 
    The following acts, services, apparatus and structures are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  The maintenance of any pond, pool of water, or vessel holding stagnant water. 
(2)  The throwing, placing, depositing or leaving in any street, highway, lane, alley, public place, square or sidewalk, or in any private place or premises where such throwing, placing, depositing or leaving is in the opinion of the health officer dangerous or detrimental to public health, or likely to cause sickness or attract flies, insects, rodents and/or vermin, by any person, of any animal or vegetable substance, dead animal, fish, shell, tin cans, bottles, glass or other rubbish, dirt, excrement, filth, rot, unclean or nauseous water, liquid or gaseous fluids, hay, straw, soot, garbage, swill, animal bones, hides or horns, rotten soap, grease or tallow, offal or any other offensive article or substance whatever. 
(3)  The pollution of any stream, lake or body of water by, or the depositing into or upon any highway, street, lane, alley, public street or square, or into any adjacent lot or grounds of, or depositing or permitting to be deposited any refuse, foul or nauseous liquid or water, creamery or industrial waste, or forcing or discharging into any public or private sewer or drain any steam, vapor or gas. 
(4)  The emission of noxious fumes or gas in such quantities as to render occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(5)  Any vehicle used for any illegal purpose. 
(6)  All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and newspapers. 
(7)  Betting, bookmaking, prizefighting and all apparatus used in such occupations. 
(8)  All gambling devices, slot machines and punchboards. 
(9)  All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses. 
(10)  The distribution of samples of medicines or drugs unless such samples are placed in the hands of an adult person. 
(11)  All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner or in any amount contrary to the provisions of this Code or statute of the state. 
(12)  Any use of the public streets and/or sidewalks which causes large crowds to gather, obstructing the free use of the streets and/or sidewalks. 
(13)  All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise and all excavations remaining unfilled or uncovered for a period of 90 days or longer, and which are so situated so as to endanger the safety of the public. 
(14)  All dangerous, unguarded excavations or machinery in any public place, or so situated, left or operated on private property as to attract the public. 
(15)  The owning, driving or moving upon the public streets and alleys of trucks or other motor vehicles which are constructed or loaded so as to permit any part of its load or contents to blow, fall or be deposited upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place, or which deposits from its wheels, tires or other parts onto the street, alley, sidewalk or other public or private place dirt, grease, sticky substances or foreign matter of any kind. However, under circumstances determined by the city manager to be in the public interest, he may grant persons temporary exemption from the provisions of this subsection conditioned upon cleaning and correcting the violating condition at least once daily and execution of an agreement by such person to reimburse the city for any extraordinary maintenance expense incurred by the city in connection with the violation. 
(Code 1980, § 9.7) 
Sec. 42-3. - Fences and hedges. 
(a)  It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to construct and maintain a fence, hedge or wall in the city more than six feet in height. 
(b)  It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person owning or occupying premises in the city to plant or maintain a hedge, bush, wall or fence within one foot from the inside of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1980, § 9.8; Ord. No. 343, § I, 10-20-03; Ord. No. 404, § I, 2-13-12. eff. 3-11-12) 
Sec. 42-4. - Dogs in stores. 
    It is hereby declared a nuisance for the owner of any dog to allow the dog within any store in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 9.9) 
Sec. 42-5. - Motorboat mufflers. 
    It is hereby declared a nuisance for any person to operate any boat equipped with a motor, which boat is ordinarily moored, docked and harbored in the city, without a muffler so constructed as to eliminate all possible noise, and the same is prohibited. 
(Code 1980, § 9.10) 
Sec. 42-6. - Home parties. 
    It is hereby declared a nuisance for any owner, occupant, guest, tenant or person in apparent possession of any premises within the city to permit, or fail to take reasonable steps to prevent, any party or gathering of two or more persons on or within the premises to become so loud or boisterous so as to disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding area, or to permit any party or gathering at which alcoholic beverages are consumed by a minor. However, this section shall not apply to legally protected religious services or legally protected educational activities. 
(Code 1980, § 9.11) 
Sec. 42-7. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
    No person shall have in his possession, either inside or outside of any building, structure or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other similar airtight container of any kind which has a snap latch or other locking device thereon, without first removing the snap latch or other locking device, or the doors, from such icebox, refrigerator or other similar container. 
(Code 1980, § 9.25) 
Sec. 42-8. - Refuse and debris control. 
(a)  Any rubbish, trash, concrete, junk, dirt piles, logs, fallen branches or trees, old building materials, used appliances, used machinery, junk automobiles or motor vehicles without current license and not in operating condition or parts thereof, or any other materials, refuse or debris lying upon any property, either public or private, in the city, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  The city manager may order the abatement of the nuisances set forth in subsection (a) of this section by giving notice in accordance with provisions of section 1-14 of this Code to the owner of the premises upon which such nuisance is located, to remove or dispose of same within ten days after service of the notice. 
(c)  If, at the expiration of the time limit in the notice, the owner has not complied with the requirements of the notice, the cost of abatement may be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 1-15 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 9.27) 
Sec. 42-9. - Refrigeration systems or units used for central air conditioning. 
(a)  In all residential districts in the City of Grosse Pointe, no refrigeration equipment used for central air conditioning purposes or heat pump units shall be installed, erected, maintained or permitted outside a residential dwelling or its attached structure except: 
(1)  Refrigeration equipment used for central air conditioning purposes or heat pump units located in the rear or side yard, as defined in chapter 90, section 90-3, of the Code of Ordinances, provided, however, that such equipment shall be installed in: (i) the rear of the structure, between the extreme sides, and not less than three feet from either side of the structure; (ii) a side yard adjoining a public right-of-way; or (iii) a side yard adjoining private property, provided the owner of such adjoining property shall consent in writing to the placement of such equipment in such side yard, which written consent shall be filed with the city and shall be irrevocable and binding on succeeding owners of such adjoining property. 
(2)  Refrigeration equipment used for central air conditioning purposes or heat pump units located in any location which is not authorized by subsection (a)(1), provided, however, that the property owner obtain, by petition, the approval of the city council concerning the location of such equipment. With the petition to the city council, the owner shall submit plans to scale showing all dimensions of the equipment, the owner's property, adjoining lots and streets and specific landscape plans for screening the equipment from view including the type of plants or shrubs, number and height. The petition shall fully describe the need for placing such equipment in the requested location. The city manager or his designated representative will set a date for a hearing on such petition and notice by certified mail shall be given by the petitioner not less than ten days prior to the hearing, to all property owners with residences located within 200 feet of the equipment to be installed. 
(b)  Refrigeration equipment used for central air conditioning purposes or heat pump units located in any location authorized by subsection (a)(1)(ii) or (a)(1)(iii) of this section shall be properly screened from view by landscaping, shrubbery, walls or fences or other barriers approved by the director of public service. 
(c)  Before any refrigeration equipment used for central air conditioning purposes or heat pump units shall hereafter be erected on any property in the City of Grosse Pointe, other than property of the city, a written permit therefore shall be obtained from the city upon application in writing. The application shall set forth a description of the equipment, and its proposed location, and such other information as the officers of the city may reasonably require. A permit shall be issued upon determination by the administrative offices of the city that the location of the proposed equipment complies with the provisions of this section; otherwise the permit shall not be issued. A fee in an amount established from time to time by the city council shall be paid to the city upon the issuance of such permit. 
(d)  An appeal to the city council may be taken from any action of the administrative officers of the city denying a permit for the installation of refrigeration equipment used for central air conditioning purposes or a heat pump unit. Appeals must be in writing and must be filed within ten days after the decision appealed from is mailed or otherwise communicated to the appellant. The council may, upon such appeal, reverse, modify or affirm the action of the administrative officers. The council may also, upon any such appeal, at its discretion, reduce or modify the requirements of this section in individual cases, where it determines such action will not impair the general affect and intent of this section, (a) in any situation of unusual practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or (b) in the general interest of the public safety, comfort, convenience, or the protection of property values. The council may impose conditions in granting approval including but not limited to required landscaping and screening to conceal the equipment from view from an abutting public right-of-way, or adjacent structures. 
(e)  This section shall only apply to central air conditioning or heat pump units first installed after December 1, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 351, § I, 11-15-04) 
Sec. 42-10. - Sale of medical marihuana in proximity to school property. 
    It is hereby declared a nuisance for a qualified primary caregiver under the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act to dispense, sell, offer to dispense or offer to sell medical marihuana on or within 1,000 feet of any property owned or used by any preschool or primary or secondary school. Each instance of dispensing, selling, offering to dispense or offering to sell shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 390, § I, 1-11-10) 
Secs. 42-11-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

Sec. 42-31. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall maintain any structure which is unsafe or which is a menace to the health, morals or safety of the public. 
(Code 1980, § 9.2) 
Sec. 42-32. - Notice of violation; hearing; condemnation notice. 
    The council may, after notice to the owner and after holding a public hearing, condemn a dangerous structure by giving notice to the owner of the land upon which the structure is located, specifying in what respects the structure is a public nuisance and requiring the owner to alter, repair, tear down or remove it within a reasonable time, not exceeding 60 days, as may be necessary to do or have done the work required by the notice. The notice may also provide a reasonable time within which the work shall be commenced. 
(Code 1980, § 9.3) 
Sec. 42-33. - Failure to comply with notice; abatement by city. 
    If, at the expiration of any time limit in the notice issued pursuant to section 42-32 the owner has not complied with the requirements of the notice, the city manager shall carry out the requirements of the notice. The cost of such abatement shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 1-15. 
(Code 1980, § 9.4) 
Sec. 42-34. - Emergency abatement. 
    The city manager may abate any public nuisance under this article, if the public safety requires immediate action, without preliminary order of the council. Thereafter the cost of abating the nuisance shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 1-15. 
(Code 1980, § 9.5) 
Secs. 42-35-42-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 42-56. - Excessive noise declared nuisance. 
    All loud or unusual noises or sounds and annoying vibrations which offend the peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities are declared to be public nuisances. 
(Code 1980, § 9.20) 
Sec. 42-57. - Specific offenses enumerated. 
    Each of the following acts is declared unlawful and prohibited, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person. 
(2)  Construction noises. The erection (including excavating therefor), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways, on Sundays, and other days, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless a permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(3)  Sound amplifiers. Use of any loudspeaker, amplifier or other instrument or device, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle for any purpose except one which is noncommercial in character and when so used shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  The only sounds permitted are music or human speech. 
b.  Operations are permitted for four hours each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized. The permitted four hours of operation shall be as designated by the director of public safety. 
c.  Sound amplifying equipment mounted on vehicles shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten miles per hour except when the truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. 
d.  Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools or churches. 
e.  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound amplifying equipment and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. 
(4)  Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(5)  Handling merchandise. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(6)  Blowers. The discharge into the open air of noise from a compressor, blower or power fan unless the noise from such compressor, blower or fan is muffled sufficiently to deaden such noise. 
(7)  Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner. 
(8)  Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of control, or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(9)  Radio and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television set, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(10)  Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing or the making of any other loud noise on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or the making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any school, place of worship, or office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(11)  Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger. 
(12)  Lawn equipment. No person shall use or operate lawn equipment in the city between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., local time, on weekdays and Saturdays or before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on Sundays or legal holidays. "Lawn equipment" means any gasoline or electrical powered lawn mower, edging tool, grass clippers, weed cutters or grass or leaf blower. 
(Code 1980, § 9.21; Ord. No. 388, § I, 6-15-09) 
Sec. 42-58. - Exceptions. 
    None of the terms or prohibitions of section 42-57 shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles. Any department of public safety vehicle or any ambulance, while engaged upon emergency business. 
(2)  Highway maintenance and construction. Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the city or the state, during the night, when the public safety, welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(Code 1980, § 9.22) 
Secs. 42-59-42-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKE CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 62. 

Sec. 42-81. - Necessity, suitability of code. 
(a)  It is in the immediate public interest of the people of the city to have in effect an enforceable code regulating smoke and air pollution and refuse burning equipment and incinerators, and all equipment and appliances and appurtenances thereof causing and/or contributing to smoke and air pollution. 
(b)  Such a code will best serve the people of the city if it is one that is entirely consistent with an acceptable code for such purpose commonly enforced in the greater Detroit metropolitan area. 
(Code 1980, §§ 9.31, 9.32) 
Sec. 42-82. - Code adopted. 
    The City of Detroit Smoke and Air Pollution Abatement Code, being Ordinance No. 167-E promulgated by the City of Detroit effective August 14, 1947, as the same has been from time to time amended to October 16, 1947, and thereafter amended by Ordinances No. 793-E effective September 17, 1953, and No. 77-F of Chapter 184 effective December 1, 1955, and as further amended to the date of adoption of the Grosse Pointe Code of Ordinances, is found and declared to be an acceptable code for that purpose and is adopted by reference as and for the City of Gross Pointe Smoke and Air Pollution Abatement Code, with the following exceptions and modifications: 
(1)  All references to the City of Detroit shall be read as referring to the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(2)  All references to the department of buildings and safety engineering shall be read as referring to the city department of public safety. 
(3)  All references to the commissioner shall be read as referring to the city clerk of Grosse Pointe. 
(4)  All references to the board of appeals and to the appeal board shall be read as referring to the city council of Grosse Pointe. 
(5)  All references to the bureau of licenses and permits of the department shall be read as referring to the city clerk of Grosse Pointe. 
(6)  The reference to the Detroit House of Correction shall be read as referring to the Wayne County Jail. 
(Code 1980, § 9.33) 
Sec. 42-83. - Copies available. 
    The city clerk shall keep printed copies of the City of Detroit code as well as legible copies of this article available in his office for inspection by and distribution at cost to the public at all times when the city clerk's office is open for business. 
(Code 1980, § 9.34) 
Secs. 42-84-42-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 418, § I, adopted April 20, 2015, repealed article V, §§ 42-90-42-94, which pertained to adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult motels, adult personal service businesses and cabarets and derived from Ord. No. 334, adopted October 21, 2002. 

Secs. 42-90-42-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROHIBITION ON SALE AND CONSUMPTION OF MARIHUANA IN PUBLIC PLACES 

Sec. 42-100. - Prohibition on sale and consumption of marihuana in public places. 
(a)  In conformance with sections 4.1(e) and 6.2(b) of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (the "Act"), the sale or consumption of marihuana in any form and the sale or display of marihuana accessories as defined by the Act, is prohibited in any public places or on public property within the boundaries of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(b)  This section does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to the transfer and consumption of marihuana on private property to the extent authorized by the person who owns, occupies or operates such property, as provided in and authorized by the Act, and does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to the use of marihuana for medical purposes as provided by any law of the State of Michigan allowing for or regulating marihuana for medical use. 
(Ord. No. 435, § II, 12-17-18) 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquors, ch. 6; nuisances, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Crimes, MSA title 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public place means any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
(Code 1980, § 9.61) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-2. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer or peep into, or be found loitering around, or within view of any window not on his own property, with the intent of looking through such window in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy, without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(6)) 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c), MSA 28.364(1)(c). 
Sec. 46-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Minutes of November 18, 2013, repealed § 46-3, which pertained to begging and derived from the Code of 1980, § 9.62(7). 
Sec. 46-4. - Fortunetelling. 
    No person shall engage in fortunetelling or pretend to tell fortunes for hire, gain or reward. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(14)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.267 et seq., MSA 28.478 et seq. 
Sec. 46-5. - Spitting in public places. 
    No person shall spit on any sidewalk or on the floor or seat of any public carrier, or on any floor, wall, seat or equipment of any place of public assemblage. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(35)) 
Sec. 46-6. - Aiding, assisting prohibited act. 
    No person shall aid and assist or attempt to aid or assist any other person in the commission of any act or acts prohibited by this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(42)) 
Sec. 46-7. - Illegal or improper behavior. 
    No person shall engage in or be about to engage in any illegal or improper diversion or act, or shall use any indecent, insulting or illegal language, or shall be guilty of any indecent, insulting or illegal conduct or behavior. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(43)) 
Sec. 46-8. - Violation of state laws. 
    No person shall violate any of the criminal laws, fair housing laws, narcotic drug laws or hypnotic drug laws of the state. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(46)) 
Secs. 46-9-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 46-31. - Obstructing, resisting public safety officers. 
    No person shall obstruct, resist, hinder or oppose any member of the public safety department, or any public safety officer in the discharge of his duties as such. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(32)) 
Sec. 46-32. - False summons of public safety department or ambulance. 
    No person shall summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise without any good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise, the public safety department or any public or private ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not needed. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(39)) 
Secs. 46-33-46-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 46-56. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to attempt or offer, with force and violence, to commit an assault and/or battery on any other person. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(1)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.81, MSA 28.276. 
Sec. 46-57. - Accosting, annoying others. 
    No person shall accost, address or speak to any stranger to his annoyance, address any person other than in a proper and respectful manner, use annoying or improper language within the hearing of any other person, or accost any person for an illegal purpose, in any public place. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(8)) 
Sec. 46-58. - Lewd behavior, molestation. 
    No person shall lewdly, wantonly or wrongfully accost, ogle, insult, annoy, follow, pursue, lay hands on, or by gesture, movement of body or otherwise wrongfully molest any person in any public place. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(9)) 
Sec. 46-59. - Insulting, annoying behavior. 
    No person shall insult, accost, molest or otherwise annoy, either by word of mouth, sign, or motion, any person in any public place. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(19)) 
Sec. 46-60. - Nonsupport of family. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person of sufficient ability within the city to refuse or neglect to support his family. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(38)) 
State Law reference- Desertion and nonsupport, MCL 750.161, MSA 28.358; person neglecting family deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(a), MSA 28.364(1)(a). 
Secs. 46-61-46-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 46-81. - Damaging, removing, defacing property. 
(a)  No person shall willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his own, or any public school building, or any public building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, street light, street sign, traffic control device, parking meter, clock, clock structure, cellular phone tower, fountain, sculpture or shade tree belonging to the city or located in the public places of the city, or mark or post handbills on, or in any manner mar, the walls of any public building, or mar any fence, tree, clock, clock structure, fountain sculpture or pole within the city, or destroy, take or meddle with any property belonging to the city, or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed or stored, without proper authority; or disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage any city water meter without proper authority; or climb on any street light, street sign, traffic control device, clock, clock structure, fountain, sculpture or cellular phone tower located within the city without proper authority. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and imprisonment of not more than 90 days. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided in this section for violating its provisions, any person convicted of a prohibited act resulting in damage to the city's property shall reimburse the city for up to three times the amount of the damages as determined by the court. 
(d)  In every case of conviction for the offenses described in paragraph (a) above resulting in damage to the city's property, the court before whom such conviction is obtained, shall enter judgment in favor of the city and against the defendant for liquidated damages in a sum as provided in paragraph (c). The city shall, with the assistance of the prosecuting attorney, collect the award by execution or otherwise. If two or more defendants are convicted of the vandalism, the judgment for damages shall be entered against them jointly and severally. If the defendant is a minor, the judgment shall be entered against his parents. 
(e)  Upon collection, the sum shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(17); Ord. No. 317, § 1, 1-24-00) 
Sec. 46-82. - Injuring water fountains. 
    No person shall destroy, injure or in any manner deface any drinking fountain located in the city, or throw or deposit any substance therein, or in any manner pollute the water in the basin of any fountain or detach the cups or other parts of such drinking fountain. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(18)) 
Sec. 46-83. - Unauthorized removal of property. 
    No person shall remove or attempt to remove any property from a store, shop, office, filling station, school or dwelling house, without the consent of the owner or of the person in charge of such property. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(40)) 
Sec. 46-84. - Fraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing, or to aid or abet, or in any manner to be concerned therein. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(41)) 
State Law reference- Frauds and cheats, MCL 750.271 et seq., MSA 28.482 et seq. 
Sec. 46-85. - Trespass upon lands or premises of another. 
    Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so, or after such lands or premises have been previously posted with a conspicuous notice forbidding any trespass thereon by the owner or occupant, or agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, or agent or servant of either, who, without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1980, §§ 9.65-9.67) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.552, MSA 28.820(1). 
Sec. 46-86. - Unlawful distribution of printed or written matter. 
(a)  Littering. No person shall litter or cause to be littered any streets, alleys, public places, or other outside premises either public or private, in the city with any printed or written matter. 
(b)  Obstructing traffic. It shall be unlawful to obstruct traffic on public streets, alleys or walks in the city in the distribution of any written or printed matter. 
(c)  Distributing to buildings, public places. No person shall throw, cast, or distribute, or cause or permit to be thrown, cast, or distributed, any handbill, circular, card, booklet, placard, or other advertising matter whatsoever in or upon any street or public place, or in the front yard or courtyard or on any stoop or in the vestibule or any hall of any building or in the letterbox. However, this subsection shall not be applicable to the distribution of any newspaper or magazine; to the delivery of mail; to the delivery of any matter which the owner or occupant of the premises may have heretofore requested to be delivered at the premises; or to the distribution of any printed matter by attaching the same to an outside door or screen knob during daylight hours in such a way that it will not be blown off. 
(d)  Going upon premises, knocking at doors without permission. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed in the city any commercial handbill or other printed or written commercial matter by the ringing of door bells, knocking at doors, or any other means of attracting one inside the premises to come to or open the entrance door, unless such person theretofore secured the written consent of the occupant of the premises. 
(e)  Creating noise, attracting attention. It shall be unlawful in the sale or distribution of any wares, merchandise, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet or any printed or written matter for the one making the sale or causing the distribution to call out, ring a bell, sound a horn or otherwise make a noise for the purpose of attracting attention in aid of such sale or distribution while he shall be in any residence district as defined in chapter 90 or in such close proximity thereto as to disturb those in the residence district. 
(Code 1980, §§ 9.41-9.45) 
Sec. 46-87. - Receiving stolen property. 
    No person shall receive, possess and/or conceal stolen property. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(47)) 
Secs. 46-88-46-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 46-111. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be intoxicated in a public place and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(2)) 
State Law reference- Intoxicated person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e), MSA 28.364(1)(e). 
Sec. 46-112. - Indecent, illegal conduct. 
    No person shall engage in any indecent, insulting, illegal or obscene conduct in any public place. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(3)) 
Sec. 46-113. - Interrupting worship service. 
    No person shall interrupt the service of any place of divine worship by talking, laughing or otherwise. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(10)) 
Sec. 46-114. - Obstructing pedestrian passage by crowding, loitering. 
    No person shall collect, stand in crowds or remain loitering on the sidewalks, or at the corners of the streets, so as to hinder or impede the passage of pedestrians, or in front of any church, any public hall or place of worship during service, or the gathering or departing of the congregation. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(11)) 
Sec. 46-115. - Breach of peace. 
    Any person who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance, trouble or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace and good order of the city are disturbed, shall be guilty of a breach of the peace and disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(20)) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170, MSA 28.367. 
Sec. 46-116. - Gathering for illegal or mischievous purpose. 
    No person shall collect or stand in crowds, or arrange, encourage or abet the collection of persons in crowds for illegal or mischievous purposes in any public place. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(21)) 
Sec. 46-117. - Jostling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(22)) 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(l), MSA 28.364(1)(l). 
Sec. 46-118. - Loitering. 
(a)  In this section the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around; and also includes the colloquial expression "hanging around." 
(2)  Public place mean any place to which the general public has access and a right of resort for business, entertainment or for lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so as to: 
(1)  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians after having been told to move on by a police officer. 
(2)  Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto after having been told to move on by a police officer. 
(3)  Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or premises. 
(c)  No person shall loiter in or about any parking lot or other area set aside for the parking of vehicles in any park. No person shall park a motor vehicle in any park for the purpose of displaying or exhibiting same or for the purpose of offering same for sale or for the purpose of performing mechanical work or cleaning, washing or polishing same and engage in any display, exhibition, gathering, demonstration, parade or other gathering within a parking lot or other area set aside for the parking of vehicles in any park without a permit or written authorization by the director of recreation. 
(d)  A person who is 17 years old or older who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of $50.00 for each offense. A person under the age of 17 who violates this section shall be liable for a civil infraction fine of $50.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 329, § 1, 9-17-01) 
Editor's note- As to the provisions of subsection (d), section 2 of Ord. No. 329, adopted Sept. 17, 2001, states: All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired, or incurred at the time this amendatory ordinance takes effect [Oct. 8, 2001] are saved and may be consummated according to the law in force when they were commenced. This amendatory ordinance shall not be construed to affect any matter pending or initiated before the effective date of this amendatory ordinance. 
State Law reference- Certain loiterers deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364. 
Sec. 46-119. - Permitting noisy, disorderly conduct. 
    No person shall permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him to be a resort of noisy, boisterous, or disorderly persons. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(31)) 
Sec. 46-120. - Prowling. 
    No person shall prowl about any alley or the private premises of any other person in the nighttime, without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(34)) 
Sec. 46-121. - Disorderly disturbance. 
    No person shall be drunk or intoxicated or make or assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace and good order of the neighborhood are disturbed, or be guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(44)) 
Sec. 46-122. - Issuing checks without sufficient funds. 
(a)  Any person who, with intent to defraud, shall make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering that the maker or drawer has not sufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order in full upon its presentation shall be guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(b)  Any person who, with intent to defraud, shall make, draw or utter any check, draft or order, for the payment of money to apply on an account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, who at the time of making, drawing, uttering or delivering such check, draft or order has no account in or credit with such bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order upon presentation shall be guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(c)  Evidence of intent to defraud. As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(d)  Notice of intent to defraud. Where such check, draft or order is protested on the grounds of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(e)  The word "credit" as used in this section shall be construed to mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon presentation thereof for payment. 
(Code 1980, § 9.69) 
Sec. 46-123. - Abandonment and labeling of shopping carts. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms whenever used or referred to in this ordinance, shall have the following respective meanings, which definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
    Store means any individual store, chain store and/or supermarket. 
    Cart means any rolling or non-rolling basket or container commonly used in so-called supermarkets or self-service stores. 
    Property means and includes any cart. 
(b)  Labeling. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide carts for patrons' use on the store premises, unless such carts bear thereon a metallic tag or other satisfactory identification designating the name of the owner. 
(c)  Abandonment. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or suffer to be abandoned any cart removed from any store premises, upon any street, alley, highway, boulevard, sidewalk, parking lot, public place or private property not owned by the store owner within the city. 
(d)  Impoundment and disposal. Whenever any cart is found abandoned in any street, highway, boulevard, sidewalk, public place or private property not owned by the store within the city, the cart shall be impounded by the public safety officers or other city representatives, who shall notify the owner thereof, who may reclaim the same by the payment of $5.00 for each cart. If the cart is not reclaimed within 30 days after such notice to said owner, such failure to reclaim shall be construed as a waiver of ownership of the cart by the owner, and the city shall dispose of the cart accordingly. 
(Code 1980, § 9.70; Ord. No. 312, § 1, 1-25-99) 
Secs. 46-124-46-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 46-146. - Swimming without proper apparel. 
    No person shall swim or bathe in any public place without wearing proper apparel. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(12)) 
Sec. 46-147. - Indecent exposure. 
    No person shall make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his person. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(15)) 
Sec. 46-148. - Selling, exhibiting, possessing obscene or indecent article. 
    No person shall print, engrave, sell, offer for sale, give away, exhibit or publish, or have in his possession for any such purpose any obscene, lewd, lascivious, indecent or immodest book, pamphlet, paper, picture, cast statuary, image or representation or other article of an indecent or immoral nature, or any book, paper, print, circular or writing made up principally of pictures or stories of immodest deeds, lust, or crime, or exhibit any such article within the view of any passerby. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(16)) 
Sec. 46-149. - Soliciting, accosting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, male or female, 17 years of age or older, to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place or in or from any building or vehicle by word, gesture or any other means to commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act. This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer while in the performance of his duties as an enforcement officer. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(25)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.448, MSA 28.703. 
Sec. 46-150. - Operating or frequenting place of prostitution, gambling or other illegal activity. 
    No person shall attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor, or where any other illegal or immoral business or occupation is permitted or conducted. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(26)) 
Sec. 46-151. - Dealing in gambling, frequenting gambling place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deal in, play or engage in gaming such as faro, roulette, dice, cards, or other device or game of chance, hazard or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player or otherwise for the purpose of gambling for money or other valuable thing, or to knowingly attend or be found frequenting any place where gambling is permitted or allowed or is taking place. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(27)) 
Sec. 46-152. - Soliciting, inducing commission of illegal act. 
    No person shall solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of any illegal or immoral act. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(28)) 
Sec. 46-153. - Transporting persons to place of illegal activity. 
    No person shall knowingly transport any person to a place where prostitution or gambling is practiced, encouraged or allowed for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in gambling or in any illegal or immoral act. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(29)) 
Sec. 46-154. - Gambling offenses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent or employee, to: 
(1)  Directly or indirectly receive or accept from any person any money or valuable thing with the agreement, understanding or allegation that any money or valuable thing will be paid or delivered to any person where such payment or delivery is alleged to be, or will be contingent upon the result of any race, contest or game, or upon the happening of any event not known by the parties to be certain. 
(2)  Directly or indirectly keep or occupy or assist in keeping or occupying any common gambling house, or any building or room therein, or place within the city where gaming is permitted or suffered, or to suffer or permit on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him any apparatus used for gaming or gambling, or to use such apparatus for gaming or gambling in any place within the city. 
(3)  Keep or maintain, for hire, gain or reward, a gaming room or gaming table, or any game of skill or chance, or partly skill and partly of chance, used for gaming, or to knowingly suffer a gaming room or gaming table, or any such game to be kept, maintained or played on any premises within the city occupied or controlled by him, or for any person to aid, assist or abet in the keeping or maintaining of any such gaming room, gaming table or game within the city. 
(4)  Directly or indirectly keep, maintain, operate or occupy any building or room, or any part thereof, or any place with apparatus, books or any device for registering bets, or buying or selling pools upon the result of a trial or contest of skill, speed or endurance, or upon the result of a game, competition, political competition, appointment or election, or any purported event of like character, or to register bets, or buy or sell pools or to be concerned in buying or selling pools, or to knowingly permit any grounds or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him to be used for any of the purposes aforesaid. 
(5)  Be in possession of any policy or pool tickets, slips or checks, memoranda of any combination, or other bet, manifold or other policy, or pool books or sheets. 
Any such articles or any other implements, apparatus or materials mentioned in this section may be confiscated and destroyed by the public safety department of the city, or used in evidence in any prosecution for violation of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 9.63) 
Sec. 46-155. - Dangerous drugs. 
(a)  Possession, sale prohibited generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, distribute, administer, dispense, prescribe or give away: 
(1)  Any narcotic, narcotics or narcotic drugs as defined in state law. 
(2)  Any of the hypnotic or dangerous drugs described in state law. 
(3)  Marijuana as defined in state law. 
Provided, that nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit the possession, sale, offering for sale, distributing, administering, dispensing or prescribing of any of the drugs or their derivatives mentioned in this subsection and under such circumstances provided in this section. 
(b)  Dispensing by unauthorized persons; drugs to be kept in original package. A manufacturer, wholesaler, apothecary, medical doctor, osteopathic physician, dentist, veterinarian, chiropodist, public or private hospital, nursing home, or institution maintained or conducted in whole or in part for the treatment of disability, disease, inebriety or drug addiction may purchase, receive, possess, sell, distribute, prescribe, administer or dispense the narcotic or dangerous drugs, and marijuana, described in subsection (a), provided such persons have complied with all pertinent provisions of the United States Internal Revenue Code as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended, and state law. No medical doctor, osteopathic physician or other person specified in this subsection in any manner authorized to prescribe narcotic or dangerous drugs shall prescribe such drugs for his own use, nor shall any druggist honor such a prescription. All narcotics or dangerous drugs obtained pursuant to this subsection shall be kept in the original package or container in which they were received, but this requirement shall not be construed to apply to any duly licensed medical doctor, osteopathic physician, dentist, veterinarian or chiropodist, or any authorized person acting directly under their supervision or control. 
(c)  Hypodermic needles, syringes, instruments; possession prohibited; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to have or possess a hypodermic syringe or needle or any other instrument or implement adapted for the use of narcotics or dangerous drugs by subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection or any other manner or method of introduction and which is possessed for that purpose, unless such possession is authorized by the certificate of a licensed medical doctor or osteopathic physician issued within the period of one year; provided that the prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists and embalmers, in the normal legal course of their respective business or profession, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring injection. 
(d)  Hypodermic syringes, needles, capsules, other implements; sale, furnishing, supplying or giving away prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, supply or give away any empty gelatin capsules, or hypodermic syringes or needles or other instrument or implement adapted for the use of narcotic or dangerous drugs by subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection or any other manner or method of introduction to any person known to be a nonmedical habitual user of narcotic or dangerous drugs. For the purpose of this subsection, a nonmedical habitual user of narcotic or dangerous drugs shall mean any person who uses narcotic or dangerous drugs merely to satisfy a craving for such drug and who does not have a legitimate medical need for narcotic or dangerous drugs. Any apothecary, medical doctor, osteopathic physician, dentist, veterinarian, chiropodist, public or private hospital, nursing home or other institution maintained or conducted in whole or in part for the treatment of disability, disease, inebriety or drug addiction shall be responsible when disposing of such items to destroy and dispose of them in such a manner that they shall be unusable by any other person and, upon failure to do so, shall be guilty of violation of this section. 
(e)  Fraud and deceit in obtaining drugs, syringes, needles; false or forged prescriptions. Any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge or concealment of a medical fact or the use of a false name or the giving of a false address for the purpose of obtaining any narcotic or dangerous drug shall be deemed a violation of this section. No person who shall have obtained the possession of any narcotic or dangerous drug, hypodermic syringe, needle, or other instrument or implement adapted for the use of drugs, or empty gelatin capsules pursuant to the terms of this section shall use the same or permit or authorize their use for any purpose other than that specifically authorized in the prescription or order by means of which such possession was obtained. Also, no unauthorized person shall use, possess or have under his control any blank prescription or blank prescription pad or any false, forged or altered prescription. 
(f)  Loitering, living about places where drugs or implements are illegally stored or kept. No person shall knowingly loiter about, frequent or live in any building, apartment, store, automobile, boat or any other place of any description whatsoever where narcotics or hypnotic or dangerous drugs or marijuana, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, hypodermic syringes, needles or other instruments or implements or empty gelatin capsules are stored, dispensed, furnished, given away, sold or kept illegally. 
(g)  Burden of proof; negation of exemption, exception or authorization. In any prosecution for violation of this section, it is not necessary for the people to negate any exemption, exception or authorization in this section in any complaint or other pleading or in any trial, hearing or other proceeding under this section. The burden of proof of any exemption, exception or authorization is upon the person claiming it. In the absence of proof that a person is exempted, excepted or authorized under the provisions of this section to do any act otherwise prohibited, he is presumed not to be so exempted, excepted or authorized. The burden of proof is upon the person claiming exemption, exception or authorization to rebut the presumption. 
(Code 1980, § 9.64) 
Sec. 46-156. - Obscene books, pictures, literature and motion pictures. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Knowingly means having actual or constructive knowledge of the content and character of work. A person shall be deemed to have constructive knowledge of the content and character of a performance of work if he has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent man on notice as to the nature of the work. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Descriptions or representations of sexual intercourse which includes genital-genital, anal-genital or oral-genital, whether between human beings or between a human being and an animal, actual or simulated. 
(2)  Descriptions or representations of fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast, actual or simulated. 
(3)  Explicit closeup representation of human genital organs. 
(4)  The stimulation of the human genital organs by any device, tool, implement or object. 
If any of the depictions or descriptions of sexual conduct described in this section are declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawfully included therein because such depictions or descriptions are constitutionally protected or for any other reason, such declaration shall not invalidate this section as to other patently offensive sexual conduct included in this section. 
(b)  Obscene, sadistic or masochistic literature, recording or image; penalty for sale, transmutation or possession. Any person who knowingly either manufactures, provides, publishes, insures, transfers, transmits, circulates, exhibits, sells, lends, gives away, distributes, shows or transmutes or offers either to manufacture, provide, publish, insure, transfer, circulate, exhibit, sell, lend, give away, distribute, show, transmute or otherwise transmit, or has in his possession with intent to either manufacture, provide, publish, insure, transfer, transmit, circulate, exhibit, sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute or advertise in any manner, or who otherwise knowingly either offers for either loan, gift, sale or distribution, any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent, sadistic or masochistic book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording, or any other device of communication of any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character, which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representation of such character, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(c)  Obscene literature, recording or image; consideration of literary, artistic, political or scientific value. The test to be applied in cases under this section shall be: 
(1)  Whether the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest. 
(2)  Whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
Such test shall be the effect of the book, picture or other subject of the complaint considered as a whole upon all those whom it is likely to reach; that is, its impact upon the average person in the community. The book, picture or other subject of the complaint must be judged as a whole in its entire context, not by considering detached or separate portions only, and by the standards of common conscience of the community of the contemporary period of the violation charged. 
(d)  Publishing, distributing. Any person who publishes or distributes for resale or for reading or other perusal any book, magazine or pamphlet, so composed as to constitute a compilation of pictures, illustrations, caricatures, cartoons, words, stories and advertisements, or any combination or combinations thereof, featuring and primarily devoted for the purpose of commercial exploitation to the description or portrayal or suggestion of illicit sex, or sexual relations or perversions, lust or sexual passion, or to any combination or combinations thereof, which are distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(e)  Requiring retailer to accept. Any person who shall as a condition to a sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale another article, book or other publication which is contrary to this section, or shall deny or threaten to deny any franchise or impose or threaten to impose any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of the failure of any person to accept such articles, books or publications, or by reason of the return thereof shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(f)  Obscene, sadistic or masochistic literature, recording or image; distributions to minors; penalty. Whoever knowingly either sells, distributes or imports for the purpose of selling or distributing to a person under the age of 18 years or who displays at newsstands or any other business establishment frequented by minors under the age of 18 years or where minors are or may be invited as a part of the general public any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, image, wire or tape recording of any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representations of such character, manifestly tending to corrupt the morals of youth, or introduces into a family, school or place of education, or buys, procures, receives or has in his possession any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording of any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character, which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representations of such character, either for the purpose of sale, exhibition, loan or circulation to a person under the age of 18 years or with intent to introduce the same into a family, school or place of education, shall be guilty of a violation of this section. 
(g)  Possession. Possession of six or more identical or substantially similar copies, or six or more articles of any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, slide, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording, or any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character, which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities shall be prima facie evidence of possession with intent to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute the thing. 
(h)  Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with terms and provisions of section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, §§ 9.161-9.163, 9.165) 
Sec. 46-157. - Controlled substances. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, as used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Act means the Michigan Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq., MSA 14.15(1101) et seq.), as amended. 
    Controlled substance means any substance other than marijuana, the sale, possession or use of which is made unlawful by the act. 
    Deliver or delivery means the actual, constructive or attempted transfer from one person to another of a controlled substance, whether or not there is an agency relationship. 
    Manufacture means the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion or processing of a controlled substance, either directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of the substance or labeling or relabeling of its container. 
    Sale includes barter, exchange or gift, or offer therefor, and each such transaction made by any person, principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. 
(b)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Manufacture, deliver or possess with intent to manufacture or deliver, sell, possess, or use any controlled substance except by such person and/or under such conditions that would be lawful under the act; provided, however, that the burden shall be on such person to prove the lawfulness of his actions under the act. 
(2)  Manufacture, deliver or possess with intent to deliver, sell, possess, use or have under his control any empty gelatin capsule, hypodermic syringe or needle, roach clip, hash pipe or any other paraphernalia adapted for use with a controlled substance by subcutaneous or intracutaneous injection or by any other method. 
(3)  Use, possess or have under his control any blank prescription pads or any false, forged or altered prescriptions, the purpose of which is to unlawfully obtain a controlled substance or paraphernalia adapted for use with a controlled substance by subcutaneous or intracutaneous injection or by any other method. 
(4)  Use any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge, false name or false address, or to conceal a material fact for the purpose of obtaining any controlled substance or paraphernalia adapted for use with a controlled substance by subcutaneous or intracutaneous injection or by any other method. 
(5)  Use any fraud, scheme, device, trick, deceit, misrepresentation or subterfuge for the purpose of obtaining money or any other thing of value by selling, furnishing, supplying or giving away of any controlled substance or counterfeit controlled substance. 
(6)  Willfully and knowingly loiter in any place within the city where controlled substances or paraphernalia used or adapted for use with controlled substances by subcutaneous or intracutaneous injection, or any other method, are used, sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored or otherwise illegally kept. 
(c)  Arrest without warrant, powers of certain inspection or investigatory agents. Any police officer or any sheriff, deputy sheriff, local or state police officer, if he has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this section or the act has taken place, or is taking place, and has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed or is committing such violation, may arrest that person without a warrant for that violation, irrespective of whether the violation was committed in his presence. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
(e)  Instruction, rehabilitation programs. If a person is convicted of a violation of this section, the court, as part of his sentence, during either the period of his confinement or the period of his probation, or both, may require him to attend a course of instruction or rehabilitation program approved by the department of mental health on the medical, psychological and social effects of the misuse of drugs. The court may order him to pay a fee, as approved by the director of mental health, for the instruction or the program. Failure to complete the instruction or program shall be considered a violation of the terms of his probation. 
Secs. 46-158-46-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 46-181. - Discharging weapon. 
    No person shall discharge any firearm, air rifle, air pistol or bow and arrow in the city, except when lawfully acting in the defense of persons or property or the enforcement of law or at a duly established range, the operation of which has been approved by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(4)) 
Sec. 46-182. - Fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Consumer fireworks means firework devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion and that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission. 
(2)  Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
(b)  The sale, display, storage, transportation and/or distribution of fireworks shall be regulated by the State pursuant to MCL 28.451 et seq., the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act. 
(c)  Consumer fireworks ignition, discharge and use in the city is limited to the following days after 11:00 a.m.: 
(1)  December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1. 
(2)  The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(3)  June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(4)  July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m. 
(5)  The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above, a person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission to use those fireworks on those premises. 
(e)  Upon application in writing by any individual, association or entity for the public display of fireworks, the city council may grant permission for such display on any day, subject to such conditions as the city council may impose to properly safeguard the public, all in accordance with MCL 28.466. 
(Code 1980, § 9.61(5); Ord. No. 405, § I, 5-21-12; Ord. No. 415 § I, 6-16-14; Ord. No. 437, § I, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 46-183. - Profane or obscene language. 
    No person shall utter vile, profane or obscene language in any public place. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(13)) 
Sec. 46-184. - Throwing missiles. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from any moving automobile. 
(2)  Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any person or automobile. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(36), (37)) 
Secs. 46-185-46-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS 

Sec. 46-206. - Purchase, possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, less than 21 years of age, to purchase, consume, possess or have under his control any alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(45)) 
Sec. 46-207. - Use of or furnishing fraudulent identification to obtain alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person less than 21 years of age to use or possess fraudulent, false or altered identification to purchase, obtain or possess alcoholic liquor or beverage. It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish fraudulent, false or altered identification to a person less than 21 years of age. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(45)) 
Sec. 46-208. - Selling, furnishing alcoholic beverages to minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell or furnish alcoholic liquor to a person unless the person has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, a motor vehicle operator's license or a registration certificate issued by the federal selective service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action under this section. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(45)) 
Sec. 46-209. - Transportation of alcoholic beverages. 
    No person under the age of 21 years, within the city, shall knowingly transport or possess, in a motor vehicle, alcoholic liquor unless the person is employed by a licensee under the state liquor control act, the liquor control commission, or an agent of the liquor control commission, and is transporting or having the alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under the person's control during regular working hours and in the course of the person's employment. 
(Code 1980, § 9.62(45)) 
Sec. 46-210. - Smoking; minors. 
(a)  A person under 18 years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars; or possess or chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff; or possess or use tobacco in any other form, on a public highway, street, alley, park, or other lands used for public purposes, or in a public place of business or amusement. 
(b)  A person shall not sell, give or furnish any cigarette, cigar, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, or tobacco in any other form to a person under 18 years of age. 
(c)  A person who is 17 years old or older who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense. A person under the age of 17 who violates this section shall be liable for a civil infraction fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 305, § 1, 10-20-97) 
Chapter 50 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; vegetation, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Authority to operate system of public recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq., MSA 5.2421 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Obstructing, damaging park property. 
    No person shall obstruct any walk or drive in any public park or playground and no person shall injure, mar or damage in any manner any monument, ornament, fence, bridge, seat, tree, fountain, shrub, flower, playground equipment, fireplaces or other public property within or pertaining to the parks. 
(Code 1980, § 3.1) 
Sec. 50-2. - Waste containers. 
    No person shall place or deposit any garbage, glass, tin cans, paper or miscellaneous waste in any park or playground except in containers provided for that purpose. 
(Code 1980, § 3.2) 
Sec. 50-3. - Ball games, other play restricted. 
    No baseball, football or softball throwing, or other violent or rough exercises or play shall be engaged in, in any public park or other public place, except in areas designated therefor by the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 3.3) 
Sec. 50-4. - Additional rules. 
    The city manager is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations subject to the approval of the city council, pertaining to the conduct and use of parks and public grounds as are necessary to administer the same and to protect public property and the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public, and no person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 3.4) 
Secs. 50-5-50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NORBERT P. NEFF MEMORIAL PARK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Harbor and pier regulations pertaining to Neff Park, § 86-26 et seq. 

Sec. 50-26. - Purpose. 
    This article shall govern the admission to, conduct in and use of the Norbert P. Neff Memorial Park. Violations of this article shall be grounds for revocation of passes issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 287, § 1(3.11), 11-15-93) 
Sec. 50-27. - Admission. 
(a)  Residents must present their park pass to the park guard to gain entrance to the Neff Park. 
(b)  Park passes shall be issued only to residents of the city who are ten years of age or over. 
(c)  Residents of the city under the age of ten must be accompanied by an adult with a park pass. 
(d)  No person shall be permitted to bring more than two guests into the park at any one time without first securing permission from the public safety director. 
(Ord. No. 287, § 1(3.12), 11-15-93) 
Sec. 50-28. - Pool. 
    Bathers using the Neff Park swimming pool must wear swimming attire in compliance with state health codes and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 287, § 1(3.13), 11-15-93) 
Sec. 50-29. - Pets. 
    No pets shall be allowed in the Neff Park. Pets on leash under control of the owner may be taken to and from boats with the approval of the park guard. 
(Ord. No. 287, § 1(3.14), 11-15-93) 
Sec. 50-30. - Parking. 
(a)  Automobiles and other vehicles shall be parked in the designated parking area of Neff Park under the control and direction of the gate attendant. 
(b)  Bicycles shall be parked in the racks provided at the entrance to the park. 
(Ord. No. 287, § 1(3.15), 11-15-93) 
Sec. 50-31. - Food/beverages. 
(a)  No food or beverage shall be sold in the Neff Park premises, except as otherwise provided. 
(b)  Beverages may be dispensed and sold through vending machines pursuant to regulations of the city manager. 
(c)  The use of all beverages shall be supervised and regulated by park guards and the director of public safety. 
(d)  All bottles, cans, picnic and other litter shall be deposited by the users in containers maintained and designated for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 287, § 1(3.16), 11-15-93) 
Sec. 50-32. - Additional rules. 
    The city manager is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the city council, pertaining to the conduct in and use of the Norbert P. Neff Memorial Park and the issuance and revocation of park passes as are necessary to administer the same and to protect public property and the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 287, § 1(3.17), 11-15-93) 
Secs. 50-33-50-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 50-40. - Special event application required. 
(a)  This article on special events covers all special events in the City of Grosse Pointe, including parades, processions, fun runs/walks, marathons, bike-a-thons or similar events. Any organization wishing to sponsor or hold a special event in the City of Grosse Pointe will be required to complete the City of Grosse Pointe Special Event Application. 
(b)  All references to "organization" in this article shall also apply to an individual seeking to sponsor a special event. Applications to conduct a special event must be made in writing to the office of the city manager. Applications are available from the city manager's office, city clerk's office or on the city's website. Applications shall be submitted to the city manager's office no later than 75 days prior to the date of the actual event. 
(c)  The City of Grosse Pointe may waive the 75-day rule in its discretion. 
(d)  The City of Grosse Pointe may hold its own special events, it may contract with one or more organizations to perform special event services, or it may jointly sponsor a special event with one or more organizations. Such events are exempt from the application process. 
(e)  The city will provide a complete review of any special event application, including consultation with the applicant as may be reasonably necessary to resolve problems, at no charge to event sponsors. 
(f)  Sponsors of special events should be aware that noise generated by the event could have an impact on the neighborhoods near the event site. Sponsors must be considerate of the neighborhood and be aware of the city noise ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 50-41. - City services provided for special events. 
    The city will provide support to special events on the following basis: 
(1)  City operated events. The city will operate certain special events directly. The city will fund the full cost of these events. 
(2)  Co-sponsored events. The city may co-sponsor certain events with other organizations, when the city council determines that the event is of general interest to the public and advances the city's public image. These events must meet the requirements of the special event policy, and must reimburse the city for any city costs in excess of the support level authorized by the city. 
The Santa Claus Parade on Kercheval held the day after Thanksgiving shall be considered a city co-sponsored event. An event operated by the City of Grosse Pointe DDA shall be considered a co-sponsored event such as Music on the Plaza. 
(3)  Other non-profit events. The city will provide up to $500.00 in city labor and related fringe benefit costs, equipment rental charges, purchased or rented materials as well as park/facility rental fees to assist other special events operated by non-profit organization. These events must meet the other requirements of the special event ordinance, and must reimburse the city for any city costs in excess of this support level. Groups filing an application as other non-profit event must be able to submit a current IRS § 501(c)(3) Determination Letter. 
(4)  Other for-profit events. The city will allow other special events operated by for-profit sponsors which are beneficial to the city and the public, subject to an additional use charge for the use of the public property which is approved for each event, or as determined by an approved fee schedule. In addition, these events must pay 100 percent of all city costs related to the event. These events must meet the other requirements of the special event policy, and must reimburse the city for any city costs in addition to the payment of the established rent. The minimum additional use charge shall be $250.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 50-42. - Fees for special events. 
    Fees shall be charged for city services provided to special events as follows: 
(1)  Hourly rate shall be the hourly cost for any employee working on a special event as established by the city administration. Hourly rate may include expenses related to the employee including fringe benefits, overhead, and overtime, if required for the event. 
(2)  Purchased or rented materials shall include all direct costs for all materials purchased or rented by the City of Grosse Pointe for use at the event. An administrative fee of three percent shall be added to all purchased or rented material to cover costs related to order processing and vendor payment. 
(3)  Equipment charges shall be the current equipment rental rates charged by the city. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 50-43. - Billing for special events. 
    Special event billings by the city shall be itemized as follows, if applicable: 
Municipal Services Employee Time $ Public Safety Employee Time $ Facility Fee $ Equipment Charges $ Purchased Materials $ Rented Materials $ _____  Sub-Total $  Less amount of City support if applicable $ _____  NET TOTAL BILLING $ _____  
A cash deposit, performance bond or other security acceptable to the city may be required in an amount equal to the amount estimated by the city to be billed for city fees as described above. The estimated city fees shall be listed as a part of the city council resolution authorizing the special event. It should be noted that the fees listed in the city council resolution are estimates only, actual fees may be higher or lower. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 50-44. - Rental charge facility fee. 
    Events which are not city sponsored shall be charged a rent/facility fee for use of public areas such as parks or streets, in addition to the city event fees provided herein. The rent/facility fee shall be set by the city administration in consultation with the applicant, based on the overall economic impact of the event, and subject to final approval by the city council as part of the special event application approval, or by an approved fee schedule. The city council may waive the facility fee for events sponsored by non-profits. 
    If the event is approved, the sponsor shall have exclusive use of the special event areas designated in the application during the events to the exclusion of all third parties. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 50-45. - Liability insurance requirements. 
(a)  The city shall require that all sponsors of special events carry liability insurance with coverage of at least $500,000.00 except for low hazard events approved by the special event review committee as provided below. An event sponsor shall be required to provide a valid certificate of insurance naming the City of Grosse Pointe as an additional insured prior to the event. The city council may require higher levels of insurance based on risk factors and past experience. 
(b)  The special event review committee shall include the city manager, director of public safety and director of public works or their designees. The special event review committee is intended to provide a risk control guide for the handling of the increased liability associated with special events. Special events are defined as activities which are not directly related to the day-to-day operations of the City of Grosse Pointe, but which may occur on premises owned or controlled by the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(c)  It shall be the policy of the city council to not routinely require insurance coverage for events classified by the special event committee as low hazard. These would be events that include no physical activity by participants and no severe exposure to spectators. This waiver of the insurance requirement is meant to cover small gatherings or ceremonies that do not involve more than 50 people, are limited to passive participation by the public, and require no city services. All other events are required to provide insurance as outlined in this article. 
(d)  The special event committee may place additional requirements on any event. These requirements may include specific staffing levels for public safety, paramedic, municipal services or other personnel. Expenses for these requirements will be billed to the sponsoring organization under the terms of this article. 
(e)  Any member of the special event review committee has the authority to cancel or stop an event if the special conditions required for approval of the event are not being met. In addition, the members of the special event review committee and city public safety officials have the authority to cancel or stop an event, or place additional restrictions on the event, if it is deemed that the public health, safety or welfare would be better served with additional restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 50-46. - Participant waiver of liability. 
    The special event sponsor shall agree to indemnification agreements as required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 50-47. - Reservation of annual event dates. 
(a)  If an event is intended to be an annual event at regularly scheduled dates, the current year's application may include the following year's requested dates. Approval of the current year's application will include reservation of the next years proposed dates. However, it will not constitute approval of next year's event, which must have its own timely application submitted for city approval. In general, the city will not approve special event dates more than one year in advance. 
    In all cases preference for scheduling shall be given in the following order: 
(1)  City sponsored events; 
(2)  City co-sponsored events; 
(3)  Community non-profit events; 
(4)  Non-community non-profit events; 
(5)  For profit events. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 50-48. - Standards for issuance. 
    The Grosse Pointe City Council will evaluate the special event application based on the following criteria: 
(1)  The applicant has complied in all respects with the requirements of this chapter, and 
(2)  The conduct of the special event will not substantially interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic on the city's public ways or use of city spaces, and 
(3)  The conduct of the special event will not interfere with proper police and fire protection of, or rescue service to, residents of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 50-49. - Written confirmation of city approval. 
    Upon approval of the special event application a written confirmation as to the action of the city council will be forwarded to the individual or organization requesting the event. This confirmation will outline any special conditions that must be met if the event is to be held. The City of Grosse Pointe Special Event Application form must be completed for all special events that take place on public lands or lands that are controlled by the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 50-50. - Revocation of approval. 
    Whenever any special event shall depart from or is conducted in a manner substantially different from that indicated in the application including the lack of adequate traffic control therefor, such special event shall be in violation of this chapter and any approval pursuant to which it is purportedly conducted shall be deemed to be automatically revoked and the special event shall be immediately terminated. This provision will be invoked when the permittee either violates the terms of the approval or refuses to conform to the terms of the approval after being advised to do so by the public safety department. 
(Ord. No. 424, § I, 3-21-16) 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; signs, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2932 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 54-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Streets means streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes, alleys, viaducts and other ways. 
(Code 1980, § 5.273) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-27. - Created. 
    The city planning commission is hereby created for the city pursuant to section 11A of the Charter and Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1980, § 5.260) 
Sec. 54-28. - Members. 
    The planning commission members shall be the members of the city council, consisting of the mayor and six councilmembers. The terms of members shall correspond to their respective official tenures. All members of the commission shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1980, § 5.261) 
Sec. 54-29. - Organization; meetings; rules; records. 
    The mayor shall serve as chairman of the planning commission. In the absence or disability of the chairman, the commission shall appoint, by simple majority of the members present, one of its members to act as chairman for the duration of such absence or disability. The city manager shall act as secretary and administrative officer to the commission. The commission may from among its members create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The commission shall hold at least four meetings each year. A majority of the members of the commission shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. The commission may adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions and determinations, which shall be a public record. 
(Code 1980, § 5.262) 
Sec. 54-30. - Employees, contracts for special services, sources and limit of expenditures. 
    The planning commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work, and may also contract with community planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the commission's work. 
(Code 1980, § 5.263) 
Sec. 54-31. - Master plan for physical development of city; adoption, contents, publication, alteration. 
    It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the city, including any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city. Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plat, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the commission's recommendations for the development of the territory including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of street, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds and open spaces; the general location of public buildings and other public property; and the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals; as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, the commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part or parts thereof, any such part to cover one or more major sections or divisions of the city, or one or more of the aforesaid or other functional matters to be included in the plan. The commission may from time to time amend and extend or add to the plan. 
(Code 1980, § 5.264) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.36, MSA 5.2996. 
Sec. 54-32. - Surveys for basis, purposes of master plan. 
    In the preparation of the master plan the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city with due regard to its relation to the neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs, which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, property and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including among other things adequate provisions for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditures of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(Code 1980, § 5.265) 
Sec. 54-33. - Adoption of whole or parts of master plan by resolution of planning commission; hearing; certificates to council and county register of deeds. 
    The planning commission may adopt the master plan as a whole by a single resolution, or by successive resolutions adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding with major geographical sections of divisions of the city or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment, extension thereof or addition thereto. Before the adoption of the plan, or any such part, amendment, extension or addition, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The adoption of the plan or of any such part or amendment or extension or addition shall be by resolution of the commission carried by the affirmative vote or not less than five members of the commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman and/or secretary of the commission. An attested copy of the plan, or part thereof, shall be certified to the city council and to the county register of deeds. 
(Code 1980, § 5.266) 
Sec. 54-34. - Public works program. 
    Whenever the planning commission has adopted the master plan of the city or of one or more major sections or districts thereof, no street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space, or public building or structure shall be constructed or authorized in the city or in such planned section and district, until the location, character and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the commission; provided, that in case of disapproval the commission shall communicate its reasons to the city council which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership; provided, however, that if the public way, ground, space, building, structure or utility is one the authorization of financing of which does not under the law or Charter provisions governing same, fall within the province of the city council, then the submission to the planning commission shall be by the board, commission or body having such jurisdiction, and the planning commission's disapproval may be overruled by the board, commission or body by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership. The failure of the commission to act within 60 days from and after the date of official submission to the commission shall be deemed approval. For the purpose of furthering the desirable future development of the city, the commission shall annually prepare a program for the ensuing six years which shall show those structures and improvements in the general order of their priority, which, in the commission's judgment, will be needed or desirable and to be undertaken within the six-year period. The above-mentioned programs shall be based upon the requirements of the community for all types of public improvements and to that end each agency or department of the city concerned with such improvements shall upon request furnish the commission with lists, plans and estimates of time and cost of public structures and improvements within the purview of such department. 
(Code 1980, § 5.267) 
Sec. 54-35. - Reports to council on projects; rescinding action. 
    Whenever the city council has ordered the opening, widening or extension of any street, avenue or boulevard, or whenever the city council has ordered that proceedings be instituted for the acquisition or enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space, such resolution shall not be rescinded until after the matter has been referred back to the planning commission for a report, and until after a public hearing has been held. The city council shall have power to overrule the recommendation of the planning commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. 
(Code 1980, § 5.268) 
Sec. 54-36. - Publicity and education; consultations, recommendations to officials; other powers. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have the power to promote public interest and understanding of the master plan and to that end may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. 
(b)  Members of the planning commission, when duly authorized by the commission, may attend municipal planning conferences or meetings of municipal planning institutes or hearings upon municipal planning legislation, and the commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance. The commission shall from time to time recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. It shall be part of its duties to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and with citizens relative to protecting or carrying out the plan. The commission shall have the right to accept and, upon request, furnish to the commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. 
(c)  The commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. In general, the commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote municipal planning or carry out the purposes of this article and the purposes of Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1980, § 5.269) 
Sec. 54-37. - Successor to zoning commission. 
    The planning commission shall have all the powers heretofore granted by law to zoning commissions under Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2932 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1980, § 5.270) 
Sec. 54-38. - Necessity for approval of plats; street system. 
    Whenever the planning commission has adopted that sort of a master plan relating to the major street system of the territory within its subdivision, jurisdiction or part thereof, and has filed a certified copy of such plan in the office of the county register of deeds, no plat of a subdivision of land within such territory or part shall be filed or recorded until it has been approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the chairman or secretary of the commission. 
(Code 1980, § 5.271) 
Sec. 54-39. - Regulations covering subdivision of land; bond to secure improvements; publication of regulations. 
(a)  Before exercising the powers referred to in section 54-38, the planning commission shall adopt regulations governing the subdivision of land within its jurisdiction. Such regulations may provide for the proper arrangements of streets, in relation to other existing or planned streets and to the master plan, for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, areas of firefighting apparatus, recreation, light and air, and for the avoidance of congestion of population, including minimum width and area of lots. 
(b)  The regulations may include provisions as to the extent to which streets and other ways shall be graded and improved and to which water and sewer and other utility mains, piping or other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the plat. The regulations or practice of the commission may provide for a tentative approval of the plat prior to such installation; but any such tentative approval shall be revocable and shall not be entered on the plat. In lieu of the completion of the improvements and utilities prior to the final approval of the plat, the commission may accept a bond with surety to secure the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements or utilities at a time and place according to the specifications fixed by or in accordance with the regulations of the commission. The city is hereby granted the power to enforce such bond by all appropriate legal and equitable remedies. 
(c)  All such regulations shall be published as provided by law for the publication of ordinances, and before adoption, a public hearing shall be held thereon. A copy shall be certified by the commission to the recorder of the county. All requirements of the Subdivision Control Act, Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as amended, shall apply to plat processing and approval by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 5.272) 
Sec. 54-40. - Approval or disapproval of plats; procedure. 
    The planning commission shall approve, modify or disapprove a plat within 60 days after submission of the plat to it; otherwise the plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the commission on demand. The applicant for the commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of the 60-day period. The ground of disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the commission. Any plat submitted to the commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of hearing shall be sent, and no plat shall be acted on by the commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent by certified mail of the time and place of the hearing to the applicant not less than five days before the date fixed for the hearing. Similar notice shall be mailed by first class mail to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land as their names appear upon the plats in the county auditor's office, and their addresses appear in the directory of the city or on the current assessment roll of the city. Every plat approved by the commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of or an addition to or a detail of the master plan and a part thereof. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the people of any street or other open space shown upon the plat. The commission may from time to time recommend to the city council amendments of the city zoning ordinance or map or additions thereto to conform to the commission's recommendations for the zoning regulations of the area comprised within approved subdivisions. The commission shall have the power to agree with the applicant upon use, height, area or bulk requirements or restrictions governing buildings and premises within the subdivision, provided such requirements or restrictions do not authorize the violation of the then effective zoning ordinance of the city. Such requirements or restrictions shall be stated upon the plat prior to the approval and recording thereof, and shall have the same force of law and be enforceable in the same manner and with the same sanctions and penalties and subject to the same power of amendment or repeal as though set out as a part of the zoning ordinance or map of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 5.273) 
Chapter 56 - RETIREMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Reciprocal retirement system, §§ 38.1101-38.1106. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 56-1-56-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RETIREMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 321, §§ 1.1-22.7, adopted July 17, 2000, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, its inclusion as §§ 56-26-56-117 was at the discretion of the editor to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 56-26. - Name of retirement system; effective date; short title. 
    The City of Grosse Pointe Employee Retirement System a defined benefit pension plan heretofore created and maintained pursuant to Part B, sections 64 through 105 of the Charter of the City of Grosse Pointe, is hereby replaced as provided in Part B, sections 64 through 68 of the Charter of the City of Grosse Pointe, as amended in 1994. This article shall be known and may be cited as the Retirement Ordinance of the City of Grosse Pointe. [The effective date of this retirement ordinance shall be August 13, 2000.] 
(Ord. No. 321, § 1.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-27. - Definitions. 
    As used in the retirement article, the following words, terms and phrases, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulated participant contributions means the credit balance in a participant's individual participant contribution, including investment earnings credited to the account. 
    Board of trustees means the board of trustees provided for in section 56-97. 
    City means the City of Grosse Pointe, Michigan. 
    Coverage plan means the coverage plan applicable to a participant. 
    Credited service means the years of service, to the nearest 1/12 year, in an individual's credited service account. 
    Compensation means the base salary or wages paid a participant for personal services rendered the city. Compensation includes: 
(1)  Amounts reported on form W-2, except: payments in consideration of unused annual leave (vacation time) and unused sick leave; and 
(2)  City contributions on behalf of the participant to a deferred compensation program maintained pursuant to Section 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
    Employee means an individual who is employed by the city in a position subject to withholding of federal income and FICA tax, including appointed officials. 
    Participant means an individual who is a participant in the retirement system as provided in section 56-28. 
    Pension means a series of monthly payments to a retired participant or survivor pension beneficiary. 
    Plan year means the 12 consecutive month period beginning with the month of January of each calendar year. 
    Refund beneficiary means the individual(s) designated in writing to be paid unexpended accumulated participant contributions in the event of the death of a member, former member, retired member or survivor pension beneficiary. 
    Retired participant means an individual who is being paid a pension on account of participation in the retirement system. 
    Retirement system means the retirement system maintained in accordance with the provisions of the retirement article. 
    Retirement system administrator, means the city finance director. 
    Survivor pension beneficiary means an individual who is being paid a pension or who has been designated to be paid a pension as a result of the death of a participant or retired participant. 
    Vested former participant means a former participant who retains entitlement to normal retirement as provided in section 56-37. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 2.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-28. - Participation in retirement system. 
    Each employee of the city shall be a participant in the retirement system unless excluded from participation in accordance with section 56-29. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 3.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-29. - Exclusions from participation. 
    The following employees are excluded from participation: 
(1)  Employees designated by the city as being employed in a position normally requiring less than 1,600 hours of work per year; and 
(2)  Employees designated by the city as part time, temporary or seasonal; and 
(3)  An individual retained or contracted by the city in a manner not subject to withholding of federal income tax or FICA tax; and 
(4)  The city attorney; and 
(5)  Elected officials, unless employed by the city in another position and proclaimed by a two-thirds vote of the city council to be a member in recognition of service performed as an employee in the other position; and 
(6)  A retired participant; and 
(7)  Any employee hired after July 1, 2013, unless that employee is subject to a collective bargaining agreement requiring participation in the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 3.2, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 372, § II, 1-22-07; Ord. No. 409, § I, 7-15-13; Ord. No. 411, § I, 11-18-13; Ord. No. 422, § I, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 56-30. - Termination of participation. 
    An individual shall no longer be a participant upon ceasing to be an employee or excluded from participation as provided in section 56-29. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 3.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-31. - Credited service; requirements for credit. 
    Personal service rendered the city while a participant shall be credited to each participant's credited service account each plan year in accordance with rules established by the board of trustees. In no case shall a participant be credited with more than one year of service for all service performed during a plan year. Service shall be credited to the nearest 1/12 year. Service shall not be credited a participant for a month during which the participant was compensated for less than ten days. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 4.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-32. - Same-Credit for intervening military service. 
    A participant who leaves the employ of the city to enter an armed service of the United States shall have the period of armed service, to a maximum of five years, added to the participant's credited service account if each of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  The participant is re-employed by the city within the period during which the right to re-employment is guaranteed under the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States, or, if there is no such law, within six months of the date of termination of required armed service; and 
(2)  The participant leaves his/her accumulated participant contributions on deposit in the pension benefit fund. The participant shall not be required to make participant contributions for periods of credited service, if any, granted under the provisions of this section, rendered during time of war, period of compulsory military service or period of national emergency recognized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 4.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-33. - Same-Forfeiture of. 
(a)  Credited service shall be forfeited if an individual who is not a vested former participant incurs a break in participation of more than 24-consecutive months. The forfeiture of credited service required by this section shall not apply in the following cases: 
(1)  The individual is absent on account of service in an armed services of the United States and returns to city employment within the period during which the right to re-employment is guaranteed under the laws of the State of Michigan or of the United States, or, if there is no such law, within six months of the date of termination of required armed service; 
(2)  The individual is absent on account of an authorized unpaid leave of absence and returns to work on or before the end of the period of authorized leave of absence. 
(b)  Credited service for which an individual has made participant contributions shall be forfeited if the individual's accumulated participant contributions are paid to the individual other than in the form of a pension, or paid to the individual's designated beneficiary or the individual's legal representative if there is not a designated beneficiary on file with the retirement system. 
(c)  Credited service forfeited because of a break in participation of more than 48-consecutive months cannot be reinstated. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 4.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-34. - Same-Reinstatement of. 
(a)  Credited service forfeited for a reason other than a break in participation of more than 48-consecutive months shall be reinstated if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The participant pays the retirement system all accumulated participant contributions previously refunded to the participant, plus compound interest at rates established by the board of trustees and calculated from the date of the refund of accumulated participant contributions to the date of the repayment to the retirement system; and 
(2)  The repayment is completed within six months of resumption of participation or time approved by the board of trustees. 
(b)  A disability-retired member who is returned to city employment and again becomes a participant shall have credited service in force at time of retirement restored to his/her credited service account. The participant's credited service account shall also be credited with the period for which a disability pension was paid if during the payment period the participant was paid worker's compensation on account of the same injury or disease for which retired. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 4.4, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-35. - Normal retirement; eligibility. 
    A participant or vested former participant may retire upon fulfilling all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The participant or vested former participant meets an age and service requirement for normal retirement as specified in the coverage plan applicable to the participant or vested former participant; and 
(2)  The participant or vested former participant selects a date of retirement; and 
(3)  A written application for normal retirement, in the form prescribed by the retirement system administrator, is filed with the administrator prior to the selected date of retirement; and 
(4)  Employment by the city in any position requiring participation in the retirement system is terminated prior to the selected date of retirement. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 5.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-36. - Same-Amount of pension. 
    Except as otherwise provided by the retirement article and the provisions of Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code applicable to public employee retirement plans, the amount of normal retirement pension, under form of payment option SL (straight life), is determined in accordance with the coverage plan applicable to the participant or vested former participant. The pension of a participant who has credited service under each of two or more coverage plans shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  Determine the amount of pension under each coverage plan as if all credited service of the participant had been under the coverage plan based on final average compensation at the time of retirement; 
(2)  For each coverage plan, multiply the amount of pension obtained in [subsection] (1) by the ratio of credited service under the coverage plan to the participant's total credited service; 
(3)  Sum the amounts obtained for each coverage plan in [subsection] (2). 
(Ord. No. 321, § 5.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-37. - Vested termination of participation; eligibility. 
    A participant who ceases to be a participant for a reason other than death or retirement shall be a vested former participant if the participant meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The participant meets the service requirement for vested termination of participation specified in the coverage plan applicable to the participant; and 
(2)  The participant's accumulated participant contributions are left on deposit in the pension benefit fund. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 6.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-38. - Same-Eligibility for normal retirement and amount pension. 
    Eligibility for normal retirement and the amount of normal retirement pension shall be determined according to the provisions of section 56-35 and 56-36, as the sections provided at the time of termination of participation. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 6.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-39. - Same-Forfeiture of. 
    An election by a vested former participant to be paid her/his accumulated participant contributions, other than by pension payments or the election of form of payment option LS at time of retirement, shall result in forfeiture of credited service and all rights to any benefits of the retirement system other than payment of the accumulated participant contributions. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, a participant who becomes vested in all or part of his accrued benefit pursuant to a Qualified Transfer under section 56-96A, who does not receive a cash out pursuant to section 56-96B, shall be entitled to a pension from the retirement system subject to all other terms and conditions of the retirement ordinance. In the case of such a vested participant who has withdrawn his accumulated participant contributions, the amount of his pension shall be determined by subtracting the actuarial equivalent of his accumulated participant contributions from his accrued benefit. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 6.3, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 368, § I, 6-19-06) 
Sec. 56-40. - Disability retirement; conditions. 
    The board of trustees may retire a participant on account of disability if each of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The participant meets the service requirement for disability retirement specified in the coverage plan applicable to the participant; and 
(2)  The participant seeking disability retirement was a participant at the time the disability was incurred; and 
(3)  A written application for disability retirement, in the form and containing the information prescribed by the board of trustees, has been filed with the retirement system administrator by the participant or the participant's department head; and 
(4)  The participant submits to all medical examinations and tests, and furnishes copies of all medical reports, requested by the board of trustees; and 
(5)  If the participant meets an age and service requirement for normal retirement, the cost of all medical examinations, tests and reports shall be paid by the participant; and 
(6)  The medical examiner makes the certification required by section 56-41. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 7.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-41. - Same-Medical examination. 
    A condition for disability retirement is a written certification by the medical examiner to the board of trustees that: 
(1)  The participant is mentally or physically totally incapacitated for continued employment with the city; and 
(2)  The incapacity is likely to be permanent. The medical examiner shall be one or more licensed physicians selected by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 7.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-42. - Same-Amount of pension. 
    The amount of a disability retirement shall be calculated as provided by the coverage plan applicable to the participant. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 7.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-43. - Same-Re-evaluation of retired participant; termination of pension. 
    The board of trustees may require a disability retired participant to undergo periodic medical or other re-evaluation by a medical examiner, at the retirement system's expense, or to submit acceptable evidence of continuation of disability, if the participant has not attained age 60 years (age 65 years for those participants hired after December 1, 2010). Medical or other re-evaluations not specifically required by the board of trustees shall be solely at the retired participant's expense. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 7.4, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 392, § I, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 56-44. - Same-Suspension of benefit. 
    The board of trustees may suspend payment of a disability pension if the disability retired participant refuses to submit to re-evaluation. If the refusal continues for one year, the board of trustees may terminate the disability retirement pension and revoke the disability retired participant's right to the disability retirement pension. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 7.5, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-45. - Same-Termination of benefit. 
    A disability pension shall be terminated if the medical examiner reports that the disability retired participant is capable of resuming employment with the city and the board of trustees concurs in the report. The former disability retired participant shall be returned to active service in the employ of the city. The city shall have reasonable latitude in placing the individual in a position commensurate with the last position held and the rate of compensation paid at time of disability retirement. A former disability retired participant who does not return to active service in the employ of the city shall be a vested former participant if the requirements of section 56-37 are met. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 7.6, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-46. - General coverage plan; applicability. 
    The general coverage plan is applicable to all participants to whom a different coverage plan is not specifically made applicable. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 8.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-47. - Same-Participant contribution rate. 
    A participant covered by the general coverage plan shall contribute five percent of annual compensation. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 8.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-48. - Same-Definition of final average compensation. 
    Final average compensation is one-forty-eighth of the total amount of compensation paid a participant for the 48-consecutive months of credited service in which the total amount of compensation paid is highest. The 48-consecutive months of credited service shall be contained within the five years of credited service immediately preceding the participant's last termination of participation. If the participant has 48 or more months of credited service but does not have 48 consecutive months of credited service, final average compensation is one-forty-eighth of the aggregate amount of compensation paid the participant during the participant's last 48 months of credited service. If the participant does not have 48 months of credited service, final average compensation is the aggregate amount of compensation paid the participant divided by the participant's total months of credited service. In all cases, for employees who are assigned to the department of public services and parks and recreation and who are subject to a collective bargaining agreement with the city at the time of their retirement, final average compensation shall not include any amounts for overtime pay, longevity pay, deferred compensation or "salt call" pay. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 8.3, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 409, § II, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 56-49. - Same-Age and service requirements for normal retirement. 
    The age and service requirements for normal retirement are: 
(1)  Age 60 years and ten years of credited service; provided that the requirements shall be age 65 years and ten years of credited service for those participants hired after December 1, 2010; 
(2)  Age 55 years and 25 years of credited service; provided that the requirements shall be age 60 and 25 years of credited service for those participants hired after December 1, 2010; 
(3)  Any age and 30 years of credited service; provided that the requirements shall be age 55 and 30 years of credited service for those participants hired after December 1, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 8.4, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 392, § II, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 56-50. - Same-Amount of normal retirement pension under form of payment option SL (straight life). 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, the amount of a normal retirement pension under form of payment option SL is equal to two and one-half percent of final average compensation (two percent of final average compensation for the participants hired after December 1, 2010) multiplied by credited service. The maximum amount of pension is 75 percent of final average compensation. 
(b)  If the retirement date is prior to age 55 (age 60 for those participants hired after December 1, 2010), the amount of pension calculated according to subsection (a) of this section shall be reduced by one-half of one percent for each month and fraction of a month the retirement date precedes age 55 (age 60 for those participants hired after December 1, 2010). The provisions of this subsection shall not be applied if the pension is for disability or on account of the death of a participant. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 8.5, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 322, § 1, 10-16-00; Ord. No. 339, § I, 5-22-03; Ord. No. 392, § III, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 56-51. - Same-Service requirement for vested termination of participation. 
    The service requirement for vested termination of participation is ten years of credited service. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 8.6, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-52. - Same-Service requirement for disability retirement. 
    The service requirement for disability retirement is ten years of credited service. The service requirement shall be waived if the board of trustees finds the participant's incapacity to be the natural and proximate result of the participant's actual performance of city duties. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 8.7, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-53. - Same-Amount of disability pension. 
    The amount of disability pension is calculated as provided in section 56-50 (normal retirement) based on credited service and final average compensation at time of disability retirement. Prior to age 65 the minimum amount of disability pension is 16 percent of final average compensation. If the board of trustees finds the participant's incapacity to be the natural and proximate result of the participant's actual performance of city duties, the amount of pension shall be recomputed upon the termination of worker's compensation benefits, or at age 65 if earlier. The recomputation shall be based on actual credited service increased by the period between disability retirement and the date of recomputation and final average compensation at time of disability retirement increased by one percent for each year of increase in credited service, not to exceed ten percent. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 8.8, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-54. - Same-Age and service requirements for pension to surviving spouse and designated survivor pension beneficiary of deceased participant. 
    The age and service requirements for the deceased participant, at time of death, are: 
(1)  Any age and 15 years of credited service; 
(2)  Age 55 (age 60 for those participants hired after December 1, 2010) and ten years of credited service. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 8.9, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 392, § IV, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 56-55. - Same-Post-retirement increases. 
(a)  The amount of pension payable to an eligible retired participant or survivor pension beneficiary shall be increased two percent (one percent for those participants hired after December 1, 2010) each January 1 unless the increase is waived as provided in subsection (b). 
(b)  A retired participant or survivor pension beneficiary may waive an annual increase by filing a written notice of waiver with the retirement system administrator no later than the December 1 preceding the scheduled increase. The waiver shall apply only to the increase scheduled for the following January 1 and not to any subsequent increases. Once waived, a scheduled increase is permanently forfeited. 
(c)  An eligible retired participant is one who has been a pension recipient for 12 or more months. An eligible survivor pension beneficiary is one who either has been a pension recipient for 12 or more months or is the beneficiary of a deceased retired participant who would have been a pension recipient for 12 or more months had death not intervened. 
(d)  Effective January 1, 2001, eligible participants retired from general employment positions with the city after July 1, 1995, and who are without medical coverage from the city or, are responsible for payment of a portion of the premium paid for medical coverage from the city, are eligible to receive a monthly increase in the pension benefit paid to them based upon the number of years since their retirement, years of service to the city, and the payment option selected by the eligible participant at the time of retirement, which benefit shall be calculated by adding the following two components: 
(1)  The product of the number of years since retirement from the city multiplied by $4.00; 
(2)  The product of the number of years of services to the city multiplied by: 
a.  Four dollars if the eligible participant selected the straight life payment option set forth in section 56-69 of the article; or 
b.  Three dollars if the eligible participant selected the joint payment option set forth in section 56-70 of the article; or 
c.  Two dollars if the eligible participant selected the survivor payment option set forth in section 56-71 of the article. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 8.10, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 323, § 1, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 392, § V, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 56-56. - Public safety coverage plan; applicability. 
    The public safety coverage plan is applicable to all participants who are certified public safety officers and are represented, for the purpose of collective bargaining, by a labor organization. In addition, the public safety coverage plan is applicable to all certified public safety officers with more than 15 years of participation in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.1, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 438, § I, 1-14-19) 
Sec. 56-57. - Same-Participant contribution rate. 
    A participant covered by the public safety coverage plan shall contribute five percent of annual compensation. Effective July 1, 2001, a participant covered by the public safety coverage plan shall contribute six percent of annual compensation. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-58. - Same-Definition of final average compensation. 
    Final average compensation is one forty-eighth of the total amount of compensation paid a participant for the 48 consecutive months of credited service in which the total amount of compensation paid is highest. The 48 consecutive months of credited service shall be contained within the five years of credited service immediately preceding the participant's last termination of participation. If the participant has 48 or more months of credited service but does not have 48 consecutive months of credited service, final average compensation is one of the aggregate amount of compensation paid the participant during the participant's last 48 months of credited service. If the participant does not have 48 months of credited service, final average compensation is the aggregate amount of compensation paid the participant divided by the participant's total months of credited service. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-59. - Same-Age and service requirements for normal retirement. 
    The age and service requirements for normal retirement are: 
(1)  Age 55 years and ten years of credited service, provided that the requirements shall be age 60 years and ten years of credited service for those participants hired after December 1, 2010; 
(2)  Age 50 years and 25 years of credited service, provided that the requirements shall be age 55 years and 25 years of credited service for those participants hired after December 1, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.4, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 392, § VI, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 56-60. - Same-Amount of normal retirement pension under form of payment option SL (straight life). 
(a)  The amount of a normal retirement command officer pension under form of payment option SL is equal to the sum of: two and one-half percent of final average compensation multiplied by credited service. The maximum amount of pension is 75 percent of final average compensation. 
(b)  The amount of a normal retirement public safety officer pension under form of payment option SL is equal to the sum of: (i) 2.65 percent of final average compensation (two percent of final average compensation for the participants hired after December 1, 2010) multiplied by credited service up to 25 years; and (ii) one percent of final average compensation multiplied by credited service in excess of 25 years. The maximum amount of pension is 75 percent of final average compensation. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.5, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 392, § VII, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 56-61. - Same-Service requirement for vested termination of participation. 
    The service requirement for vested termination of participation is ten years of credited service. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.6, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-62. - Same-Service requirement for disability retirement. 
    The service requirement for disability retirement is ten years of credited service. The service requirement shall be waived if the board of trustees finds the participant's incapacity to be the natural and proximate result of the participant's actual performance of city duties. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.7, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-63. - Same-Amount of disability pension. 
(a)  The amount of disability pension is calculated as provided in section 56-60 (normal retirement) based on credited service and final average compensation at time of disability retirement. Prior the age 65 the minimum amount of disability pension is 16 percent of final average compensation. 
(b)  If the board of trustees finds the participant's incapacity to be the natural and proximate result of the participant's actual performance of city duties, the amount of disability pension shall not be less than 66 2/3 percent of the participant's base rate of pay at time of disability retirement reduced by: 
(1)  Worker's compensation benefits paid the retired participant; and 
(2)  Disability benefits paid the retired participant under the federal old age, survivors and disability retirement program (Social Security); and 
(3)  Any other disability benefit paid the retired participant; and 
(4)  Earnings from employment by the retired participant to the extent such earnings, when added to payments under (1), (2) and (3) preceding, exceed 100 percent of base pay at time of disability retirement. 
    Worker's compensation benefits are weekly benefits, redemptions of weekly benefits and settlements in lieu of weekly benefits. Redemptions of weekly benefits and settlements in lieu of weekly benefits shall allocated weekly based on the weekly benefit the to which the retired participant would have been paid. 
    A disability retired member being paid a pension calculated pursuant to this subsection shall submit, prior to May 1 of each year, a verified statement of earnings during the prior calendar year to the retirement system administrator in the form prescribed by the retirement system administrator. If the verified statement is not received by May 1, payment of the pension shall be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.8, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-64. - Same-Age and service requirements for pension to surviving spouse and designated survivor pension beneficiary of deceased participant. 
    The age and service requirements for the deceased participant, at time of death, are: 
(1)  Any age and 15 years of credited service; 
(2)  Age 55 (age 60 for those participants hired after December 1, 2010) and ten years of credited service. 
(3)  Age 50 (age 55 for those participants hired after December 1, 2010) and 25 years of credited service. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.9, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 392, § VIII, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 56-65. - Same-Post-retirement increases. 
(a)  Effective for retirement dates on or after July 1, 1990, the amount of pension payable to an eligible retired participant or survivor pension beneficiary shall be increased two percent, (one percent for those participants hired after December 1, 2010) compounded annually, each January 1 unless the increase is waived as provided in subsection (b). 
(b)  A retired participant or survivor pension beneficiary may waive an annual increase by filing a written notice of waiver with the retirement system administrator no later than the December 1 preceding the scheduled increase. The waiver shall apply only to the increase scheduled for the following January 1 and not to any subsequent increases. Once waived, a scheduled increase is permanently forfeited. 
(c)  An eligible retired participant is one who has been a pension recipient for 12 or more months. An eligible survivor pension beneficiary is one who either has been a pension recipient for 12 or more months or is the beneficiary of a deceased retired participant who would have been a pension recipient for 12 or more months had death not intervened. 
(d)  Effective January 1, 2001, eligible participants retired as public safety command officers after July 1, 1984, and public safety officers who retired after July 1, 1987, and who are without medical coverage from the city or, are responsible for payment of a portion of the premium paid for medical coverage from the city, are eligible to receive a monthly increase in the pension benefit paid to them based upon the number of years since their retirement, years of service to the city, and the payment option selected by the eligible participant at the time of retirement, which benefit shall be calculated by adding the following two components: 
(1)  The product of the number of years since retirement form the city multiplied by $4.00; 
(2)  The product of the number of years of services to the city multiplied by: 
a.  Four dollars if the eligible participant selected the straight life payment option set forth in section 56-69 of the article; or 
b.  Three dollars if the eligible participant selected the joint payment option set forth in section 56-70 of the article; or 
c.  Two dollars if the eligible participant selected the survivor payment option set forth in section 56-71 of the article. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.10, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 323, § 2, 3-19-01; Ord. No. 392, § IX, 11-15-10) 
Sec. 56-66. - Form of payment of a pension; election thereof. 
    Pension payments shall be made under form of payment SL unless the participant or vested former participant requests payment under another form of payment provided by this section and names a survivor pension beneficiary. The request for payment under another form of payment shall be made on a form furnished by and filed with the retirement system administrator prior to the date the first pension payment is made under form of payment SL. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 10.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-67. - Same-Changes restricted. 
    A form of payment selection may not be changed after the date the first pension payment is made. A named survivor pension beneficiary may not be changed after the date the first pension payment is made under form of payment 100 percent JS or 50 percent JS. No benefit will be paid under the provisions of this section if any benefit is paid or will become payable under the provisions of section 56-76. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 10.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-68. - Same-Same actuarial present value. 
    Pension payments under each optional form of payment shall have the same actuarial present value, computed as of the effective date of retirement. Form of payment LS may be elected in conjunction with any of the other forms of payment. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 10.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-69. - Form of payment straight life (SL). 
    The retired participant is paid a pension for life under form of payment SL. All payments to the retired participant stop upon payment for the month in which the death of the retired participant occurs. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 10.4, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-70. - Form of payment of a pension; 100 percent joint and survivor (100 percent JS). 
    The retired participant is paid a pension for life under form of payment 100 percent JS. The last payment to the retired participant is the payment for the month in which occurs the death of the retired participant. The named survivor pension beneficiary, if living on the first day of the month following the death of the retired participant, is then paid the same amount of pension for life. The first payment to the survivor pension beneficiary is for the month following the month in which occurs the death of the retired participant. The last payment to the survivor pension beneficiary is the payment for the month in which occurs the death of the survivor pension beneficiary. No payment is made to the survivor pension beneficiary if the death of the retired participant and the death of the survivor pension beneficiary occur in the same month. If the named survivor pension beneficiary dies prior to the retired participant, the amount of the retired participant's pension shall change to the amount that would be payable had form of payment SL been selected. The change in amount starts with the payment for the month following the month in which occurs the death of the named survivor pension beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 10.5, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-71. - Same-50 percent joint and survivor (50 percent JS). 
    The retired participant is paid the reduced annuity and/or pension for life under form of payment 50 percent JS. The last payment to the retired participant is the payment for the month in which occurs the death of the retired participant. The named survivor pension beneficiary, if living on the first day of the month following the death of the retired participant, is then paid 50 percent of the reduced annuity and/or pension for life. The first payment to the survivor pension beneficiary is for the month following the month in which occurs the death of the retired participant. The last payment to the survivor pension beneficiary is the payment for the month in which occurs the death of the survivor pension beneficiary. No payment is made to the survivor pension beneficiary if the death of the retired participant and the death of the survivor pension beneficiary occur in the same month. If the named survivor pension beneficiary dies prior to the retired participant, the amount of the retired participant's pension shall change to the amount that would be payable had form of payment SL been selected. The change in amount starts with the payment for the month following the month in which occurs the death of the named survivor pension beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 10.6, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-71A. - Same-75 percent joint and survivor (75 percent JS). 
    The retirement participant is paid the reduced annuity and/or pension for life under form of payment 75 percent JS. The last payment to the retired participant is the payment for the month in which occurs the death of the retired participant. The named survivor pension beneficiary, if living on the first day of the month following the death of the retired participant, is then paid 75 percent of the reduced annuity and/or pension for life. The first payment to the survivor pension beneficiary is for the month following the month in which occurs the death of the retired participant. The last payment to the survivor pension beneficiary is the payment for the month in which occurs the death of the survivor pension beneficiary. No payment is made to the survivor pension beneficiary if the death of the retired participant and the death of the survivor pension beneficiary occur in the same month. If the named survivor pension beneficiary dies prior to the retired participant, the amount of the retired participant's pension shall change to the amount that would be payable had form of payment SL been selected. The change in amount starts with the payment for the month following the month in which occurs the death of the named survivor pension beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 330, § 1, 9-17-01) 
Sec. 56-72. - Form of payment lump sum (LS). 
    Under form of payment LS, the retired participant is paid a lump sum amount equal to all or a selected portion of the retiring participant's accumulated participant contributions. An election of form of payment LS shall cause the amount of pension under any other form of payment to be reduced by an amount which is the actuarial equivalent of the amount of lump sum paid. The rate of interest used to calculate actuarial equivalencies under this section shall be the average 30-year treasury bond rate for the third calendar month preceding the month of the participant's date of retirement. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 10.7, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-73. - Pension to surviving spouse of deceased participant; eligibility. 
    A pension shall be paid to the surviving spouse of a deceased participant, if the participant at the time of death, met the age and service requirements for a pension to surviving spouse specified in the coverage plan applicable to the participant. No pension shall be paid pursuant to this section if a pension is paid pursuant to section 56-76 or section 56-79. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 11.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-74. - Same-Amount of pension. 
    The amount of pension is the deceased participant's accrued normal retirement pension at time of death under form of payment 100 percent JS. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 11.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-75. - Same-Commencement and termination. 
    Payment of the pension shall commence on the first day of the month following the month in which occurs the death of the participant. The last pension payment shall be the payment for the month in which occurs the death of the surviving spouse. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 11.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-76. - Pension to designated survivor pension beneficiary deceased participant; eligibility. 
    A pension shall be paid to the designated survivor pension beneficiary of a deceased participant who has elected form of payment 100 percent JS, if all of the following requirement are met: 
(1)  The participant, at time of death, met the age and service requirements for a pension to a designated survivor pension beneficiary specified in the coverage plan applicable to the participant; and 
(2)  The participant has filed an election of form of payment 100 percent JS with the retirement system administrator and named a survivor pension beneficiary; and 
(3)  The designated survivor pension beneficiary files written application for the pension with the retirement system administrator. 
    The election and designation called for in this section may be changed at any time prior to the first pension payment following the retirement of the participant. 
    No pension shall be paid pursuant to this section if a pension is paid pursuant to section 56-79. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 12.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-77. - Same-Amount of pension. 
    The amount of pension is the deceased participant's accrued normal retirement annuity and pension amount at time of death under form of payment 100 percent JS. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 12.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-78. - Same-Commencement and termination. 
    Payment of the pension shall commence the first day of the month following the month in which occurs the death of the participant. The last pension payment shall be the payment for the month in which occurs the death of the designated survivor pension beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 12.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-79. - Death in line of duty; eligibility. 
    The benefits provided in this section shall be paid in the event of (i) the death of a participant or (ii) the death of a disability retired participant who is in receipt worker's compensation on account of city employment if the death is within three years of the date of disability retirement and is the result of the same injury or disease for which retired, and all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The board of trustees finds the death to have been the result of the deceased's performance of duty in the employ of the city; 
(2)  The beneficiary applies for and is granted worker's compensation on account of the death of the participant or disability retired participant; 
(3)  The beneficiary makes written application for the pension. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 13.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-80. - Same-Payment of accumulated participant contributions. 
    In the case of a deceased participant but not a deceased disability retired participant, the participant's accumulated participant contributions shall be paid as provided in section 56-87. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 13.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-81. - Same-Pension to surviving spouse. 
    The surviving spouse shall be paid a pension commencing the first day of the calendar month following termination of the spouse's weekly worker's compensation benefit. The amount of pension shall be equal to the spouse's weekly worker's compensation benefit converted to a monthly amount. The pension shall terminate with the payment for the month in which the spouse either (i) marries, or (ii) dies. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 13.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-82. - Same-Pension to surviving children. 
    Each surviving child under age 18 years shall be paid a pension commencing the first day of the calendar month following termination of the child's weekly worker's compensation benefit. The amount of pension shall be equal to the child's weekly worker's compensation benefit converted to a monthly amount. If a widow's pension is terminated each eligible child's pension shall be increased by an equal share of the terminated spouse's pension. The pension of a child shall terminate with the payment for the month in which the child either (i) marries, or (ii) attains age 18 years, or (iii) is adopted, or (iv) dies. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 13.4, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-83. - Same-Pension to dependent surviving parents. 
    Each surviving parent shall be paid a pension commencing the first day of the calendar month following termination of the parent's weekly worker's compensation benefit. The amount of pension shall be equal to the parent's weekly worker's compensation benefit converted to a monthly amount. A parent's pension shall terminate with the payment for the month in which the parent either (i) marries, or (ii) dies. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 13.4, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-84. - Same-Definition. 
    As used in this section, "spouse" means the person to whom the participant or disability retired participant was married at the time participant terminated. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 13.5, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-85. - Residual benefits upon termination of all pension payments. 
    If pension payments permanently terminate before the retirement system has paid an aggregate amount equal to the deceased retired participant's accumulated participant contributions, the difference between the amount of accumulated participant contributions and the aggregate amount of pension payments shall be paid to the refund beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 14.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-86. - Residual benefits upon termination of participation other than by death. 
    The accumulated participant contributions of a vested former participant or former participant shall be paid to the individual upon written request to the retirement system administrator. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 14.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-87. - Residual benefits upon death. 
    If a participant, vested former participant or former participant dies prior to retirement and no pension is or will be paid except as provided in section 56-81 through 56-83, the deceased's accumulated participant contributions shall be paid to the refund beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 14.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-88. - Participant contributions; deduction from salary. 
    The city shall cause the participant contributions specified by the coverage plan applicable to a participant to be deducted from the compensation of the participant. Each participant shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deductions made and provided for in this section by continuing employment with the city. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 15.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-89. - Same-Individual accounts. 
    Contributions of participants shall be credited to the participants' individual account. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 15.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-90. - Same-Investment earnings credited. 
    The board of trustees shall, not less often than once each plan year, credit investment earnings to the participant contribution account of each participant. The rate of investment earnings shall be earnings shall be that determined by the board of trustees, but shall not be less than five percent. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 15.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-91. - City contributions to retirement system; appropriation and remittance of city contributions. 
    The city shall appropriate and cause the contribution to be paid to the retirement system. The city shall remit its fiscal year contributions to the retirement system no later than the last day of the fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 16.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-92. - Same-Level cost funding. 
    The funding objective for the retirement system is to establish and receive during each fiscal year city contributions which are sufficient to: 
(1)  Cover the actuarial cost of benefits likely to be paid on account of service rendered by participants during the fiscal years (normal cost); and 
(2)  Pay off the unfunded actuarial cost of benefits likely to be paid on account of service rendered by participants prior to the current fiscal year (unfunded actuarial accrued liability) over periods not in excess of the lesser of the maximum periods, if any, established by the governmental accounting standards board for the purpose of determining pension expense and 40 years. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 16.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-93. - Same-Actuarial valuations. 
    City contributions shall be determined by annual actuarial valuation using a level percent of payroll actuarial cost method which produces a contribution not less than that produced by the individual entry age actuarial cost method. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 16.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-94. - Accounting funds. 
    The mandatory accounting funds of the retirement system are the "pension benefit accounts" and the "health benefit accounts". The board of trustees may establish such additional funds and accounts as it deems appropriate or as are required for compliance with applicable laws and accounting standards. The maintenance of separate accounting funds and accounts shall not require the actual segregation of the assets of the retirement system in the accounting funds and accounts. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 17, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-95. - Pension benefit fund. 
    The "pension benefit fund" is the accounting fund which shall be credited with contributions by participants and the city, investment earnings of the retirement system and which shall be charged with pension payments, refunds of accumulated participant, expenses incurred in the operation of the retirement system and investment earnings allocated to the health benefit fund. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 17.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-96. - Health benefit fund. 
    The health benefit fund is the accounting fund which shall be credited with (a) contributions by the city (including salary reduction contributions provided under applicable collective bargaining agreements) for the purpose of funding all or a portion of the cost of providing health insurance coverage to eligible retired participants and eligible survivor pension beneficiaries, and (b) investment experience allocated to the health benefit fund, and which shall be charged with all, or a portion of, applicable premiums or contract charges for such coverage. Eligibility for coverage and the portion of the premium or contract charge to be paid from the health benefit fund shall be determined in accordance with section 56-118. Except as provided at section 56-96A, contributions to the health benefit fund by the city (including salary reduction contributions provided for under applicable collective bargaining agreements), when added to any city contributions for life insurance protection provided by the retirement system, shall not exceed 25 percent of the total actual contributions to the retirement system (other than contributions to fund past service) for all years since the health benefit fund has been in effect and shall be reasonable and ascertainable. Amounts allocated to the health benefit fund may only be used for retiree health benefits described in section 56-118 and in the City of Grosse Pointe Retiree Health Benefit Plan, and may not be used for any purpose other than providing such retiree health benefits or until the satisfaction of all liabilities under section 56-118 at which time any amount remaining in the health benefit fund shall be returned to the city. Amounts in the health benefit fund shall be allocated to separate 401(h) subaccounts which shall be established for any key employee (as defined in Code Section 416(1)(1)) of the city, and benefits may be paid only from such key employee's subaccount. The city shall not contribute any amounts to the health benefit fund or a welfare benefit fund (as defined in Code Section 419(e)(1)) with respect to qualified current retiree health liabilities as defined in Code Section 420(e)(1)(A) for which transferred assets are required to be used as described in subsection 56-96A(3) below. 
    The provisions of any collective bargaining agreement which provides for employee contributions to the health benefit fund are incorporated herein by reference. Salary reduction contributions under any such collective bargaining agreement shall commence as of the first payroll period which begins after the date such provisions become effective under the collective bargaining agreement. 
    When a participant is covered by a collective bargaining agreement which provides for salary reduction contributions by such participant to a 401(h) account to provide retiree health care benefits, such participant shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The plan shall maintain a subaccount for each contributor that reflects all contributions made by or for that contributor, adjusted for investment experience and payment of medical benefits. 
(2)  The city shall pick up the contributor's contributions. Contributions picked up under this subsection on a salary-reduction basis are not included as gross taxable income of the contributor. The value of medical benefits provided from a contributor's subaccount shall not be included in the income of the retired contributor or the contributor's health benefit dependents. 
(3)  The benefits to be provided from the medical benefit account, together with life insurance, if any, provided under the retirement system, are intended to be subordinate to retirement benefits under the retirement system. Accordingly, contributions credited to a contributor's subaccount, together with contributions, if any, that may be made to provide life insurance for the contributor under the retirement system, shall not exceed the aggregate amount permitted above. 
(4)  All payments of medical benefits with respect to a contributing participant and such participant's spouse and dependents shall be charged against the balance of the retired contributor's subaccount. Payments or reimbursements out of such account shall not be made after the subaccount has been exhausted. Medical benefits to be provided from the medical benefit account shall be those called for under section 56-118. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 17.3, 7-17-00; Ord. No. 368, § I, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 409, § III, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 56-96A. - Code Section 420 transfer of excess assets to the health benefit fund. 
    In addition to contributions made directly by the city under section 56-96, the health benefit fund may be funded by a "qualified transfer" of "excess assets" of the retirement system to the health benefit fund. "Excess assets" means those assets in excess of the retirement system's (i) full funding limit; or (ii) 125 percent of the retirement system's current liability (as described in Code Section 412(c)(7)(B). The "qualified transfer" of assets does not otherwise count against the limits on city contributions described in section 56-96 to the health benefit fund. The "qualified transfer" of excess assets is subject to the requirements described below: 
(1)  Limitation on number of qualified transfers per taxable year. No more than one transfer of excess assets under this section 56-96A during a taxable year of the city; provided that in no event shall any such "qualified transfer" be made after December 31, 2013. 
(2)  Limit on amount of transfer. The amount of excess assets transferred from the retirement system to the health care fund shall not exceed the amount reasonably estimated to be paid during the tax year of the transfer for "qualified current retiree health liabilities" as defined in Code Section 420(e)(1)(A). The amount to be transferred shall be reduced by the ratio of (i) assets (as of June 30 preceding the Plan Year of the transfer) previously set aside to pay for the qualified current retiree health liabilities (as defined in Code Section 420(e)(1)(B)(i)), to pay for the qualified current retiree health liabilities, to (ii) the present value of the qualified current retiree health liabilities for all plan years (as defined in Code Section 420(e)(1)(B)(ii)). In the event the amount transferred exceeds the amount used to pay qualified current retiree health liabilities, the excess (including income thereon) shall be returned from the health benefit fund to the retirement system. 
(3)  Use of transferred assets. Any assets (and any income allocable thereto) of the retirement system transferred to the health benefit fund shall be used only to pay reasonably estimated current retiree health liabilities (other than liabilities of key employees not taken into account under Section 420(e)(1)(D)) for the taxable year of the transfer. For purposes of this section, any amount paid out of the health benefits fund shall be treated as first being paid out of excess assets transferred to the health benefit fund pursuant to this section 56-96A and income thereon. 
(4)  Accelerated vesting requirement. 
(i)  An employee who is a participant in the retirement system on the date of the transfer shall be 100 percent vested on the date of the qualified transfer in his then currently accrued benefit in the retirement system, in the same manner as if the retirement system had terminated immediately before the qualified transfer. 
(ii)  A participant who separated from service at the city during the one-year period ending on the date of the qualified transfer shall be 100 percent vested in his then currently accrued benefit as if the retirement system had terminated immediately before his separation from service. 
A participant who vests in an accrued benefit under this subsection 56-96A(4) shall nonetheless be subject to the vesting requirements of the applicable coverage plan at sections 56-51, or 56-61 with respect to future benefit accruals in the retirement system. In the case of a participant who becomes vested pursuant to subsection 56-96A(4)(ii) above, which participant has been paid his accumulated participant contributions and has accordingly forfeited his credited service, such participant shall have his accrued benefit based upon his previously forfeited credited service retroactively reinstated and vested, provided that the vested accrued benefits so reinstated and vested shall be reduced by the actuarial equivalent of his accumulated participant contributions previously paid to him. 
(5)  Maintenance of applicable employer retiree health costs. As more fully set forth in Article III of the City of Grosse Pointe Retiree Health Benefits Plan, in the event of a qualified transfer, the city shall maintain levels of applicable employer retiree health costs during the cost maintenance period, as such terms are defined in Article III of the City of Grosse Pointe Retiree Health Benefits Plan. 
(6)  Key employees excluded. Assets transferred to the health benefits fund cannot be used to pay the retiree health benefits of any participant who was a key employee (within the meaning of Code Section 416(i)(11) at any time during the plan year ending within the tax year of the city in which the qualified transfer was made. If an employee is a key employee with respect to any plan year, such employee shall not be taken into account in computing qualified current retiree health liabilities for such taxable year, or in calculating applicable employer retiree health costs during the cost maintenance period as such terms are defined in Article III of the City of Grosse Pointe Retiree Health Benefit Plan. 
(7)  Limitation of city deductions. The city shall not be entitled to a deduction for (a) amounts transferred to the health benefit fund in a qualified transfer (nor for any excess qualified transfer funds returned to the retirement system pursuant to Code Section 420(c)(1)(B)(i)); (b) for amounts which are used from the health benefit fund to pay retiree health benefits which otherwise would have been deductible in the tax year of the qualified transfer had the expenses been paid directly by the city; nor (c) for any retiree health benefits for the year of the qualified transfer that are paid directly by the city, except such expenses which exceed the excess (if any) of the amount of the qualified transfer reduced by the amounts paid from the health benefit fund pursuant to (7)(b) above. 
    State law limitations. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this retirement ordinance, excess amounts transferred under subsection 56-96A(2) "limit on amount of transfer" shall not exceed state law limitations as set forth in Michigan Compiled Laws Annotation (MCLA) 38.571 which section is incorporated by reference in this retirement ordinance. 
Sec. 56-96B. - Cashouts of accelerated vested accrued benefit pursuant to a Code Section 420 transfer under section 56-96A or pursuant to the Reciprocal Retirement Act. 
(a )  [Vested.] This section shall only apply to a participant who becomes vested in his accrued benefit: 
(i)  Pursuant to a qualified transfer under section 56-96A; or 
(ii)  By reason of the Reciprocal Retirement Act. 
    This section shall not apply to any participant who completes ten years of credited service with the city. 
Upon termination of such a participant's employment, the following shall apply: 
(b)  Involuntary cashout. If the present value of the vested normal retirement pension of a participant described in (a) is $1,000.00 or less, then the retirement system administrator shall pay an immediate lump sum distribution of the greater of: 
(i)  The present value of such participant's vested normal retirement pension; or 
(ii)  His accumulated participant contributions; 
and such participant's credited service and all rights to any further benefits of the retirement system shall be forfeited. 
(c)  Voluntary cashout. If the present value of the vested normal retirement pension of a participant described in (a) is more than $1,000.00 and less than or equal to $10,000.00, then such participant may elect to receive his benefits in an immediate lump sum distribution. In such event, the retirement system administrator shall pay an immediate lump sum distribution of the greater of: 
(i)  The present value of such participant's vested normal retirement pension; or 
(ii)  His accumulated participant contributions; 
and such participant's credited service and all rights to any further benefits of the retirement system shall be forfeited. 
    If such participant elects not to receive an immediate lump sum distribution, he shall be treated as a vested former participant entitled to a deferred pension in accordance with sections 56-37 and 56-38. 
(d)  Other participants. If the present value of the vested normal retirement pension of a participant described in (a) is more than $10,000.00, such participant shall be treated as a vested former participant entitled to withdraw his accumulated participant contributions in accordance with section 56-39 or to receive a deferred pension in accordance with sections 56-37 and 56-39. 
(e)  Present value. For purposes of the foregoing, present value shall be calculated using the interest rate for actuarial equivalencies described in section 56-72, and shall be determined on the later of (i) the date of the distribution or (ii) the date of the qualified transfer under section 56-96A. 
(f)  Service upon reemployment. If a vested participant who received a distribution pursuant to this section is reemployed by the city, his years of credited service for vesting shall be reinstated. The credited service which related to the distribution shall not be reinstated unless he repays to the retirement system plan the benefit he received together with interest at a rate as set by the board of trustees from the date of payment to him to the date of repayment to the retirement system. Repayments under this subsection 56-96B(f) shall be made in accordance with section 56-34. 
    If a vested participant who received a distribution pursuant to this section becomes employed by another governmental employer, his years of credited service for purposes of the Reciprocal Retirement Act shall be reinstated if he repays to the retirement system the benefit he received, together with interest at a rate of as set by the board of trustees from the date of payment to him to the date of repayment to the retirement system. Repayments under this section shall be made in accordance with section 56-34. 
(g)  Timing. All cash out distributions made pursuant to this section shall be made as soon as administratively feasible following the later of: 
(i)  The participant's termination of employment; or 
(ii)  The date of a qualified transfer under section 56-96A 
(h)  Vested termination. A participant who is eligible to elect a voluntary cash out of his vested accrued benefit under paragraph (b) may elect immediate payment of his vested accrued benefit. Such vested accrued benefits shall be reduced by the actuarial equivalent of his accumulated participant contributions previously paid to him. 
(Ord. No. 368, § I, 6-19-06) 
Sec. 56-97. - Board of trustees; powers. 
    The board of trustees shall be in the trustees of the retirement system and shall have all the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of the retirement article including, in addition to any specific powers provided for in the retirement article, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the power: 
(1)  To administer the Retirement article, including the management of the retirement system and making effective the provisions of the retirement article; 
(2)  To administer oaths; 
(3)  To create and maintain records; 
(4)  To issue subpoenas and compel the production of evidence and attendance of witnesses in connection with any hearings or proceedings of the board of trustees; 
(5)  To make and adopt such reasonable rules and regulations as may be necessary or convenient to carry out the duties of the board of trustees and activities of the retirement system, including any rules and regulations necessary to preserve the status of the retirement system as a qualified pension plan under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, as amended, or under successor or related provisions of law; 
(6)  To designate committees and to designate committee participants, including individuals who may not be participants in the retirement system; 
(7)  To employ such personal and other services as are necessary to comply with the provisions of the retirement article; 
(8)  To pay the expenses of operating the retirement system from the assets of the retirement system, to the extent such expenses are not paid directly by the city. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 18.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-98. - Same-Composition. 
    The board of trustees shall consist of the following five individuals: 
(1)  A resident of the city who is not an officer of the city and who is not a participant or beneficiary of a participant, to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council; 
(2)  Two members of the city council to be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council; 
(3)  A certified public safety officer having at least five years of credited service who is a participant of the retirement system and has been elected by the certified public safety officer participants in the retirement system. 
(4)  A general participant having at least five years of credited service and who is not a certified public safety officer and has been elected by the participant's who are not certified public safety officers. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 18.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-99. - Same-Term of office; elections. 
(a)  The regular term of office of a trustee holding office pursuant to subsections 56-98(1), (3) and (4) shall be three years. Trustees shall take office immediately following their qualification. Trustees holding office on the effective date of this restated retirement article shall continue in office for the balance of their term or until replaced as provided in the retirement article. 
(b)  Elections of participant elected trustees shall be held at the time and in accordance with the procedures established by the board of trustees. 
(c)  A trustee shall qualify for office by taking an oath of office. The oath of office shall be administered by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 18.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-100. - Same-Vacancies. 
    A vacancy in the office of trustee shall be filled within 90 days of the date of the vacancy, for the unexpired term, in the same manner as the position was previously filled. If the vacancy is in the position of participant elected trustee and the term has less than 60 days to run, the position shall be left vacant until filled by regularly scheduled participant election. A participant trustee who ceases to be a participant shall be considered to have resigned from the board of trustees and the board of trustees shall by resolution declare the position vacant. A trustee who fails to attend three consecutive meetings, unless in each case excused for cause by the trustees attending such meeting shall be considered to have resigned from the board of trustees and the board of trustees shall by resolution declare the position vacant. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 18.4, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-101. - Same-Meetings; quorum. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall hold quarterly meetings and shall designate the time and place thereof by posted written notice. All meetings of the board of trustees shall be public. The board of trustees shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a written record of its proceedings. 
(b)  Three trustees shall constitute a quorum. Three concurring votes are required for a decision of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 18.5, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-102. - Same-Expenses of office. 
    Members of the board of trustees shall serve without additional compensation for their services as trustees. They shall be reimbursed for necessary and reasonable travel expenses and participant members shall suffer no loss of compensation in fulfilling their duties as a trustee. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 18.6, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-103. - Same-Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall elect from its membership a chairperson and a vice-chairperson. 
(b)  The city manager/city clerk shall be the secretary of the board of trustees. 
(c)  The finance director/city treasurer shall be the treasurer of the retirement system and plan benefits administrator. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 18.7, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-104. - Investment of funds; authority; employment of investment counsel. 
(a)  The board of trustees as trustees of the retirement system may invest and reinvest the assets of the retirement system subject to the terms, conditions, limitations and restrictions imposed by the State of Michigan for the investment of public employee retirement plan assets. 
(b)  In exercising its discretionary authority with respect to the management of the money and other assets of the retirement system, the board of trustees shall exercise the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing, that a investor of prudence, acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters, would use in the conduct of an enterprise of like character with like aims. 
(c)  The board of trustees may employ outside investment counsel to assist it in the making and disposition of investments or with the discretionary authority to make and dispose of investments within the investment guidelines established by the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 9.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-105. - Same-Custodian of assets. 
    The finance director/City treasurer shall be the custodian of the assets of the retirement system unless the board of trustees designates a corporate custodian. To be eligible for designation, a corporate custodian shall be a federal or state licensed bank or trust company. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 19.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-106. - Qualified retirement system. 
(a)  The city intends the retirement system to be a qualified plan under Section 401 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and that the trust be an exempt organization under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code. The retirement board shall administer the retirement system so as to fulfill this intent, including but not limited to the following. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this retirement article, all benefits distributed from the retirement system shall comply with the limitations set forth in Internal Revenue Code Section 415 and applicable regulations. For this purpose, compensation shall be determined in accordance with Internal Revenue Code Section 415(e)(3). In the event it should become necessary to reduce or restrict a benefit in order to comply with Internal Revenue Code Section 415(e), the employer provided portion of the benefit payable by the retirement system shall be reduced or restricted to the extent necessary for compliance. 
(2)  In the event the retirement system should terminate, or if there is a complete discontinuance of contributions to the retirement system, the rights of all employees to benefits accrued to date of termination or discontinuance, to the extent then funded, shall be non-forfeitable. 
(3)  Distribution from the retirement system will comply with the requirements of Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(9) and regulations thereunder, including the following specific requirements. 
Distribution of a participant's benefits will begin not later than the later of April 1 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the employee attains age 701/2 or April 1 of the calendar year in which the participant retires. 
If distribution of a participant's benefits commenced prior to the participant's death, any remaining benefits will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution used as of the date of the participant's death. 
If distribution of a participant's benefits had not commenced prior to the participant's death, any portion of the benefits paid after the participant's death shall: 
a.  If payable to the participant's surviving spouse, begin no later than the end of the calendar year in which the participant would have attained age 701/2; or 
b.  If payable to the participant's designated beneficiary, begin no later than the end of the calendar year following the end of the calendar year in which the participant died and extend over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the beneficiary; or 
c.  Otherwise, be distributed within five years of the participant's death. 
(b)  This subsection applies to distributions made after December 31, 1992. Notwithstanding any provision of the retirement article to the contrary that would limit a distributee's election under this subsection, a distributes may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board of trustees, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly, as a direct rollover, to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. The following definitions shall apply with regard to this subsection. 
(1)  Eligible rollover distribution: Any distribution of all or a portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except an eligible rollover distribution does not include: Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent the distribution is required under Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(9); and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. 
(2)  Eligible retirement plan: In the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a participant, an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an individual retirement annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an annuity plan described in Section 403(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. In the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a surviving spouse, an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
(3)  Distributee: A participant or former participant, the surviving spouse of a participant or former participant and the spouse or former spouse of a participant or former participant, with regard to their interest, who is an alternative payee under a qualified domestic relations order defined in Section 414(p) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(4)  Direct rollover: A payment by the retirement system to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 20.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-107. - Actuarial equivalencies. 
    Except as provided in section 56-72, actuarial equivalencies shall be calculated using such rates of interest and mortality tables as the board of trustees shall from time-to-time adopt. In no case shall a rate of interest be less than five percent a year, compounded yearly. No change in interest rate or mortality table shall reduce the accrued benefit of any participant. In the event the makeup of the board of trustees is changed in a manner that brings the board under the direct control of the employer, actuarial equivalencies shall be calculated using the 1984 Group Annuity Mortality Table (Male) and an interest rate of five percent a year, compounded yearly. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 20.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-108. - [Diversion or other uses] of assets prohibited. 
    All assets of the retirement system shall be held and invested for the sole purpose of meeting the legitimate obligations of the retirement system and shall be used for no other purpose. No part of the assets shall be used for or diverted to purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of participants and beneficiaries prior to satisfaction of all retirement system obligations. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 20.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-109. - Actions. 
    Members of the board of trustees and its employees are prohibited from: 
(1)  Having a beneficial interest, direct or indirect, in an investment of the retirement system; and 
(2)  Borrowing from the retirement system; and 
(3)  Receiving any pay or emolument from any individual or organization, other than the city, providing services to the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 20.4, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-110. - Amendment, termination and discontinuance of the retirement system. 
    It is the intent of the city that the retirement system be permanent and remain in effect for an indefinite period. The city, however, reserves the right to modify or amend the retirement system at any time. The city expressly reserves the right to amend the retirement system in order to take advantage of or comply with any statute, rule or regulation of the federal government or State of Michigan, or any duly constituted agency thereof. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 21.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-111. - Miscellaneous; payments. 
    All payments by the retirement system shall be by check issued pursuant to a voucher signed by two persons designated by the board of trustees or by electronic fund transfers for direct deposit. An attested copy of the board of trustee resolution designating such persons and bearing their signatures shall be filed with the custodian. All payments shall be authorized by a specific or continuing resolution of the board of trustees. Checks shall be signed in accordance with city procedures for the signing of checks involving an expenditure from the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 22.1, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-112. - Same-Assignments prohibited. 
    Except as provided by a Michigan eligible domestic relation order issued or a judicial determination which does not increase the cost of the benefit which would otherwise be provided, none of the money, pensions or other benefits mentioned in the retirement ordinance shall be assignable either in law or in equity or be subject to execution, levy, attachment, garnishment or other legal process. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 22.2, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-113. - Same-Correction of errors. 
    The board of trustees shall correct errors in the records and actions of the retirement system. The board of trustees shall seek to recover overpayments and shall make up underpayments. Recovery of overpayments may be accomplished by reducing the amount of future payments so that the actuarial present value of actual payments is equal to the actuarial present value of correct payments. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 22.3, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-114. - Same-Employment rights. 
    The retirement system shall not be construed as giving an employee any right to be retained in the service of the city without its consent nor shall the retirement system interfere with the right of the city to discharge an employee, nor shall an employee be given any right, claim or interest in any benefits of the retirement system except upon fulfillment of the conditions and requirements of the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 22.4, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-115. - Same-Applicable laws. 
    The retirement system shall be construed and enforced under the laws of the State of Michigan and any applicable federal law, rule or regulation, and all of the provisions hereof shall be administered in accordance therewith. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 22.5, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-116. - Same-Severability. 
    If any section or part of a section of the retirement article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of the remaining sections of the retirement article or the retirement article in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 22.6, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-117. - Same-Reciprocal retirement act. 
    The retirement system is a reciprocal retirement system under the provisions of Act No. 88 of the Public Acts of 1961, being sections 38.1101 through 38.1106 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, pursuant to resolution of the city council adopted March 21, 1977. 
(Ord. No. 321, § 22.7, 7-17-00) 
Sec. 56-118. - Retiree health benefits. 
(a)  The eligibility for health insurance coverage, the specific health insurance coverage, the conditions of which would lead to loss of coverage, and the cost to the city and the covered individuals provided after the retirement or death of a retired participant shall be as described in the City of Grosse Pointe Retiree Health Benefit Plan. 
(b)  The city's share of the cost of retiree health insurance benefits provided under this section shall, to the extent such account has sufficient funds, be paid from the separate account as described in section 56-96. 
(Ord. No. 368, § I, 6-19-06) 
Chapter 58 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 356, § I, adopted June 20, 2005, amended chapter 58 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 58, §§ 58-1-58-5, 58-31-58-36, pertained to similar provisions, and derived from Ord. No. 259, §§ 1(8.171-8.184), 8-20-90. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; planning, ch. 54; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Highway advertising act, MCL 252.301 et seq. 

Sec. 58-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and nondiscriminatory sign standards and requirements. 
    Toward this end, the city council finds that the City of Grosse Pointe is primarily a residential community that has traditionally depended on its base of permanent residents. New residents, in part, are attracted to the visual quality and character of the city, including the lakefront and its tight-knit neighborhoods with beautiful homes located on tree-lined streets. Signage has a significant impact on the visual character and quality of the city. 
    The proliferation of signs in the city would result in visual blight and unattractiveness and would convey an image that is inconsistent with a high quality residential environment. Effective sign control has preserved and enhanced the visual character of other residential communities in Michigan and other states. The City of Grosse Pointe must compete with many other Michigan communities and other places to retain and attract desirable residents. 
    In order to preserve the City of Grosse Pointe as a desirable community in which to live, rear families, obtain a high quality education and experience a healthful and fulfilling life, a pleasing, visually attractive environment is of foremost importance. 
    The purpose of these sign regulations is to: 
A.  Preserve and maintain the City of Grosse Pointe as a pleasing, visually attractive environment. 
B.  Promote and accomplish the goals, policies and objectives of the Grosse Pointe Area Comprehensive Plan. 
C.  Enhance the attractiveness and economic well-being of the City of Grosse Pointe as a place to live, learn and conduct business. 
D.  Address community needs relating to upgrading the quality of the residential experience, preserving the unique natural environment, preserving and enhancing the high quality human existence, and retaining the city's premier status in an increasingly competitive residential market, preserving the historically and architecturally unique character of the city, fostering the "village style" quality of the city, and preserving and enhancing lakefront and other scenic views. 
E.  Enable the identification of places of residence and business. 
F.  Encourage signs that are appropriate to the zone district in which they are located and consistent with the category of use to which they pertain. 
G.  Permit signs that are compatible with their surroundings and aid orientation, and preclude placement in a manner that conceals or obstructs adjacent land uses or signs. 
H.  Curtail the size and number of signs and sign messages to the minimum reasonably necessary to identify a residential or business location and the nature of any such business. 
I.  Establish sign size in relationship to the scale of the lot's street frontage and building's street frontage along which the sign is to be placed. 
J.  Protect the public from the dangers of unsafe signs, and require signs to be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and satisfactory manner. 
K.  Lessen hazardous situations, confusion and visual clutter caused by proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation and excessive height, area and bulk of signs, which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
L.  Regulate signs in a manner so as to not interfere with, obstruct vision of, or distract motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 58-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section when they are used in this chapter: 
    Accessory sign: A sign which pertains to the principal use of the premises upon which such sign is located. 
    Appendage sign: A sign that is intended to draw attention to one or more of various services, items for sale, contests, and other similar items or events and is attached as an appendage to an accessory sign, sign support or any part of a sign structure. 
    Banner sign: A sign on paper, cloth, fabric or other combustible material of any kind, either with or without frames. 
    Billboard: A non-accessory sign which makes anything known to the general public, and on which a display can be posted, painted or otherwise affixed in a manner that is readily changed. 
    Building frontage: The length of the portion of a building facing a street abutting to the premises on which a business is located. 
    Bulletin board: A sign with temporary or replaceable letters or characters, used to announce dates of functions or activities. 
    Canopy: A suspended covering, often movable, placed above a door, window, or other entranceway. Canopies can be constructed of cloth, metal, wood, or other materials. 
    Commercial sign: A sign displayed for the purpose of identifying a commercial use, or advertising a service, product, business or venture that is offered for trade or sale. 
    Construction sign: A sign advertising a project under development, erected for the period of construction, identifying its developers, contractors, engineers, brokers and architects. 
    Directional sign: A sign, the primary purpose of which is to expedite the flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic to, from and within a site. 
    Flashing sign: A sign that is intermittently illuminated or reflects light intermittently from either an artificial source or from the sun. 
    Freestanding sign: A commercial sign supported by one or more uprights, poles, pylons or braces placed in or upon the ground and not attached to any building or other structure. 
    Grade: The average elevation of an area within a radius (of the sign base) equal to two times the height of the sign. 
    Handicapped sign: A sign limited to indicating that off-street parking is reserved for the physically handicapped, or a sign which is limited to indicating facilities for the physically handicapped. 
    Illuminated sign: A sign which has characters, letters, figures, or designs, which are illuminated either internally or with external shielded lights. 
    Institutional sign: A sign containing a surface area upon which is displayed the name of a religious institution, school, library, community center, or similar institutions, and the announcement of its services or activities. 
    Interior sign: A sign which is visible from any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or public property and located within a building. 
    Marquee sign: A sign attached to or hung from a marquee, canopy or other covered structure projecting from and supported by the building. 
    Maximum sign height: Shall be measured from grade or sidewalk to the highest edge of the sign surface or its projecting structure. 
    Minimum sign height: Shall be measured from grade or sidewalk to the lowest edge of the sign surface or its projecting structure. 
    Moving sign: A sign that has motion either constantly or at intervals or that gives the impression of movement through intermittent, flashing, twinkling, or varying intensities of illumination. 
    Mural: A picture or photograph painted on or directly attached to a wall, intended to serve as a cosmetic adornment for the building that does not contain an advertising message. 
    Natural materials: Wood, stone, clear glass (but not painted glass), brick and wrought iron construction materials. 
    Non-accessory sign: A sign which does not pertain to the principal use of the premises on which such sign is located. 
    Occupational sign: A sign denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in a commercial building or public institutional building. 
    Off-premises commercial sign: A sign displaying advertising copy (including names, artwork, symbols or logos) that pertains to a service, product, business or venture not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located. Off-premises commercial signs are prohibited in the City of Grosse Pointe. 
    Political sign: A temporary sign relating to the election or appointment of a person to public office, or relating to a political party, or relating to an issue or a matter to be voted upon at a public election or referendum, or pertaining to the advocating by persons, groups, or parties of political views or policies. 
    Portable sign: A commercial sign, sign board, or banner which is not permanently anchored or secured to either a building, structure or the ground; or, any sign attached to a trailer or other vehicle not accessory to the vehicle or its use, but used with the express intent of advertising. 
    Premises: A lot or group of lots with one or more buildings which functions as a single use, is under the same ownership or control and is not divided by a public street. Multiple tenants of a single premises may share common entranceways and off-street parking. Examples of premises include a shopping center, a multiple family apartment complex, and an educational or medical campus. 
    Projecting sign: A sign so constructed and erected as to be attached at one end to a building, metal pole or other structure, and projecting there from. 
    Real estate sign: A sign advertising only that the property said sign is located upon is for sale, rent or lease and other information which is essential to the proposed real estate transition. 
    Roof sign: A sign which is erected, constructed and maintained on or above the roof of a building or any portion thereof. Signs on the face of mansard or gable roofs are considered roof signs. 
    Sign: Any visual or graphic device (including its structure and component parts) designed through use of words, numbers, characters, or symbols to inform or attract attention for communication purposes and which is designated to be visible from outside any building or structure in which, upon which, or attached to which it may be located. 
    Sign area: The entire area within a circle, triangle, rectangle or other geometric shape enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material, graphic or color forming an integral part of the display or message, or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed; excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed, if no advertising matter is placed thereon. 
    Sign erector: Any person engaged in the business of erecting, constructing, altering, or removing signs on a contractual or hourly basis. 
    Subdivision/development sign: A freestanding sign or entranceway structure, listing the names and addresses only of the establishments occupying a development, subdivision or condominium. The erection of such identification signs is so intended to assist the public in locating establishments within its immediate area and shall be placed upon property within the development or subdivision. 
    Temporary sign: A sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time, including decorative displays for holidays, special events, grand opening, or public demonstrations; not including signs pertaining to sale, rent, or lease of property. 
    Time/date/temperature sign: A sign that displays only the current time and/or date and/or temperature. 
    Wall sign: A sign attached to, painted on, inscribed, or otherwise set upon the exterior wall or surface of any building. A sign painted or inscribed on a canopy shall also be considered a wall sign. 

Marquee Sign and Projecting Sign 

Public Information and Directional Signs 

Awning Sign and Window Sign 

Roof Sign and Wall Sign 

Various Types of Freestanding Signs 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 378, §§ I, II, 9-15-08) 
Sec. 58-3. - Reserved. 
Sec. 58-4. - Computation of sign area. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the total area of a sign shall be expressed in square feet and shall be computed as follows: 
(a)  Single-face sign. The total area of a single-face sign shall be computed as the number of square feet within any single geometric shape such as a square, rectangle, triangle or circle B encompassing the extreme limits of an individual letter(s), word(s), message(s), representation, emblem or any similar figure, including open space(s), together with any frame or other material forming an integral part of display used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. 
(b)  Double-face signs: For double-face signs having two faces of equal size arranged and/or positioned back to back, parallel to each other, with no more than a two-foot space between the two faces; the area of the sign shall be computed as one-half the total area of the two faces. When the faces of such a sign are not of equal area, then the area of the sign shall be computed as the total area of the largest face. The sign face area shall be computed as described above for a single-face sign. 
(c)  Three-dimensional signs. For signs, which are designed as a three-dimensioned geometric form such as a sphere, cone, cylinder, or cube; the area shall be computed as one-half the total surface of the geometric form. The sign face area shall be computed as described above for a single-face sign. 
(d)  Natural materials (or representation of) bonus. Signs constructed of not less than 90 percent natural materials, as defined herein, shall be permitted a bonus surface area of 125 percent of the area otherwise permitted by these regulations. Thus, if a sign is permitted to include a face surface area of 20 square feet, constructing the sign of not less than 90 percent natural materials shall permit a maximum area of 25 square feet. Such signs shall be only externally illuminated with shielded light fixtures. The planning commission shall review each request for a natural materials bonus to determine if the application fulfills the requirements as described herein. 

(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 58-5. - Permit required for signs. 
(a)  Sign erection permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, re-erect, move, alter, enlarge, or illuminate, any sign unless a permit shall have been first obtained from the building inspector, except as provided in section 58-9 (signs exempt from permit requirement). Any sign that makes use of electricity shall, in addition to a sign permit, require an electrical permit, regardless of size. 
(b)  Sign maintenance or change of message: No permit shall be required for ordinary servicing, repainting of existing sign message, or cleaning of a sign. No permit is required for change of message of a sign designed for periodic message change without change of structure, including a bulletin board or billboard, but not including a sign to which a new permanent face may be attached. 
(c)  City council approval: Except as provided in the next sentence, all new or replacement signs that require a sign permit, time/date/temperature signs, or any type of sign not explicitly defined in section 58-2 of this chapter must be approved by the city council before a permit shall be issued. Permits for portable signs subject to the requirements in section 58-11(d)15. shall be issuable by the building inspector on a ministerial basis. Notwithstanding the foregoing, neither a permit nor approval is required to display a noncommercial message on any authorized sign. 
(d)  Modification of standards: Upon receipt by the city council of an application for a permit that includes a request to modify any of the standards in this chapter, the council may, at any regular meeting or any special meeting duly called for that purpose, consider whether the proposed sign, if erected, will achieve the purposes of this chapter. In reaching its determination the council shall consider the following, without limitation: 
(1)  Whether the structure, dimensions and placement of the proposed sign generally conform to the character of signs in the neighborhood or business district; 
(2)  Whether the proposed sign achieves the purposes of this chapter as described in section 58-1; 
(3)  Whether the proposed sign achieves another public purpose consistent with the purpose of this chapter or the city's master plan; 
(4)  Whether there is a practical difficulty preventing an applicant from meeting the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Sign erector requirements: Permits for the erection of signs shall only be issued to persons qualified to carry on such work under the provisions of section 58-6 (sign erector requirements.) 
(f)  Permit applications: Applications for sign permits shall be made upon forms provided by the building inspector for this purpose and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and phone number of applicant. 
(2)  Location of the building, structure, or lot on which the sign is to be attached or erected. 
(3)  Location of sign on building. 
(4)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, signs, property lines, and rights-of-way, existing or proposed. 
(5)  Estimated cost by applicant. 
(6)  One set of plans, drawings, and specifications describing the proposed sign. The sign plans shall include all pertinent data including materials, exact wording of sign, lighting, highest point, low point clearance; face outline and total face area with method of calculation. When public safety so requires the specifications shall include the certificate or seal of a registered structural or civil engineer as a condition to the issuance of a permit. 
(7)  Name and address of the sign erector. 
(8)  Insurance policy as required herein (see section 58-6(a)) and/or performance bond as required. 
(9)  Letter of consent from the owner or tenant of the premises, unless the owner or tenant is the applicant or co-applicant. 
(10)  Such other information as the building inspector may require showing full compliance with this and all other applicable laws of the city and the State of Michigan. 
(g)  Application process: The building inspector or his designee shall determine whether the application is complete. If he determines that it is not complete, he shall inform the applicant of the deficiencies or, on request by the applicant, shall furnish written notice specifying the deficiencies. 
(1)  Within eight business days after receipt of a complete application, and receipt of any required fee, the building inspector shall (a) issue a permit to erect the sign, (b) issue a permit subject to additional conditions, or (c) deny a permit. The applicant may elect to extend the time within such action is required. 
(2)  In performing his review, the building inspector shall determine whether the application is consistent with the purposes, requirements and standards of this chapter. 
(3)  The city council shall have the responsibility and authority to hear and decide appeals regarding this chapter where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, permit decision or denial by the building inspector in carrying out or enforcement of any provisions of this section. 
(h)  Sign erection permit expiration: A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was issued is not completed within 90 days of the date of issue. 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 378, § III, 9-15-08) 
Sec. 58-6. - Sign erector requirements. 
(a)  Insurance certificates: Before a sign permit is issued, the installing company shall submit for filing with the city a valid certificate of insurance, for public liability in the amount of 100,000.00 for injuries to one person and $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person, and property damage insurance in the amount of $25,000.00 for damage to any property due to the actions of himself or any of his agents or employees. Said certificate shall provide for notification of the building inspector ten days prior to expiration of insurance. 
(b)  Lapsing of insurance: If at any time, the insurance of any sign erector is permitted to lapse, his right to obtain permits shall automatically be revoked. 
(c)  Notification of change: A sign erector shall notify the building official of any change in address, and if a firm or corporation, any change in ownership or management if other than that indicated on the insurance certificates. 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 58-7. - Certificate of compliance. 
(a)  Compliance certification: All signs shall be inspected at original installation and if found to be in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be issued a certificate of compliance. The building inspector or his designee shall cause existing signs to be inspected if deemed necessary by him to determine continuation of compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Responsibility of compliance: The owner of any property on which a sign is placed and the person maintaining said sign are declared to be equally responsible for the erection, safety and condition of the sign and the area in the vicinity thereof subject to provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 58-8. - General sign provisions. 
(a)  Public rights-of-way: No sign (or any pole or support cable of any nature) except those established and maintained by the City, County, State, or Federal Governments, shall be located in, project into, or overhang a public right-of-way or dedicated public easement, unless otherwise authorized in this chapter. 
(b)  Traffic interference: No advertising device shall be erected or maintained which simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering, or design any traffic sign or signal or other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, confuse or create a visual impediment or safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(c)  Clear corner vision: No sign above a height of 30 inches shall be located within, project into, or overhang the triangular area formed at the intersection of any two street right-of-way lines (existing or proposed) by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection, unless visual under-clearance can be assured on the plans. 
(d)  Proximity to electrical conductors: No sign shall be erected so that any part including cables, guys, or any other part of the sign or support structure, will be within ten feet of any electrical conductor, electric light pole, street lamp, traffic light, or other public utility pole or standard. 
(e)  Illumination: Illuminated signs shall be externally illuminated with external light fixtures attached to the building or ground. Such lighting shall be located and directed toward the building or sign in such a manner that glare is not visible by pedestrians or vehicles. Signs may also be backlit subject to approval by city council. Directional signs may be internally illuminated provided no more than 25 percent of the sign being illuminated shall be translucent; the remaining 75 percent of the sign shall be opaque. 
(f)  Fire escapes: No signs of any kind shall be attached to or placed upon a building in such a manner as to obstruct any fire escape. 
(g)  Wall signs: No wall sign shall project beyond or overhang the wall, or any permanent architectural feature, by more than one foot, and shall not project above or beyond the highest point of the roof or parapet. Wall signs shall not cover or otherwise obscure windowsills, lintels, or other architectural details. No wall sign shall be located above the first floor storefront facade. 
(h)  Freestanding signs: Freestanding signs are permitted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Located in the RO-1, C-1, or NC districts. 
(2)  Must be a ground mounted free standing sign (no pole signs). 
(3)  Must meet the size requirement in this chapter. 
(4)  Must be harmonious with the architectural character of the building. 
(5)  Must be located in a landscape area. 
(6)  Shall not be internally illuminated. 
(i)  Construction signs: Signs advertising buildings or projects under construction shall not exceed 12 square feet per 100 lineal feet of public right-of-way frontage or fraction thereof, and shall not exceed 48 square feet in total area. Such signs shall have a maximum height of six feet and shall be set back at least 25 feet from any public right-of-way unless attached to a building or construction fence and shall be removed upon completion of construction. No more than one construction sign is permitted per public right-of-way frontage and placement shall be a minimum of 300 feet apart as measured along the right-of-way line. 
(j)  Liability insurance; indemnification: If (I) the vertical distance of a sign above the street is greater than the horizontal distance from the sign to the street right-of-way line and is so located as to be able to fall or be pushed onto or impacts public property in any manner or (II), if a sign in whole or in part rests on, in or over any public sidewalk or other public right-of-way, the owner of such sign shall keep in force a public liability insurance policy in the amount of $100,000.00 for injury to one person and $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person and property damage insurance in the amount of $25,000.00 for damage to property. In lieu of an insurance policy as required herein, an owner may present satisfactory proof to the city attorney that said owner is financially capable of self-insurance in the above amounts. At the request of the city, a person or entity which places or maintains a sign, in whole or part, on a public sidewalk or other public right-of-way in the city shall file a written statement with the city clerk satisfactory to the city attorney, whereby such person or entity agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from any loss, liability, expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation of, use of, or maintenance on, or obstruction of the public way. 
(k)  Contractor signs: Signs advertising contractors who have a valid building permit from the city may be located on the premises of the job for which the permit has been issued. Signs for contractors who do not have a permit from the city shall be prohibited. Any sign advertising a permitted contractor may not exceed four square feet in area and must be removed upon completion of the job. 
(l)  Event signs: Temporary signs for events such as grand openings, displays, shows, benefits, elections, festivals and other fixed date or limited term events shall be removed within seven days after the event to which the sign pertains. 
(m)  Wind pressure and dead load requirements: All exterior signs and sign structures, other than temporary signs and portable signs, shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure as regulated by chapter 14 of this Code, and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required pursuant to that chapter. 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 378, §§ IV, V, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 414, § V, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 58-9. - Signs exempt from permit requirements. 
    No sign permit is required for signs listed below. Such exemptions, however, shall not be construed to relieve the owner from responsibility for proper location, erection, and maintenance of the sign, nor from compliance with the requirements of section 58-8. 
(a)  Government signs. Signs erected by or on behalf of or pursuant to the authorization of a government body, including legal notices, informational signs, directional, or regulatory signs. 
(b)  Flags: Flags, pennants or insignia of any governmental, educational, religious, political or nonprofit organizations when not displayed in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device. 
(c)  Address signs: Signs not exceeding two square feet in area and bearing only property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises, or other identification of premises not having commercial connotations. 
(d)  Street signs: Signs erected by the city, county, state, or federal government for street names, traffic control, or direction and information. 
(e)  Private traffic signs: Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property that do not exceed four square feet each and bear no advertising matter. 
(f)  Handicapped signs: Not exceeding four square feet each and bearing no advertising matter. 
(g)  Architectural features/artwork: Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings or works of art, historic plaques, benches and other similar devices so long as such features or works do not contain letters, trademarks, moving parts, or lights. Additionally, such elements must be included and approved in the master sign plan. 
(h)  Small accessory signs: Any accessory sign erected on a premise which is no more than two square feet in area, such as no trespassing signs, garage sale signs, and signs warning of animals. The total area of all small accessory signs on one premise shall not exceed eight square feet, except in residential districts in which the total area of all small accessory signs on one premise shall not exceed six square feet. 
(i)  Temporary signs, banners, flags: Temporary signs, banners, or flags when in the nature of special decorative displays used for public demonstrations or promotions of civic welfare or charitable purposes on which there is no commercial advertising, provided the city is held harmless and blameless for any damage or injury resulting there from. Said signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area. 
(j)  Real estate signs: Signs advertising that the premises, on which such sign is located, is for sale, rent, or lease, when not illuminated, and when not more than four square feet in area for a single dwelling or building or vacant land. Such signs shall not be erected in such a manner that they will or reasonably may be expected to interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead traffic. Such signs shall be removed within 15 days after the premises is sold or rented. 
(k)  Plaque signs. Signs that do not include business name, logo, or other form of commercial advertising. Signs are to be a maximum of two feet in area, and project from wall surfaces a maximum of two inches. 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 378, §§ VI, VII, 9-15-08) 
Sec. 58-10. - Signs prohibited throughout the city. 
    The following signs are prohibited throughout the city, notwithstanding anything to the contrary elsewhere in this chapter. 
(a)  Signs which incorporate in any manner or are illuminated by any flashing or moving lights, or where any illumination can shine directly into the eyes of any occupant of any vehicle traveling upon any highway, driveway or parking area, or into any window of any residence within 200 feet, or where the illumination interferes with the visibility or readability of any traffic sign or device. 
(b)  Exterior banners, pennants, strings of flags, spinners, and streamers. Temporary banners for city-sponsored events are exempt from this requirement when posted 30 days or less. 
(c)  Exterior string lights used in connection with a commercial premises, other than holiday decorations used from the day after Thanksgiving through the following January 15th. 
(d)  Any sign which has any visible motion, moving or animated parts or image, whether movement is caused by machinery, electronics, wind, or otherwise, except for minor elements of clocks or thermometers. 
(e)  Any sign which is structurally or electrically unsafe, or which obstructs any fire escape. 
(f)  Any sign erected on a tree, fence or utility pole except signs of any political subdivision of this state. 
(g)  Any business sign, sign structure or frame now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or a product offered for sale. 
(h)  Portable signs. Any freestanding exterior commercial sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground, including sandwich boards, plastic message boards on wheels, and the like, except for portable signs in the C-1 and C-2 district subject to the requirements in section 58-11(d)15. 
(i)  Any sign on a motor vehicle or trailer that is parked in front of a business for the purpose of advertising a business or product or service of a business located on the premises where such vehicle is parked. 
(j)  Any sign on a motor vehicle or trailer that is parked at a location visible from a public street and intended to attract attention for the business, product or service identified on the sign. 
(k)  Roof signs or any sign, which projects more than one foot above the roofline. 
(l)  Any sign or sign part, cable or support, except those established for emergency services purposes and maintained by the city, the Wayne County Road Commission, the Michigan Department of Transportation, or the federal government, located in, projecting into, or overhanging a public right-of-way or dedicated public easement, except as provided in subsection 58-11(d)7. for signs in C-1 and C-2 districts. The city manager or designated official is authorized to cause the removal of any signs posted or placed in any public right-of-way, provided any such sign shall be kept for a period of 60 days for pick up by any person who might claim it, and thereafter may be destroyed by the city. 
(m)  Any sign erected on any property, public or private, without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(n)  Any sign which simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering, or design, any traffic sign or signal or other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse the drivers or motorized vehicles. 
(o)  Any sign that incorporates any open spark or flame unless specifically approved by the building department. 
(p)  Backlit awnings. 
(q)  Message board signs. 
(r)  Pylon or pole-mounted signs. 
(s)  Any sign attached to or painted on a satellite dish antenna. 
(t)  Billboard signs. 
(u)  Additional signs associated with any outdoor eating area. 
(v)  Signs displaying obscene images or messages. 
(w)  Signs advertising a commercial business or home occupation located in the R1-A, R1-B, R2, or RT districts. 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 378, § VIII, 9-15-08) 
Sec. 58-11. - District regulations. 
    The following signs are permitted in the districts: 
(a)  Signs permitted in R-1A, and R-1B (single-family) districts: 
1.  For each dwelling unit, one address sign in compliance with subsection 58-9(c). 
2.  Small accessory signs no more than two square feet in area, such as no trespassing signs, garage sale signs, and signs warning of animals. The total area of all small accessory signs on one premise shall not exceed six square feet. 
3.  One real estate sign for each dwelling unit in compliance with subsection 58-9(j) of this chapter. Such sign will have a maximum height of six feet from grade and shall be set back five feet from any public right-of-way. 
4.  One subdivision entrance sign per vehicle entrance may be permitted on private property in compliance with the corner clearance provisions (subsection 58-8(c)) and shall not exceed 20 square feet in area or a height of six feet above grade. The location and appearance of all subdivision/condominium signs shall be subject to review and approval by the city council at the time of site plan review, provided that such signs shall be located no closer than 12 feet from any property line and 100 feet from any adjacent single-family district. Adequate provisions shall also be made at the time of site plan review to insure continued maintenance of the sign. 
5.  One institutional sign for each school, church, library, or similar institution when erected as a freestanding or wall sign having an area of no more than 20 square feet, having a height of no more than six feet above the established grade, and located no closer than 12 feet from any property line. 
6.  Flags, street signs and government signs when erected in compliance with section 58-12 of this chapter. 
7.  Construction signs in compliance with subsection 58-8(i). 
8.  Notwithstanding, other limitations of subsection 58-11(a), in addition to one address sign and any other signs required by law or police regulation or order, there shall not be displayed on any residential lot at any one time more than the lesser of: (A) a total of five signs or (B) signs with a total surface area not exceeding 20 square feet. 
(b)  Signs permitted in R-2 and R-T (two-family and terrace) districts: 
1.  Signs as permitted in subsection 58-11(a) above, except that up to eight square feet of total small accessory signs may be erected. 
2.  Signs identifying community facilities or special uses within said developments. Such signs shall not exceed a total of 15 square feet in area, or a height of six feet above grade, for each building or use and no such sign shall be located closer than 30 feet to any property line of an adjacent single-family district. 
3.  Private traffic signs and handicapped signs in compliance with subsections 58-9(e) and (f). 
4.  Notwithstanding, any other limitation of subsection 58-11(b), in addition to one address sign for each unit and any other signs required by law or police regulation or order, there shall not be displayed on any R-2 lot at any one time more than the lesser of: (A) a total of eight signs or (B) signs with a total surface area not exceeding 32 square feet; nor shall there displayed at any one time with respect to any unit of a premises zoned R-T, more than the lesser of: (A) a total of four signs or (B) signs with a total surface area not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet. 
(c)  Signs permitted in RO-1 (restricted office) districts: 
1.  The following standards shall apply to all buildings located within the RO-1 district located on a major arterial, as defined by the comprehensive master plan: 
a.  A total of 50 sq. ft. of signage shall be permitted. 
Such signs may consist of the following: 
i.  No wall sign shall exceed .75 square feet for each linear foot of the building facade on which the sign is located, or 24 square feet, whichever is less. 
ii.  One (1) wall sign shall be permitted for each 24 linear feet of building frontage. No wall sign shall be closer than 24 ft. measured horizontally from any other wall sign for the same business. 
iii.  For each premises, one (1) freestanding sign erected in compliance with subsection 58-8(h) and further subject to the following: 
a.  Such sign shall have a height of no more than four feet above the established grade. 
b.  No sign shall be erected closer than 12 feet to any property line. 
c.  The lower edge of the freestanding sign face shall be located not more than 18 inches above the established surface grade of the ground under the sign. 
b.  Construction signs when erected in compliance with subsection 58-8(i). 
c.  All signs exempt from permit requirements when erected in compliance with sections 58-8 and 58-9. 
d.  Any signs within the interior of the building, which are visible from any public right-of-way, alley, or adjacent property, are prohibited. 
2.  The following standards shall apply to all other buildings located within the RO-1 district: 
a.  The total sign area on each premises shall be limited to 12 square feet. 
Such signs may consist of the following: 
i.  For each business, one wall sign erected in compliance with subsection 58-8(g). 
ii.  For each premises, one freestanding sign erected in compliance with subsection 58-8(h) and further subject to the following: 
a.  Such sign shall have a height of no more than four feet above the established grade. 
b.  Shall be erected no closer than 12 feet from any property line. 
c.  The lower edge of the freestanding sign face shall be located not more than 18 inches above the established surface grade of the ground under the sign. 
b.  Construction signs when erected in compliance with subsection 58-8(i). 
c.  All signs exempt from permit requirements when erected in compliance with sections 58-8 and 58-9. 
d.  Any signs within the interior of the building, which are visible from any public right-of-way, alley, or adjacent property, are prohibited. 
(d)  Signs permitted in C-1; C-2 (local business and central business) districts: 
1.  Signs shall be architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the building, and with other signs on nearby buildings. Signs shall be an integral part of the building and site design. 
2.  A sign program shall be developed for buildings which house more than one business. Signs need not match, but shall be compatible with one another. 
3.  Sign materials shall be consistent or compatible with the original construction materials and architectural style of the building facade on which they are to be displayed. Natural materials such as wood and metal or accurate representatives of those materials are appropriate. 
4.  Buildings designed to permit businesses to occupy more than one floor shall reserve (a) two-thirds of their allowable sign area for tenants on the first floor and (b) one-third for tenants on the second floor. 
5.  Wall signs. 
a.  Wall signs are to be mounted flush and fixed securely to a building wall, projecting no more than 12 inches from the face of a building wall, and not extending sideways beyond the building face or above the highest line of the building to which it is attached. 
b.  Wall signs on a storefront-type building shall generally be placed within a "sign band" immediately above the storefront. Wall or roof signs on other buildings shall be placed where they do not obscure architectural features. 
c.  The height of lettering on wall signs shall not exceed 12 inches. A business logo, which is incorporated into the design of the sign lettering may be permitted to a height not to exceed 18 inches. 
d.  Wall signs should be located on the upper portion of the storefront, within or just above the enframed storefront opening. The length of the sign should not exceed the 80 percent of the width of the enframed storefront. 
e.  Wall signs shall be placed within a clear signable area. Signable areas are defined as an architecturally continuous wall surface uninterrupted by doors, windows or architectural detail. 
f.  No wall sign shall not exceed .75 square feet for each linear foot of the building facade on which the sign is located, or 24 square feet, whichever is less. 
g.  One wall sign shall be permitted for each 24 linear feet of building frontage. No wall sign be closer than 24 ft. measured horizontally from any other wall sign for the same business. 
h.  Wall signs shall be mounted in locations that respect the design of a building, including the arrangement of bays and openings. 
i.  Signs should not obscure windows, grillwork, piers, pilasters, and ornamental features. 
6.  Awning and canopy signs. 
a.  Sign lettering and/or logo shall comprise no more than 20 percent, or ten square feet of the total exterior surface of an awning or canopy. 
b.  Awnings and canopies must be permanently attached to buildings. 
c.  The minimum height of awnings/canopies shall be nine feet from the lowest point of the awning/canopy to the sidewalk. 
d.  Awnings and canopies shall be mounted on the horizontal framing element separating the storefront window from the transom (a crosspiece separating a doorway from a window). 
e.  Awnings shall be designed to project over individual window and door openings and not project as a single continuous feature extending over masonry piers or arches. 
f.  Awnings shall be mounted on the wood or metal framing within a door or window opening, not on the wall surrounding the opening. 
g.  Awnings with back-lit graphics or other kinds of interior illumination are prohibited. 
7.  Projecting signs. 
a.  Projecting signs shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of nine feet above pedestrian areas. 
b.  Projecting signs shall project no more than 48 inches from the building face. 
c.  Projecting signs shall be limited to five square feet per side. 
d.  Projecting signs shall be considered visually interesting elements such as irregular, round, oval or three-dimensional shapes with painted or carved letters. 
e.  Mounting hardware must consist of ornamental wrought iron brackets of decorative and ornamental shapes. 
8.  Marquee signs. 
a.  Marquee signs are to be installed only on buildings occupied by theatres, cinemas, performing arts facilities, or parking structures. 
b.  The sign copy of marquee signs shall be limited to include only the facility's name and changeable copy related to current and future attractions. 
c.  The facility name portion of the sign shall not exceed 40 percent of the total sign area and the changeable copy portions of the sign shall not exceed 80 percent of the total sign area. 
9.  Hanging signs. 
a.  Hanging signs are permitted at ground floor locations, below canopies/awnings. Hanging signs may be permitted above the ground floor for upper floor businesses with covered entry porches and balconies. 
b.  A minimum clearance of eight feet above pedestrian areas is required. 
c.  Hanging signs, excluding supporting rods, chains or similar hangers, shall fit within an imaginary rectangle with a maximum area of two square feet. 
10.  Window signs. 
a.  Window signs shall not exceed ten percent of the window area so that visibility into and out of the window is not obscured. 
b.  Sign copy shall not exceed six inches in height. 
c.  Window sign copy shall be applied directly to glazed area. 
d.  Window signs should be applied directly to the interior face of the glazing or hung inside the window, concealing all mounting hardware and equipment. 
11.  Plaque signs. 
a.  Plaque signs are to be located only on wall surfaces adjacent to tenant entries. 
b.  Plaque signs are to fit within an imaginary rectangle with a maximum area of two square feet. 
c.  Signs shall not include the business name or a business logo. 
12.  Reserved. 
13.  Temporary signs. 
a.  Temporary signs shall not cover more than ten percent of the total window and door sign area visible from the exterior. 
b.  Temporary signs are allowed on the interior of the business establishment only. 
c.  Temporary signs are permitted to contain no more than five square feet of text and shall not exceed ten square feet in size. 
d.  Temporary signs should be made of durable materials and shall not incorporate fluorescent or intensely bright colors. 
e.  Temporary signs may be permitted for a period of up to 30 days. A maximum of three temporary sign permits may be permitted per 12-month period, not in two successive months. 
14.  Gasoline price signs. 
a.  Gasoline price signs may be permitted in the C-1 district subject to subsection 58-8(h) with the exception that a gasoline price sign shall be setback a minimum of five feet from an adjacent street right-of-way. 
15.  [Portable signs.] Portable signs may be placed at the public entrances to businesses, on either private property or the public sidewalk, in accordance with the following specifications: 
a.  Permits for portable signs may be granted by the building department for either a 30-day or a 12-month time period. Permit fees will be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
b.  No sign shall be placed within a distance of ten feet from any fire hydrant, or in any location where it would imperil public safety, as determined by the building inspector, or his/her designee, or interfere with the function of the fire department. 
c.  The sign shall be located a minimum of two feet and a maximum of ten feet from the main entrance to the business(s), within 25 inches of the building wall or an approved outdoor café associated with the business. However, a portable sign shall not block or obstruct the entrance. The location of such sign shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation, taking into consideration existing street furniture, as determined by the building inspector or his/her designee. 
d.  There shall be only one portable sign per public entrance facing a street or public alley and no more than one portable sign per business. For a business with an additional side and/or rear customer entrance in addition to the front entrance, one additional portable sign may be permitted at the side or rear entrance, subject to al the requirement of this section. 
e.  Each sign shall be placed outside only during the hours when the business is open to the general public, and shall be stored indoors at all other times. Signs shall be removed from the public or other public areas during public sidewalk cleaning, snow plowing, and the like or other special events. No portable sign shall be located or maintained within any public right-of-way so as to endanger the safety of persons or property, or to unreasonably interfere with, nor as to impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or access to any legally parked vehicles, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted nearby. 
f.  Portable signs shall not have more than two sign faces. 
g.  The following design requirements shall apply to all signs: 
1.  All portable signs located in the C-2 district shall be consistent with the character of the City of Grosse Pointe village area. 
2.  Portable signs shall be made of wood or decorative metal or other comparable high quality material, with cast iron or decorative metal brackets, and the design of the sign shall be consistent with the style, composition, materials, colors and details of the building. Portable signs on wheels and the use of plastic sign bases and frames shall be prohibited. Portable signs that incorporate banners, flags, balloons, streamers, or pennants shall be prohibited. 
3.  Fluorescent or intensely bright colors shall be prohibited. 
4.  Portable signs lettering, excluding that which is part of the business logo, shall be between two to four inches high. Changeable letters, dry-erase/marker boards, and fabric sign faces shall be prohibited; however chalkboard signs and signs with changeable faces may be permitted. 
5.  Portable sign designs shall have minimal text. Logos and graphics are encouraged. 
6.  The business name lettering and/or logo shall be neatly painted, raised, or routed onto the sign, or similar permanent lettering attached to the sign face, as determined by the building inspector. 
7.  The sign shall be kept in good repair at all times. 
8.  Portable signs are to relate to the nature or theme of the business advertised. 
h.  No portable sign shall be less than an overall height of 36 inches or exceed and overall height of 61 inches. The maximum width of the sign shall be 25 inches. The maximum sign area per portable sign is six square feet. 
i.  The city shall reserve the right to modify these requirements for portable signs when such signs are used solely during city approved special events. 
j.  Portable signs shall be weighted or secured in some manner so as to prevent them from being moved or blown over by the wind. 
16.  All signs exempt from permit requirements are allowed in C-1 district when erected in compliance with sections 58-8 and 58-9. 
17.  Freestanding signs. 
a.  May not be located in the C-1, C-2, or T-2 district. 
b.  Such sign shall have a height of no more than four feet above grade. 
c.  Shall be no closer than five feet from any property line. 
d.  The lower edge of the free standing sign shall be located not more than 18 inches above the established surface grade of the ground under the sign. 
(e)  Signs permitted in P-1 (vehicular parking) districts: 
1.  Signs limited to the purpose of directing traffic flow or indicating location of no parking zones, fire lanes, loading and unloading zones. The area and location of such signs must be approved by the city council, or designation thereof, at time of site plan approval. 
2.  Construction signs erected in compliance to subsection 58-8(i). 
3.  Temporary signs and real estate signs when erected in compliance with subsections 58-9(i) and 58-9(j). 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 378, §§ IX, X, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 414, § VI, 6-16-14; Ord. No. 425, § II, 3-21-16) 
Sec. 58-12. - Construction and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Materials and design: All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in conformity with the provisions for materials, loads, and stresses of the latest adopted edition of the City Building Code and requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Erector's imprint: Signs which require a permit under this chapter must carry the identification and address of the sign erector, electrical voltage (when applicable), and date of erection in clearly legible letters whether for the initial erection or rehanging of a sign. In case of re-hanging or re-erection of any sign, the new erector must place his identification, address and the date on the sign. 
(c)  Fastenings: All signs must be erected in such a manner and with such materials to remain safe and secure during the period of use and all bolts, cables, and other parts of such signs shall be kept painted and free from corrosion. Any defect due to the fault of the erector shall be repaired by the erector. 
(d)  Sanitation/landscaping: Property surrounding any freestanding sign shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from obnoxious and offensive substances, weeds, debris, rubbish, and flammable material. All plant materials and other landscaping surrounding a freestanding sign shall be maintained on a regular basis, including pruning, mowing, watering, fertilizing and replacement of dead and diseased materials. 
(e)  Maintenance: All signs and all components thereof, including without limitation supports, braces, and anchors, shall be kept in a state of good repair. Peeling or missing paint, holes, broken, cracked, bent, warped, rotted, discolored, sagging, out-of-plumb, worn, rusted or missing material parts shall be repaired within ten days of written notification of the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 58-13. - Non-conforming signs. 
(a)  Intent: It is the intent of the city to encourage eventual elimination of signs that are made non-conforming as a result of the 2005 revision of this chapter, to administer this chapter to realize the removal of illegal non-conforming signs, and to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights. 
(b)  Lawful existing signs: Any sign lawfully existing at the effective date of this section 58-13 which does not fully comply with all provisions of this chapter shall be considered a legal non-conforming sign and may be continued in use as long as the sign is properly maintained and not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the community except as hereafter provided. 
(c)  Continuance: A non-conforming sign shall not: 
(1)  Be expanded, enlarged, or changed to another business; 
(2)  Be relocated. 
(3)  Be structurally reconstructed so as to prolong the life of the sign; or so as to change the shape, size, type, placement, or design of the sign's structural parts; or so as to add illumination; 
(4)  Be repaired or re-erected after being damaged if the repair or re- erection of the sign, within any 12-month period, would cost more than 50 percent of the cost of an identical new sign. If deemed necessary by the building inspector, the cost of an identical new sign shall be determined as the average of no less than three cost estimates obtained from three contractors. 
(5)  Be altered unless the alteration or reconstruction is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of this chapter only, the term "altered" or "reconstructed" shall not include normal maintenance; changing of surface sign space to a lesser or equal area; landscaping below the base line; or changing electrical wiring or devices, backgrounds, letters, figures, or characters. 
(d)  Termination of business: Nonconforming signs and sign structures shall be removed or made to conform within 30 days of the termination of the business or use to which they are accessory. 
(e)  Change of property: If the owner of a sign or the premises on which a sign is located changes the location of a building so that any sign on the premises is rendered nonconforming, such sign must be removed or made to conform to this chapter. 
(f)  Portable and temporary signs: Portable and temporary signs that are nonconforming shall be altered to comply with the provisions of this chapter or removed within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter. 
(g)  Administration: The building inspector or his designee shall make every reasonable effort to identify all the nonconforming signs within the city. Persons responsible for each sign (as well as the owner of the property where the nonconforming sign is located) shall be contacted and informed (i) which sign is nonconforming, (ii) how it is nonconforming, (iii) what must be done to correct it and by what date, and (iv) the consequences of failure to make the necessary corrections. The administrator shall keep complete records of all communications and other actions taken with respect to such nonconforming signs. 
(h)  Removal: All nonconforming signs, billboards, commercial outdoor advertising structures and objects and their supporting members located in R-1A, R-1B, R-2 and R-T districts shall be completely removed from the premises within five years of the passage of this chapter or amendments applicable to the property in question. 
(Ord. No. 356, § I, 6-20-05) 
Chapter 62 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 38; nuisances, ch. 42; smoke control, § 42-81 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Solid waste management act, MCL 299.401 et seq., MSA 13.29(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Unlawful deposits, collections. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit, place, scatter, or bury garbage and food wastes on any private or public premises or on any street, highway, alley or place in the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person to collect and transport within the city upon any of its public highways, streets, alleys or public places garbage and food wastes unless previously authorized by proper action of the city council. It is hereby determined that a violation of this section will constitute a nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 2.1) 
Sec. 62-2. - Garbage disposal unit required. 
    All residential buildings, all commercial buildings and all other structures used for purposes which cause, result in, produce or develop food wastes in the city now existing or hereafter constructed shall have a good and proper type of garbage grinder or disposal unit installed in the sewer system, which grinder or disposal unit and all connections shall be of sufficient size to grind all garbage and food wastes produced or accumulated (shells, large bones, corn husks and the like excepted). Each apartment, household unit, shop, store, restaurant or other individual unit where garbage or food waste is produced or accumulated shall be provided with a separate garbage grinder or disposal unit. 
(Code 1980, § 2.2) 
Sec. 62-3. - Use of incinerators. 
    Incinerators which provide an auxiliary supply of fuel such as gas or fuel oil so as to completely burn garbage and food wastes and which have been approved in writing by the city manager, or such other city official as may from time to time be designated by the city council for that purpose, may be installed and used in the place and stead of the garbage grinder or disposal unit required to be installed. A list of makes of incinerators which have been approved as substitutes for the garbage grinder or disposal unit shall be on file in the offices of the city, available for inspection by and distribution to the public. Installation, operation and maintenance of any equipment or method to be used for the disposal of food wastes shall comply with the applicable provisions and regulations of this Code concerning building, housing, plumbing, electricity, smoke abatement, air pollution, safety engineering, health, sanitation and fire prevention. 
(Code 1980, § 2.3) 
Sec. 62-4. - Regulation of refuse operations. 
    The city manager is hereby empowered to make rules and regulations subject to the approval of the city council pertaining to the collection and administration of refuse operations within the city as are necessary to effectively control the administration thereof and to protect safety, health and welfare of the public. Failure to comply with any such rule and regulation shall constitute a violation of this Code. The city council may by resolution establish a schedule of penalties (fines) to be collected by the traffic violation bureau from persons who fail to comply with such rules and regulations and who waive trial. 
(Code 1980, § 2.4) 
Secs. 62-5-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE CONTRACTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 62-31. - Scope. 
    The regulations in this article shall apply to the collection of refuse by private contractors. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 1(2.5), 2-25-91) 
Sec. 62-32. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the collection, transportation, hauling and disposal of solid waste and refuse generated anywhere within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a valid license issued by the city. This license requirement shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The collection, hauling or disposal of hazardous wastes, used oil, automobile tires, contractor's construction wastes, batteries or medical wastes. 
(2)  The collection, hauling or disposal of recyclable, compostable or landscape materials or tree wastes. 
(3)  The collection, hauling or disposal of any wastes by the city. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 1(2.5(1)), 2-25-91) 
Sec. 62-33. - License application. 
    Any person desiring a license to collect, transport, haul or dispose of solid waste and refuse generated within the city shall file an application for such license with the city clerk on forms provided by the city. The applicant shall, at its own expense, provide to the city clerk, with the application for license, the following items: 
(1)  A certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured and certificate holder with the requirement of a 30-day written notice to the city of cancellation or reduction in coverage afforded by such insurance with limits in the amount not less than $1,000,000.00 for injury or death to any one person and property damage insurance with limits in an amount not less than $500,000.00 for any one occurrence. 
(2)  A certificate of insurance documenting compliance with state workers compensation law. 
(3)  A performance and payment bond in the amount of $5,000.00 issued in favor of the city guaranteeing that the applicant will comply with all conditions of this article and that all permitted burnable solid waste and refuse excepting those items specifically excluded under this article will be disposed of at the: 
Grosse Pointes-Clinton Refuse Disposal Authority Incinerator 
33701 Lipke Road 
Clinton Township, Michigan 
The bond shall also guarantee that the applicant will pay to the city the amount of charges made to the city by the Grosse Pointes-Clinton Refuse Disposal Authority for items disposed of at the authority and billed to the city. The bond shall be available to satisfy any fees or charges owed to the city or the Grosse Pointes-Clinton Refuse Authority by the licensed applicant arising out of the licensed applicant's activities. Such bond shall be issued by a surety or bonding company deemed suitable by the city manager. 
(4)  A list of customers and, for each customer, the size of containers provided, the frequency of collection, the estimated tonnage to be collected on a monthly basis and a copy of any contract or agreement for the collection and disposal of such wastes or refuse. 
(5)  A written, enforceable agreement to reimburse the city for all charges made to the City of Grosse Pointes-Clinton Refuse Disposal Authority for materials disposed of at the authority by the licensed applicant. The licensed applicant will be invoiced monthly with payment due within 30 days. Failure to make payment within 30 days will result in a penalty of ten percent and will be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 1(2.5(2)), 2-25-91) 
Sec. 62-34. - License fee; duration. 
    Each license application under this article shall be accompanied by payment of $300.00 or a greater amount as may be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council, payable to the city as an annual license fee. Each license issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on May 31 each year. The fee of any new license shall be reduced by one-twelfth for each full month that has elapsed from the June 1 immediately preceding the license application. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 1(2.5(3)), 2-25-91) 
Sec. 62-35. - Display of license plate or sticker. 
    The licensed applicant under this article shall receive from the city clerk a license plate, sticker or other proof as determined appropriate by the city clerk evidencing that a license has been issued under the provisions of this article. Such plate, sticker or other proof of license shall be prominently displayed on any motor vehicle operated by the licensed applicant for the purpose of collecting or hauling solid waste. If the licensed applicant uses more than one motor vehicle, additional plates, stickers or other proof of license will be furnished to the licensed applicant at a charge of $10.00, or a greater amount as may be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council, for each additional unit. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 1(2.5(4)), 2-25-91) 
Sec. 62-36. - Responsibility for materials delivered to incinerator. 
    No licensed applicant under this article shall be deemed whatsoever to be an agent of the city for any purpose. Any licensed applicant issued a license to transport waste materials to the Grosse Pointes-Clinton Refuse Disposal Authority under the provision of this article shall be held responsible for compliance with the rules and regulations of the authority concerning the type of materials acceptable for incineration. Any violation of the authority rules or regulations which results in damage to the incinerator or causes a shutdown of the incinerator or the imposition of penalties by state, federal or other authorities upon the Grosse Pointes-Clinton Refuse Disposal Authority shall be charged to the licensed applicant deemed responsible for the violation and damage. The licensed applicant shall advise the authority and the city of the source of any refuse, rubbish or other solid waste not originated from within the city. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 1(2.5(5)), 2-25-91) 
Sec. 62-37. - Revocation of license. 
    Any license issued under this article may be revoked by action of the city council upon a finding that the licensed applicant has failed, neglected or refused to comply with the city regulations or has violated the regulations of the Grosse Pointes-Clinton Refuse Disposal Authority. Prior to revoking any license, the city council shall cause the licensed applicant to be advised of the alleged rule or regulation violation and the licensed applicant shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the city council. Any license revoked by action of the city council shall not be reissued to such former licensed applicant for a period of one year from the date of revocation. Application for license may be denied to any applicant whose license has been revoked more than once. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 1(2.5(6)), 2-25-91) 
Sec. 62-38. - Automatic license suspension for nonpayment of charges. 
    Should any licensed applicant under this article fail, neglect or refuse to reimburse the city for charges made to the city by the Grosse Pointes-Clinton Refuse Disposal Authority for solid waste or refuse delivered to the authority by the licensed applicant and such charges remain unpaid by the licensed applicant to the city for a period of 30 days from and after the date of an invoice being mailed to the licensed applicant by the city, the license issued under this article shall be automatically revoked and the licensed applicant shall not be authorized nor permitted to collect solid waste and refuse within the city until the invoice is paid in full and the license reinstated. Any license revoked for nonpayment of charges made by the city under the provisions of this section shall be subject to a reinstatement fee of $300.00 or such greater amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 1(2.5(7)), 2-25-91) 
Sec. 62-39. - Schedule of compliance. 
    All contractors currently collecting, hauling or transporting refuse within the city without a license issued under this article shall procure a license within 120 days after March 17, 1991, and shall thereafter comply with all terms, conditions and provisions set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 261, § 1(2.5(8)), 2-25-91) 
Chapter 66 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; subdivisions, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Bicycles, rollerblades and skateboards. 
(a)  No person shall use a bicycle, rollerblades and/or skateboard: 
(1)  In any manner or location which shall deface or damage any private or public property. 
(2)  Upon planter boxes, windowsills, benches, curbs, or in close proximity to doorways so as to hamper the entrance or exit of pedestrians. 
(3)  In any careless or reckless manner which may endanger another. 
(4)  Clinging to any motor driven device. 
(5)  In such a manner that the person using the bicycle, rollerblades or skateboard fails to yield the right of way to pedestrians. 
(b)  For purposes of this section the term rollerblades includes any device marketed as such, and also includes roller skates, street skates, or any other similar device, which has coasters or wheels. 
(Ord. No. 369, § I, 9-18-06) 
Secs. 66-2-66-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 

Sec. 66-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the department of public works of the city. 
    Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet constructed. 
(Code 1980, § 4.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-27. - Damage and obstruction prohibited. 
    No person shall make any excavation in, or cause any damage to any street in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article, but this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit the following: 
(1)  Such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises. 
(2)  The lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic. 
(3)  The planting of trees and shrubs as permitted in chapter 82 of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 4.2) 
Sec. 66-28. - Permits and bonds. 
    Where permits are authorized in this article, they shall be obtained upon application to the building inspector upon such forms as he shall prescribe, and there shall be a charge for each such permit as provided by resolution of the city council. Such permit shall be revocable by the building inspector for failure to comply with this article, rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article, and the lawful orders of the building inspector or his duly authorized representative, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit, they shall be in not less than amounts specified by the city manager. Every such insurance policy shall name the city as an additional insured. A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such insurance policy, approved as to form by the city attorney, shall be filed with the city clerk. Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit under this article, such deposit shall be in the amount specified by the building inspector, and such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Six months after the completion of the work done under the permit, any balance of such cash deposit unexpended shall be refunded. In any case where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1980, § 4.3; Ord. No. 379, § I, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 66-29. - Street openings. 
    No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street without first obtaining a written permit from the building inspector. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by section 66-28. 
(Code 1980, § 4.4) 
Sec. 66-30. - Emergency openings. 
    The building inspector may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of this article shall be complied with. 
(Code 1980, § 4.5) 
Sec. 66-31. - Backfilling. 
    All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by special permission, shall be backfilled in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to this article. Any settlement shall be corrected within eight hours after notification to do so. 
(Code 1980, § 4.6) 
Sec. 66-32. - Sidewalk vaults. 
    Openings through the sidewalk for the delivery of fuel, when lawfully in existence, shall not be greater than 30 inches in diameter, shall be circular in form, and shall be effectually closed when not in actual use by an iron cover set flush within the surface of the sidewalk, level with the sidewalk, and securely locked in place. All openings in the sidewalk for the admission of light and air shall be closed and protected either by substantial iron grating or illuminating pavement of a design and so placed as to be satisfactory to the building inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 4.7) 
Sec. 66-33. - Utility poles. 
    Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the building inspector shall prescribe and shall be located thereon in accordance with the directions of the building inspector. Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the building inspector shall from time to time direct. 
(Code 1980, § 4.8) 
Sec. 66-34. - Maintenance of installations in street. 
    Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate hereafter maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation, or any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon, any street which is adjacent to or a part of his estate, shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part with the city to keep the same and the covers thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and condition at all times during his ownership or control thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being under, over, in or upon the street, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control. 
(Code 1980, § 4.9) 
Sec. 66-35. - New paving. 
    Whenever the city council shall determine to pave or resurface any street, the manager shall, not less than 30 days prior to commencement of construction, serve notice upon all public utilities, requiring them to install all necessary underground work in advance of the paving or resurfacing. 
(Code 1980, § 4.10) 
Sec. 66-36. - Installation of sewer and water connections. 
    When paving or resurfacing has been ordered or declared necessary by the city council, such sewer and water connections as are necessary shall be installed in advance of the paving or resurfacing, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby, and against the owner of such premises. Where the paving or resurfacing is financed in whole or in part by special assessment, the cost of the sewer and water connections may be made chargeable against the premises served or adjacent thereto, as a part of the special assessment for the paving or resurfacing. Where the paving or resurfacing is financed otherwise than by special assessment, the cost of the sewer and water connections so installed shall be a lien on the premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby, and shall be collected as provided for assessments on single lots pursuant to the provisions of section 1-15. 
(Code 1980, § 4.11) 
Sec. 66-37. - Determination of necessity for sewer and water connections. 
    The necessity for sewer and water connections shall be determined by the building inspector, which determination shall be based upon the size, shape and area of each abutting lot or parcel of land, the lawful use of such land under the zoning regulations of the city, the character of the locality and the probable future development of each abutting lot or parcel of land. The building inspector shall give written notice of the intention to install such sewer and water connections and to charge the cost of the same to the premises to each owner of land abutting the street to be furnished with such connections, as shown by the records of the city assessor in accordance with section 1-15. Any owner objecting to the installation of any such sewer or water connection shall file his objections in writing within seven days after service of such notice, with the building inspector who shall, after considering each such objection made in writing, make a final determination of the sewer and water connections to be installed. 
(Code 1980, § 4.12) 
Sec. 66-38. - Prohibited openings. 
    No permit to make any opening or excavation in or under a paved street shall be granted to any person within a period of four years after the completion of any paving or resurfacing thereof. If a street opening is necessary as a public safety measure, the building inspector may suspend the operation of this section, as to such street opening. 
(Code 1980, § 4.13) 
Sec. 66-39. - Curb cuts. 
    No opening in or through any curb or any street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the building inspector. Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No single curb cut shall be less than ten feet. 
(2)  The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk shall be five feet. 
(3)  The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving residential property, shall be 26 feet. 
(4)  The maximum number of lineal feet of sidewalk driveway crossings permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise, shall be 46 percent of the total abutting street frontage up to and including 200 lineal feet of street frontage plus 20 percent of the lineal feet of street frontage in excess of 200 feet. 
(5)  The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals, other public improvements or installations, or removal of trees shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
(6)  All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the building inspector. 
(7)  The driveway approach, being the area between the curb cut or void and the nearest sidewalk line, shall be paved with concrete, asphalt, or other material in accordance with regulations established therefore by the city manager. If materials other than asphalt or concrete binder pavement (e.g., brick pavers) are utilized for a driveway approach within a street right-of-way, those materials shall meet city engineering strength specifications equivalent to a six-inch depth concrete surface. If the city requires access to any utilities in the right-of-way area, the city will not be obligated to incur the costs of the approach surface replacement other than the normal costs for asphalt or concrete binder pavement (Refer also to section 90-159(2)). If there is no sidewalk, a driveway approach shall be paved for a minimum distance of ten feet from the curb cut or void towards the property served by the driveway approach. Any existing driveway approach which is not paved shall be paved within three years after the adoption of this section (January 13, 1997), or at the time when a sidewalk repair program is conducted in a particular area, whichever date occurs first. If the driveway approach is not paved as required in this section, the building inspector shall cause the same to be done, give the same notice required for repair of defective sidewalk repair, including the assessing of the cost of paving such area against the premises and the owner thereof. 
(8)  Any curb cut which has been abandoned, or where structural or other changes on the adjoining premises make it no longer useful thereto, or for which any required permission or permit has not been obtained, shall be restored by replacement of the curb. 
(Code 1980, § 4.18; Ord. No. 300, § 1, 1-13-97) 
Sec. 66-40. - Occupying with construction materials or machinery. 
    No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building adjacent to the street, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector and posting a cash deposit and filing an insurance policy as required by section 66-28. 
(Code 1980, § 4.20) 
Sec. 66-41. - Pedestrian passage. 
    At least five feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the free passage of pedestrians and if the building operations are such that free pedestrian passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk with substantial railings or sidewalk shelter built in accordance with chapter 14 shall be provided around the obstruction. 
(Code 1980, § 4.21) 
Sec. 66-42. - Barricades, warning lights. 
    All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with prescribed warning lights. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of traffic shall not be more than three feet apart, and parallel to the flow of traffic not over 15 feet apart. 
(Code 1980, § 4.23) 
Sec. 66-43. - Shoring excavations. 
    All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workers and to prevent cave-ins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(Code 1980, § 4.24) 
Sec. 66-44. - Clearing ice and snow. 
    No person shall shovel or push by means of plow or otherwise cause to be placed or deposited in or upon the traveled portion of any street or sidewalk or within any ditch or gutter in any public street any snow or ice removed by him or under his direction, from any private property or from any public property abutting any private property owned or occupied by him without first obtaining a permit to do so. The existence of any deposit of snow or ice deposited by artificial means in the traveled portion of any street or sidewalk or within any ditch or gutter in any public street shall be prima facie evidence that the occupant of the abutting property closest thereto placed or deposited the ice or snow therein. 
(Code 1980, § 4.29) 
Sec. 66-45. - Authority to make additional regulations. 
    The city manager may make additional regulations pertaining to openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street openings, and house moving, which regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city council. No person shall fail to comply with any such regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 4.37) 
Sec. 66-46. - Removal of encroachment. 
    Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting landowner when made or permitted by him or suffered to remain by him, otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. The procedure for collection of such expense shall be as prescribed in section 1-15. 
(Code 1980, § 4.38) 
Sec. 66-47. - Temporary street closings. 
    The department shall have authority to temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when it shall deem the street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. It shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on the street, indicating that the street is closed to public travel. When any street or portion thereof is closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over the street except as the same may be necessary incidentally to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the department. 
(Code 1980, § 4.39) 
Secs. 66-48-66-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 66-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the department of public works of the city. 
    Sidewalk means the portion of the street right-of-way designed for pedestrian travel. 
(Code 1980, § 4.51) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-72. - Construction, repair; permit required. 
    No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk except in accordance with the line, grade, slope and specifications established by the building inspector nor without first obtaining a written permit from the building inspector, except that sidewalk repairs of less than 50 square feet of sidewalk may be made without a permit. The written permit shall be prominently displayed on the construction site. The fee for the permit shall be $0.02 per square foot up to 275 square feet and a minimum of $2.00; $0.015 per square foot from 275 square feet to 800 square feet; and $0.01 per square foot in excess of 800 square feet. 
(Code 1980, § 4.52) 
Sec. 66-73. - Line and grade stakes. 
    The building inspector shall furnish line and grade stakes as may be necessary for proper control of the sidewalk work, but this shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for making careful and accurate measurements in constructing the work to the lines furnished by the building inspector. Where it is necessary to replace engineer's stakes disturbed or destroyed without fault on the part of the city or its employees, a charge of $1.00 per stake shall be paid. 
(Code 1980, § 4.53) 
Sec. 66-74. - Specifications. 
    Sidewalks shall not be less than four inches in thickness and expansion paper shall be placed in the joints. All concrete used in sidewalk construction shall, 28 days after placement, be capable of resisting a pressure of 3500 pounds per square inch without failure. The building inspector may establish additional detailed specifications in addition to and not inconsistent with the above. 
(Code 1980, § 4.54) 
Sec. 66-75. - Permit revocation. 
    The city manager may suspend any permit issued under the terms of this article for incompetency or failure to comply with the terms of this article, or the rules, regulations, plans and specifications established by the building inspector for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk. The city manager may cause work to be stopped under any permit for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk for any of the causes enumerated in this section, which stop order shall be effective until the next regular meeting of the city council. If confirmed by the council, at its next regular meeting, such stop order shall be permanent and shall constitute a revocation of the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 4.55) 
Sec. 66-76. - Order to construct. 
    The city council may, by resolution, require the owners of lots and premises to build sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises. When such resolution shall be adopted, the city clerk shall give notice thereof, in accordance with section 1-14, to the owner of the lot or premises requiring him to construct the sidewalk within 20 days from the date of the notice. 
(Code 1980, § 4.56) 
Sec. 66-77. - Construction by city. 
    If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to build any particular sidewalk as described in the notice, and within the time and in the manner required by the notice, the city manager is authorized and required, immediately after the expiration of the time limited for the construction by the owner, to cause the sidewalk to be constructed and the expense thereof shall be charged to the premises and the owner thereof, and collected as provided for single lot assessments in section 1-15. 
(Code 1980, § 4.57) 
Sec. 66-78. - Maintenance. 
    No person shall permit any sidewalk which adjoins property owned by him to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe. 
(Code 1980, § 4.58) 
Sec. 66-79. - Repair. 
    Whenever the building inspector shall determine that a sidewalk is unsafe for use, notice may be given to the owner of the lot or premises adjacent to and abutting upon the sidewalk of such determination, which notice shall be given in accordance with section 1-14. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the owner to place the sidewalk in a safe condition. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than seven days, within which such work shall be commenced, and shall further provide that the work shall be completed with due diligence. If the owner of the lot or premises shall refuse or neglect to repair the sidewalk within the time limited therefor, or in a manner otherwise than in accordance with this article, the building inspector shall have the sidewalk repaired. If the building inspector determines that the condition of the sidewalk is such that immediate repair is necessary to protect the public, he may dispense with the notice. The cost of such repairs shall be charged against the premises which the sidewalk adjoins and the owner of the premises (except that for years prior to December 31, 1974, when the sidewalk repairs abut side street frontages of corner lots, as distinguished from interior lots, then the cost of repairs shall be charged against the premises which the sidewalk abuts, the owner of the premises and the city in such proportions as shall be determined and authorized by the council and set forth in a resolution duly adopted by council), and shall be collected as provided for single lot assessments in section 1-15. 
(Code 1980, § 4.59) 
Sec. 66-80. - Snow and ice control. 
    No person shall permit any snow or ice to remain accumulated on sidewalks within the public right-of-way in the front, rear or sides of any business, house, building or lot owned, occupied or controlled by him longer than 24 hours after the same has fallen. Where either snow or ice has fallen or formed on any such sidewalk, the owner, occupant or agent shall, within 24 hours after it has fallen or formed, remove the snow or ice or cause a sufficient quantity of salt, or salt substitute be strewn thereon in such a manner as to render the sidewalk safe for persons thereon. Any violation of any portion of this section shall be fined upon first conviction, $25.00; second conviction, $50.00; third and subsequent convictions in accordance with provisions of section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, § 4.60) 
Secs. 66-81-66-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS 

Sec. 66-100. - Distributed antenna systems. 
(a)  Distributed antenna systems (DAS) or other small cell wireless networks (referred to collectively as "broadband systems") may be located on existing utility poles, traffic signal poles, sports or field light poles and parking lot light poles. A broadband system means equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a communication network, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber optic cable, regular and backup power supplies and comparable equipment. The antenna in a broadband system shall be located in an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements must fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet. Broadband systems may be permitted on public property and public right-of-way in all zoning districts. Broadband systems are not permitted on privately owned property. 
(b)  Broadband systems shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Antennas shall not be located on poles planned for removal by the city, county or a utility; 
(2)  Antennas shall be limited to snug-mount, canister-mount, pole extension and concealed antennas; 
(3)  Antennas shall not increase the pole height by more than five feet and shall not exceed 18 inches in diameter; 
(4)  There shall be no more than one antenna on each pole; 
(5)  The antenna equipment shall not exceed a noise level of 65 db(A); 
(6)  All cables and equipment shall be located inside the pole or within an unified encasement colored to match the pole and oriented to a side with the least visual/safety impact; 
(7)  Antennas, mounting hardware, and cabling shall be covered or painted to match the color and texture of the pole on which it is mounted; 
(8)  No broadband system shall be located within 100 yards of another broadband system. 
(c)  New and modified broadband systems may be permitted subject to: 
(1)  Approval of the site plan by the planning commission; 
(2)  Approval of any required variances by the zoning board of appeals; 
(3)  Approval of the application for a broadband system by the city council; 
(4)  Compliance with all applicable building codes; and 
(5)  Obtaining all required permits, paying the required application fee, paying an annual license fee for use of city property/right-of-way, signing a license in a form approved by the city and posting required security. 
    Modifications made to an existing broadband system shall be treated for purposes of this section as a new broadband system, which requires the submission of a new application, new permitting procedure and compliance with this section as if the broadband system was a new broadband system, and the entire broadband system, as modified, shall be subject to all of the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Amateur radio stations, receive-only antennas, city towers and antennas. This section shall not govern any tower or antenna that is under 20 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna, nor shall it govern any tower or antenna utilized by the city in connection with performing its municipal functions. 
(e)  An application, required for authorization to construct, operate, expand, extend or modify a broadband system, shall be submitted to the building department at the city offices. The application shall include: 
(1)  A completed broadband system application form; 
(2)  A site plan application; 
(3)  A site plan, prepared by an architect or engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan; 
(4)  An application fee as established by resolution of the city council. The fee will be based on an amount necessary to adequately and thoroughly investigate and review the application for compliance with this section and to provide for the city having the application reviewed by technical consultants, when necessary, to ensure that all current technological considerations have been properly taken into account. 
(f)  After the application has been determined to be complete, the city manager or his or her designee shall review the application and where applicable, refer the application to other city departments and/or consultants for review. The city administration reserves the right to require additional information as needed or waive requirements for information determined unnecessary for complete review of the project. 
(g)  The site plan shall be forwarded to the planning commission for review. If the site plan is approved, the planning commission's actions and recommendations shall be submitted, in writing, to the city council. 
(h)  Following approval of the site plan by the planning commission, the city council shall make a final determination regarding the application. 
(i)  If the city council authorizes construction of the broadband system, the council shall then determine the appropriate amount of cash, irrevocable surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit to be kept on file with the city to ensure that adequate funds will be available to maintain, repair or remove the broadband system if abandoned or in need of repair. It shall be a continuing requirement of any permission given to operate a broadband system in the city that the applicant keep in force such cash deposit, irrevocable surety bond, or irrevocable letter of credit as required by the city. 
(j)  Prior to installing, constructing, expanding, extending or modifying the broadband system, the applicant shall obtain all necessary building permits. 
(k)  Authorization by the city council to construct a broadband system shall be effective for a period of six months. If the applicant has not applied for a building permit and commenced construction by the date, the authorization for the broadband system is terminated, and any permits issued shall be revoked. 
(l)  Building permits are required to proceed with the installation, construction, expansion, extension or modification of all broadband systems. Such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the approved plans, conditions imposed by the planning commission under site plan review, the authorization granted by the city council, the permits issued, all applicable federal regulations, such as the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA), and all state and local regulations. 
    Each broadband system shall be identified by a permanently installed plaque or marker, no larger than four inches by six inches, clearly identifying the wireless communications provider's name, address and contact information; and the name, address, e-mail address, and emergency phone number for the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and emergency purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the broadband system is installed. Such information shall also be posted and clearly visible on the broadband system pole. 
    Security to ensure maintenance, repair and removal of a broadband system shall be posted with the city at the time the building permit is issued. The security shall, at the election of the city, be in the form of cash, an irrevocable surety bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit. 
(m)  Authorization given by the city council for a broadband system shall terminate and the broadband system shall be removed upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events: 
(1)  Abandonment. The broadband system has not been used for six months or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations, including transmission and/or reception of radio signals, shall be considered as the beginning of a period of non-use. 
(2)  Maintenance. The broadband system is not maintained in accordance with the standards and regulations set forth in this section and the city building codes, and written notice of the deficiencies has been delivered to the wireless communication provider and the wireless communication provider failed to correct the deficiencies within 30 days thereafter. 
(3)  Noise. The broadband system is being operated at noise levels above 65 db(A) and written notice of the violation has been delivered to the wireless communication provider and the wireless communication provider failed to correct the violation within 30 days thereafter. 
(4)  False information. The broadband system applicant; the owner(s) or duly authorized representative(s) of the owner(s) of the land, buildings, structures or tower; or any other persons with an ownership interest in the land, buildings, structures or tower upon which the broadband system is proposed for placement, construction, or modification provides false information in the application or other required documents. 
(5)  Noncompliance. The broadband system fails to comply with applicable federal, state or local regulations, including the regulations contained in this section, or fails to pay annual license fees. 
(n)  The wireless communication provider shall immediately notify the building official in writing as soon as the use of a broadband system ceases. 
(o)  If the removal of the broadband system has not been lawfully completed within 60 days from the date that authorization for the broadband system was terminated, and the city has given at least 30 days' written notice to the wireless provider, the city may remove or procure the removal of the facility, or portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge, plus attorney fees, to be drawn, collected and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time the building permit was issued. Notwithstanding the potential or actual recovery costs from the bond or other security, the provider remains liable for the actual costs and administrative charges of demolition, removal and restoration. 
(Ord. No. 432, § I, 3-19-18) 
Chapter 70 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Subdivision control act, MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq. 

Sec. 70-1. - Conformance required for approval. 
    No subdivision plat or resubdivision plat or the subdividing of any lot or lots shall hereafter be approved by the city council unless there is conformance with the provisions of this chapter, including the minimum standards and requirements provided for in this chapter, as well as compliance with the laws of the state as the same may be from time to time amended. 
(Code 1980, § 5.221) 
Sec. 70-2. - Relation to adjoining street system. 
    Provision shall be made for the dedication of the proper location and width of major streets. The subdivider may be required to continue certain adjoining streets through the area that is being subdivided whenever such continuations are necessary to provide for normal movements of vehicles or to enable adjoining property to be properly subdivided. 
(Code 1980, § 5.222) 
Sec. 70-3. - Minor street and alley width. 
(a)  The minimum width for minor streets in any subdivision located south of Jefferson Avenue shall be 40 feet. In other sections of the city the minimum width of minor streets shall be 50 feet; provided, however, that where the topography or special conditions make a street of less or greater width more suitable, the above requirements may be waived. 
(b)  Alleys shall not be provided in single-family or two-family districts but alleys having a width of not less than 20 feet shall be provided in any area that is to be used for commercial development. 
(c)  In any subdivision of property located south of Jefferson Avenue, all streets, places and parks shall be established as private ways and areas rather than dedicated to public use or to the city, unless the city council, in its discretion and by appropriate resolution, approves and accepts dedication of any specific street, place or park in such subdivision. In the absence of such approval and acceptance, adequate provisions shall be made in the deed restrictions accompanying the plat to dedicate the ways and areas to a board of trustees and to make proper provision for the supervision, maintenance and construction or reconstruction of the ways and areas. 
(d)  Provisions or agreements may also be made whereby any private street or way can be maintained or reconstructed by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 5.223) 
Sec. 70-4. - Easements. 
    Easements of not less than six feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines and side lines, where necessary, for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains. In no event shall the total width of any easement be less than 12 feet. Any permissible regulations regarding the use of such easements shall be vested in the city. Easements of greater width may be required along lines or across lots where necessary for the extension of main sewers and similar utilities. Permanent easements for ingress and egress must conform with chapter 90 and must be fully improved according to the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 5.224) 
Sec. 70-5. - Lots. 
    The minimum area of any lot in a subdivision shall not be less than the minimum lot area requirements of the zoning district in which the area is located. In unusual instances a residential lot may have a narrow frontage providing access to a street but in no instance shall the minimum width of the narrow strip be less than 20 feet. 
(Code 1980, § 5.225) 
Sec. 70-6. - Building lines. 
    Provision shall be made by deed requiring building lines that shall not be less than required by chapter 90 and all enclosed parts of buildings must be set back of the front building line. 
(Code 1980, § 5.226) 
Sec. 70-7. - Improvements generally; bond. 
    Before the final plat of any subdivided area shall be approved and recorded, the subdivider shall make and install the improvements described in this chapter. In lieu of final completion of the minimum improvements before the plat is finally approved, the subdivider may post a surety company bond, approved by the city attorney and city treasurer, with the city, which bond will insure to the city that the improvements will be completed by the subdivider within two years after final approval of the plat. The amount of the bond shall not be less than the estimated cost of the improvements and the estimated costs must be approved by the city engineer in writing. If the improvements are not completed within the specified time, the city council may use the bond or any necessary portion thereof to complete same. 
(Code 1980, § 5.227) 
Sec. 70-8. - Minimum improvements. 
    The minimum improvements installed in any subdivision before the plat can be finally approved shall be in accordance with the following subsections: 
(1)  The subdivider shall grade and improve all new streets and any alleys within the subdivision. The paving on such new streets and alleys shall be of a character suitable for the expected traffic and in harmony with similar improvements in the surrounding areas. It shall either be of concrete, not less than six inches in thickness, or not less than six inches of compacted macadam and a bituminous surfacing of not less than two inches in thickness. The width of the pavement, exclusive of curbs, shall not be less than 18 feet. Roll curbs shall be provided along the pavement to accommodate stormwater. The cross section and specifications shall be approved by the city engineer and all construction shall be done under his inspection. 
(2)  Concrete sidewalks not less than five feet in width shall be constructed along both sides of the street unless the council approves of a sidewalk on only one side of the street. 
(3)  The subdivider shall, whenever necessary, grade any portion of the property subdivided into lots so that each lot will be useable and suitable for the erection of residential or other structures thereon. 
(4)  The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers and stormwater sewer and provide a connection for each lot. Such installation shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city and, before the improvement is started, the plan shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  The subdivider shall install water mains. Such installation shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city. 
(6)  It is also desirable to install other improvements such as street trees, electric lines, gas mains and similar facilities in any subdivision. When the city council deems it necessary, it may require that the subdivider procure the installation of any such improvements before the plat is approved. 
(Code 1980, § 5.228) 
Sec. 70-9. - Investigation deposit. 
    Prior to approval of any plat, the subdivider shall deposit with the city a sum equal to three percent of the estimated costs of all improvements required by this chapter, as the same are approved in writing by the city engineer. The sum shall be used to reimburse the city for its actual costs for having the city engineer check and approve plans and designs for the improvements and for actual costs in having the city engineer inspect as necessary the installation of the improvements to ensure compliance with the approved plans and designs. Any amount of the sum not used for such reimbursement of costs to the city shall be refunded to the subdivider when the improvements are fully installed and approved. 
(Code 1980, § 5.229) 
Sec. 70-10. - Variations and exceptions. 
    Whenever the strict enforcement of the regulations in this chapter would entail unusual, real and substantial difficulties or hardships, the city council may vary or modify them in such a way that the subdivider is allowed to plan and develop his property and record a plat of it without unjust difficulties and expense, but at the same time the public welfare and interests of the city must be fully protected and the general intent and spirit of this chapter preserved. 
(Code 1980, § 5.230) 
Sec. 70-11. - Lot splits. 
(a)  No lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat shall be further partitioned or divided unless it is in conformity with the provisions set forth in this section. 
(b)  The owner of a platted lot who wishes to split the lot, or his agent, shall submit to the city manager six copies of the owner's application for lot split at least 30 days prior to the next regularly scheduled city council meeting at which time the application is proposed to be acted upon. A drawing of the proposed lot split, including adjacent platted lots and properties within 200 feet, shall be included with the application and be prepared by a registered civil engineer or registered land surveyor and be drawn to scale. 
(c)  The lot split drawing shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the owners and engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Date, north arrow and scale, written and graphic. 
(3)  Names and addresses of the owners of the abutting property, including owners across the street from the proposed split lots and abutting lots. 
(4)  Street names, right-of-way and roadway widths of all existing and proposed streets within and adjacent to the proposed lot splits. 
(5)  Proposed and existing storm and sanitary sewers and water mains including locations and size. 
(6)  All existing structures and other physical features which would influence the layout and design of the lot split. 
(7)  Location, width and purpose of existing and proposed easements. 
(8)  Existing and proposed lot lines and lot numbers. 
(d)  The city manager shall transmit a copy of the application for lot split to the city planner, building inspector and city assessor for review and comment. 
(e)  Upon receipt of recommendations from the city planner, building inspector and city assessor, the city manager shall set the date and time for the public hearing at which the application shall be acted upon. 
(f)  Notice of hearing shall be given in accordance with provisions of section 1-14. 
(g)  The application for lot split shall be considered by the city council at the scheduled public hearing. Amendments to the application may also be considered at the hearing. A two-thirds vote of all members of the city council is required to adopt a resolution approving the lot split. 
(Code 1980, § 5.232) 
Sec. 70-12. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building inspector shall not issue building or repair permits for any structure located on a lot in any subdivision the plat of which has not been fully approved and recorded in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter. No building or repair permit shall be issued for a structure located on a lot in any such subdivision which has been sold or transferred by metes and bounds if the deed for such lot was recorded after the date of the adoption of Ordinance No. 107 (August 21, 1961), unless approved by the city council as provided for in section 70-11. "Metes and bounds," for the purpose of this section, is a method used to describe a tract of urban land intended to be used for dwelling or other purposes as contrasted with the description of a part of a properly approved and recorded subdivision plat by the lot and block number of the subdivision. 
(b)  Any person who sells or attempts to sell a lot in any subdivision by metes and bounds or otherwise, in violation of this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, § 5.231) 
Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - MOTOR VEHICLE CODE 

Sec. 74-1. - Code adopted. 
    The Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.923 and as subsequently amended is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 335, § I, 6-17-02) 
Sec. 74-2. - References in code. 
    References in the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 335, § I, 6-17-02) 
Sec. 74-3. - Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish this division in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the clerk for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 335, § I, 6-17-02) 
Sec. 74-4. - Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provisions of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(Ord. No. 335, § I, 6-17-02) 
Secs. 74-5-74-10. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ACT OF 1963 

Sec. 74-10. - Code adopted. 
    The Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, 1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 et seq., and as subsequently amended, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 337, § I, 1-27-03) 
Sec. 74-11. - References in code. 
    References in the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 to "state" shall mean the City of Grosse Pointe. All other references to federal and/or state authorities shall be read in logical contexts given the adoption of the Act by the city. 
(Ord. No. 337, § I, 1-27-03) 
Sec. 74-12. - Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish this division in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the clerk for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 337, § I, 1-27-03) 
Sec. 74-13. - Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provisions of the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(Ord. No. 337, § I, 1-27-03) 
Secs. 74-14-74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt the Uniform Traffic Code, MCL 257.951. 

Sec. 74-26. - Adopted. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages promulgated by the director of state police and published in the 2002 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code, in accordance with Act No. 62 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956 (MCL 257.951 et seq.) is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1980, § 10.1; Ord. No. 352, § I, 2-28-05) 
Sec. 74-27. - References in code. 
    References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships and Villages adopted in this article to "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Code 1980, § 10.2) 
Sec. 74-28. - Copies available. 
    The city clerk, having published the ordinance adopting the Uniform Traffic Code in the manner required by law and having published a supplementary notice setting forth the purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code and of the fact that complete copies of the code are available at the office of the clerk for inspection by and distribution to the public at all times, shall maintain copies in accordance with such supplementary notice. 
Sec. 74-29. - Amendments. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages adopted in this article are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like-numbered section of the Uniform Traffic Code. 
    Section 28.1823. Section 28.1823 is added to read: 
    Sec. 28.1823. Parking on private property. 
(1)  No person shall park any motor vehicle on any private property in the city without the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. Complaint for the violation of this section shall be made by the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. 
(2)  A person who violates this rule is responsible for a civil infraction. 
    Section 28.1824. Section 28.1824 is added to read: 
    Sec. 28.1824. Parking commercial vehicles. 
(1)  No person shall park or store any motor home, travel home, boat trailer, commercial truck or trailer on any public street of the city between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. At other times such vehicles may park on public streets to load, unload or conduct authorized and permitted business. 
(2)  A person who violates this rule is responsible for a civil infraction. 
    Section 28.1825. Section 28.1825 is added to read: 
    Sec. 28.1825. Parking on tree lawn. 
(1)  No person shall park or stand any vehicle, motor home or boat or any portion thereof between the curb or curbline and the edge of the sidewalk farthest from the curb, such area being commonly known as the tree lawn. 
(2)  A person who violates this rule is responsible for a civil infraction. 
    Section 28.1906 . Section 28.1906 is added to read: 
    Sec. 28.1906. Traffic violations bureau. 
    The Grosse Pointe traffic violations bureau is hereby continued, with its offices to be in the city hall. The chief of police, or such other person as shall be designated by the city council, shall be chief clerk of the bureau. Persons receiving traffic violation notices who desire to waive trial may, within prescribed time limits, present such notices to the traffic violations bureau and pay the appropriate fine, if any, as established under traffic control orders promulgated pursuant to law. If no such fine is established, trial may not be waived. Upon receipt of any such fine, the chief clerk shall issue a signed receipt for the same, and shall file a duplicate receipt with the city treasurer. All fines collected shall be paid over to the city treasurer, and the chief clerk of the traffic violations bureau shall make monthly accounts thereof to the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 10.4; Ord. No. 253, § 1(8.28), 2-21-89; Ord. No. 274, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 316, § 1, 10-18-99; Ord. No. 319, § 1, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 352, § II, 2-28-05) 
Secs. 74-30-74-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDING, STOPPING AND PARKING 

Sec. 74-51. - Supervision of system. 
    The automobile parking system of the city shall be under the supervision and direction of the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 2.131) 
Sec. 74-52. - Rates. 
    The rates for parking in off-street parking lots and structures, operated as a part of the automobile parking system, shall be established by resolution of the city council from time to time upon recommendation of the city manager. Such rates need not be uniform throughout the system, but shall be based upon demand for parking in the area which the lot or structure serves and such other considerations as the city council shall deem pertinent. The rates and charges in effect upon the date of the adoption of this Code shall remain in effect until changed as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 2.132) 
Sec. 74-53. - Parking in designated space only. 
    No person shall park any motor vehicle in any parking lot or structure other than within the boundaries of the space designated as allocated for the parking of a single motor vehicle, by appropriate lines or other markings. Any person parking any motor vehicle in any parking lot or structure otherwise than as prescribed in this section, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 2.133) 
Sec. 74-54. - Garage and nonmetered lot parking. 
    Every person who parks a motor vehicle in any nonmetered parking lot or garage of the automobile parking system shall pay the rates duly established for such parking before removing the vehicle from the parking lot or structure. 
(Code 1980, § 2.134) 
Sec. 74-55. - Metered parking lots. 
    In parking lots of the system where parking charges are collected by means of parking meters installed adjacent to the parking spaces in the lots, no person shall: 
(1)  Park a motor vehicle in any metered space without placing a United States coin of proper denomination in the meter in accordance with the regulations posted on said meters during the hours the regulations require the payment of parking charges. 
(2)  Permit a motor vehicle in his custody, or owned by him, to remain in any metered zone except while lawful parking time appears on the meter regulating the space occupied by such motor vehicle. 
(3)  Deface, injure, open or tamper with any parking meter installed on any such parking lot, except as authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1980, § 2.135) 
Sec. 74-56. - Vehicle abandonment. 
    Any motor vehicle parked for over 24 consecutive hours in any parking lot or structure of the system shall be deemed abandoned and may be removed by the city and impounded. Any motor vehicle otherwise parked in violation of this article may be removed by the city from the parking lot or structure in which it is parked and impounded. Any vehicle so impounded by the city shall not be released to the owner until all parking charges, storing and towing charges shall have been paid by the owner. The procedure for disposing of impounded vehicles shall be as specified in this chapter of this Code. The abandonment of a vehicle as defined in this section shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 2.136) 
Sec. 74-57. - Presumption from ownership. 
    In any proceeding for violation of the provisions of this article relating to parking, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of this article, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1980, § 2.137) 
Sec. 74-58. - Fee for vehicle storage. 
(a)  If any motor vehicle is stored, impounded or retained by the Grosse Pointe City Public Safety Department in the course of its duties, a motor vehicle storage fee in the amount of $10.00 per day shall be payable by any person lawfully taking possession of the motor vehicle from the department of public safety or its authorized agent. 
(b)  The Grosse Pointe City Council may amend the amount of the storage fee by resolution. 
(c)  The public safety director or his/her authorized agent shall determine persons entitled to possession of motor vehicles that have been stored, impounded or retained. 
(d)  The public safety director may waive any or all of the storage fees in his or her discretion. 
(Ord. No. 313, § 3-15-99) 
Secs. 74-59-74-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 74-81. - Driver regulations applicable. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a street or highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle under this chapter, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. "Bicycle" shall have the meaning prescribed in state statutes. 
(Code 1980, § 10.31) 
Sec. 74-82. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle, propelled wholly or in part by muscular power, upon any of the streets, alleys or public highways of the city without first having obtained a license therefor. 
(Code 1980, § 10.32) 
Sec. 74-83. - License application, fee. 
(a)  Written application for bicycle license shall be made to the director of public safety, which application shall state the name and address of the owner of such bicycle, the character and description of the bicycle to be licensed, and the serial number thereof, and such other information as may be required. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such application and upon the payment of license fee as established by city council to the director of public safety, the director shall issue a license to such applicant, which license shall be attached to the bicycle as long as the bicycle is owned by the applicant for the license and the applicant resides and uses the bicycle in the city. Fees for bicycle licenses shall be as set forth in section 18-99. 
(Code 1980, §§ 10.33, 10.34) 
Sec. 74-84. - Used bicycle dealers. 
    All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles in the city shall be required to make a weekly report to the public safety department, giving the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle was purchased, the serial or frame number thereof, and the number of the license plate found thereon, if any. 
(Code 1980, § 10.35) 
Sec. 74-85. - Dealers purchasing from minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles to purchase any secondhand bicycle from a minor under the age of 17 years. 
(Code 1980, § 10.36) 
Sec. 74-86. - Dealer's report. 
    All persons engaged in the business of selling new and secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make a weekly report to the public safety department giving a list of all sales made by such dealers, which list shall include the name and address of the person to whom sold, the kind of bicycle sold, together with the description and frame or serial number thereof, and the number of the license plate attached thereto, if any. 
(Code 1980, § 10.37) 
Sec. 74-87. - Report of sales. 
    It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer to the public safety department. The report shall give the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred, and the report shall be made within seven days from the date of the sale or transfer. 
(Code 1980, § 10.38) 
Sec. 74-88. - Report for license or transfer. 
    It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of any bicycle to apply for registration thereof or transfer of such license within seven days after the date of the sale or transfer. 
(Code 1980, § 10.39) 
Sec. 74-89. - Removal, destruction of frame number. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number on any bicycle frame licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article, or to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal or registration card during the time in which such license plate, seal or registration card is operative; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall prohibit the public safety department from stamping numbers upon the frames of bicycles upon which no serial number can be found or upon which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Code 1980, § 10.40) 
Sec. 74-90. - Reciprocal provisions. 
    Where adjacent municipalities have regulations similar to this article, it shall be lawful for residents of the adjacent municipality to operate bicycles upon the streets of the city without obtaining a license as required in this article. A nonresident so operating a bicycle shall furnish proof to any public safety officer upon request that he possesses a license or registration card issued by the municipality. The provisions of this section shall not apply to residents of adjacent municipalities unless a like privilege is extended to the residents of the city by such municipalities. 
(Code 1980, § 10.41) 
Sec. 74-91. - Nonresidents. 
    This article shall not apply to nonresidents passing through the city on a substantially continuous journey, but after any person shall have resided in the city for seven days, he shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 10.42) 
Sec. 74-92. - Prior registrations continued. 
    All registrations made and licenses issued under any prior ordinance of the city shall remain in force and effect and shall from the effective date of this Code be considered as registered under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 10.43) 
Secs. 74-93-74-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OPERATING WHILE INTOXICATED; EMERGENCY RESPONSE; DRIVER LIABILITY 

Sec. 74-100. - Purpose. 
    The City finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic accidents in the City involve drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or a controlled substance. In addition, the City finds that in traffic accidents involving drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or a controlled substance there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage. As a result of these determinations, a greater operational and/or financial burden is placed upon the city police, public service, fire fighting and rescue services by persons who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or a controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. 349, § I, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 74-101. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    Emergency response shall mean: 
(1)  The providing, sending and/or utilizing public service, police, fire fighting and rescue services by the city to an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and a controlled substance; or 
(2)  The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when the driver was operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance. 
    Expense of emergency response shall mean the direct costs associated with the occurrence of an emergency response as set forth in subsection (1) or (2) above, whichever is applicable. The expenses of making an emergency response as set forth in "emergency response" above, shall include, but not be limited to, the costs connected with the administration and provision of a blood, urine or breath alcohol test and the videotaping of the driver if applicable. These costs shall be set by council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 349, § I, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 74-102. - Liability for expenses. 
(a)  Any person who, while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any controlled substance or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any controlled substance, operates a motor vehicle which results in an emergency response as defined in section 74-101 of this article shall be responsible and/or liable for the expenses of the emergency response. 
(b)  For purposes of the article, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle under the influence of an alcoholic beverage if chemical analysis of the drivers blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in the driver's blood was in excess of the statutory limits set forth in the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code or applicable local ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 349, § I, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 74-103. - Civil liability. 
    This article shall be construed to be a responsibility and liability of a civil nature on the part of the driver and shall not be construed to conflict, contravene or enlarge or reduce any criminal liability or responsibility including fines or court costs imposed by a judge on a driver for operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. 349, § I, 10-18-04) 
Chapter 78 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1-78-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 

Sec. 78-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the city department of water. 
    Water connection means that part of the water distribution system connecting the water main with the premises served. 
    Water main means that part of the water distribution system located within the easement lines of streets designed to supply more than one water connection. 
(Code 1980, § 2.20) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-27. - Service connections. 
    Application for water connections shall be made to the department on forms prescribed and furnished by it. Water connections and water meters shall be installed in accordance with rules and regulations of the department and upon payment of the required connection fee and meter installation fee. All meters and water connections shall be the property of the city. Connection fees shall not be less than the cost of materials, installation and overhead attributable to such installations. 
(Code 1980, § 2.21) 
Sec. 78-28. - Turning on water service. 
    No person, other than an authorized employee of the department, shall turn on or off any water service, except that a licensed plumber may turn on water service for testing his work (when it must be immediately turned off) or upon receiving a written order from the department; provided, that upon written permit from the department, water may be turned on for construction purposes only, prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy for the premises, and upon payment of the applicable charges. 
(Code 1980, § 2.22) 
Sec. 78-29. - Water meters. 
    All premises using water shall be metered, except as otherwise provided in this Code. No person except a department employee shall break or injure the seal or change the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any water meter. 
(Code 1980, § 2.23) 
Sec. 78-30. - Access to meters. 
    The department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any premises where the department is not able to obtain access to the meter. Any qualified employee of the department shall at all reasonable hours have the right to enter the premises where such meters are installed for the purpose of reading, testing, removing or inspecting same and no person shall hinder, obstruct or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of his duties in relation to the maintenance and reading of the water meter. 
(Code 1980, § 2.24) 
Sec. 78-31. - Reimbursement for meter damage. 
    Any damage which a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the owner, agent or tenant or from neglect of either of them to properly secure and protect the meter, as well as any damage which may be wrought by frost, hot water or steam backing from a boiler, shall be paid by the owner of the property to the city on presentation of a bill therefor; and in cases where the bill is not paid, the water shall be shut off and shall not be turned on until all charges have been paid to the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2.25) 
Sec. 78-32. - Meter failure. 
    If any meter shall fail to register properly, the department shall estimate the consumption on the basis of former consumption and bill accordingly. 
(Code 1980, § 2.26) 
Sec. 78-33. - Testing of meters. 
    A consumer may require that the meter be tested. If the meter is found accurate, a charge of $3.00 will be made. If the meter is found defective, it shall be repaired or an accurate meter installed and no charge shall be made. 
(Code 1980, § 2.27) 
Sec. 78-34. - Accuracy of meters. 
    A meter shall be considered accurate if when tested it registers not to exceed two percent more or two percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If a meter registers in excess of two percent more than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered fast to that extent. If a meter registers in excess of two percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered slow to that extent. 
(Code 1980, § 2.28) 
Sec. 78-35. - Bill adjustment. 
    If a meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and determined to register fast the city shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to the percent fast multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by the consumer within the six months prior to the test, and if a meter so tested is determined to register slow, the department may collect from the consumer a sum equal to the percent slow multiplied by the amount of all the bills incurred by the consumer for the preceding six months. When the department on its own initiative makes a test of a water meter, it shall be done without cost to the consumer, other than his paying the amount due the city for water used by him as above provided, if the meter is found to be slow. 
(Code 1980, § 2.29) 
Sec. 78-36. - Hydrant use. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant except in case of emergency, without first securing a written permit from the department and paying such charges as may be prescribed. 
(Code 1980, § 2.30) 
Sec. 78-37. - Lawn sprinkling. 
    The city manager may regulate, limit or prohibit the use of water for any purpose. Such regulations shall restrict less essential water uses to the extent deemed necessary to ensure an adequate supply for essential domestic and commercial needs and for firefighting. Such rule or regulation shall become void and of no force or effect unless ratified by the city council at its next meeting, which ratification shall be duly published in the same manner. Any person violating any such rule or regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, § 2.31) 
Sec. 78-38. - Injury to facilities. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his duties, shall willfully or carelessly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city water distribution system. 
(Code 1980, § 2.33) 
Sec. 78-39. - Additional regulations. 
    The city manager may make and issue additional rules and regulations concerning the water distribution system, connection thereto, meter installations and maintenance, connection and meter installation fees, hydrants and water mains and the appurtenances thereto, not inconsistent with this article. Such rules and regulations shall be effective upon approval by the city council. The rules and regulations now in effect shall continue until changed in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1980, § 2.32) 
Sec. 78-40. - Cross connections. 
(a)  The City of Grosse Ponte adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality being R325.11401 to R325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the public service department to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city and as approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(c)  The public service department shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal to provide such information or refusal to provide access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of a cross connection. 
(d)  The city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this ordinance exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(e)  All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially upon installation to be sure that the device is working properly. Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified by the public service department and in accordance with state department of environmental quality requirements. Only individuals approved by the public service department shall be qualified to perform such testing. That individual(s) shall certify the results of his/her testing. 
(f)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this ordinance and by the state and the city plumbing code. Any water outlet which would be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING  
(g)  There shall be a fee for an initial cross connection inspection, for any subsequent reinspections, and for any device test report review conducted by the public service department or their representative to check for the presence of cross connections. No cross connection inspection fees shall be charged for the inspection or reinspection of single-family residential premises that would be in addition to any fees or costs charged in connection with permits and/or inspections for single-family residential premises in connection with changes to plumbing, sale of the property, restoration of water service, or installation of a water meter. The fees provided for in this section shall be in amounts set forth in resolutions that are adopted from time to time by the city council. 
(h)  This section does not supersede the state plumbing code, but is supplementary to it. 
(i)  Any person or customer who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance or any written order of the public service department, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed responsible for a civil infraction, and upon a finding of responsibility shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this section shall occur or remain shall be deemed a separate and additional violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 333, § I, 7-15-02) 
Secs. 78-41-78-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    B.O.D. (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drain pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combination sewer or combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes, solids, or semisolids from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of water, either surface water or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the cooking, preparation and dispensing of food that has been cut or shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters and surface waters are not intentionally admitted, provided that sanitary sewer shall include weeping tile (drains surrounding basement footings) when installed under regulations that would prevent excessive amounts of groundwater from entering the system. 
    Sewage means any combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business and commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means any pipe, tile, tubes or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage but which excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Suspended solids means the solids that either float on the surface of or are suspended in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    SWRC means the state water resources commission. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1980, § 2.61) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-62. - Inspectors. 
    The building inspector of the city and other duly authorized officials or employees of the city and agents of the SWRC bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article, at any time during reasonable or usual business hours. Any person guilty of refusing or obstructing such entry shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 2.90) 
Sec. 78-63. - Notice to cease violation. 
    Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article except sections 78-120 and 78-62 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of such violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, take such corrective action as may be necessary. 
(Code 1980, § 2.91) 
Sec. 78-64. - Continued violation. 
    Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 78-63 shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day or fraction of a day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Any officer, agent or employee guilty of aiding or abetting such violation, or who, being responsible therefor, refuses or neglects to take corrective action, shall be guilty as a principal. 
(Code 1980, § 2.92) 
Sec. 78-65. - Civil liability. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned to the city by reason of such violation, and recovery therefor may be had in an appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1980, § 2.93) 
Sec. 78-66. - Abatement in equity. 
    Any continued violation, after due notice as provided in section 78-63, shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by suit in equity by the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. This remedy shall be in addition to those heretofore provided for in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 2.94) 
Sec. 78-67. - Unsanitary waste deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon any public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1980, § 2.62) 
Sec. 78-68. - Water pollution. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural watercourse or any storm sewer, within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters except drainage from the following sources, so long as they are not contributing to violations of state water quality standards: 
(1)  Firefighting activities. 
(2)  Water line flushing and discharges from other potable water sources. 
(3)  Landscape irrigation runoff. 
(4)  Rising groundwater. 
(5)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration and seepage. 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, except for groundwater cleanups specially authorized by NPDES permits. 
(7)  Foundation drains, sump pumps, footing drains, and crawl space pumps. 
(8)  Air conditioner condensation. 
(9)  Water from noncommercial car washes. 
(10)  Street cleaning wash water. 
(11)  Dechlorinated swimming pool water from single, two or three family residences. 
(Code 1980, § 2.63; Ord. No. 419, § I, 4-20-15) 
Sec. 78-69. - Privies and septic tanks. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1980, § 2.64) 
Sec. 78-70. - Sewer connection required. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way or public utility easement in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 180 days after date of the official notice to do so has been issued by the city manager, provided that the public sewer is located within a public easement contiguous to and not further than 200 feet from any such houses, buildings, structures or properties. 
(Code 1980, § 2.65) 
Sec. 78-71. - Administrative rules. 
    From time to time the city council may adopt storm water management administrative rules (the "administrative rules") to provide for the administration and implementation of a storm water management program in the city. A violation of the administrative rules shall be punished as provided therein, or if a punishment is not specifically set forth, a violation shall be punished in accordance with the rules governing this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 419, § II, 4-20-15) 
Secs. 78-72-78-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 78-81. - When permitted. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 78-70, the building sewer shall be connected with a private disposal system complying with the regulations and orders of the SWRC and the board of health, and the provisions of chapter 14. 
(Code 1980, § 2.67) 
Sec. 78-82. - Discontinuance of system upon availability of public sewer. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in section 78-70, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with the provisions of this article, and any septic tank, privy, privy vault, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1980, § 2.68) 
Sec. 78-83. - Maintenance of system. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2.69) 
Sec. 78-84. - Additional requirements. 
    Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city council or the SWRC with respect to private sewage disposal. 
(Code 1980, § 2.70) 
Secs. 78-85-78-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 78-96. - Permit required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or open into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or any appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the building inspector of the city. 
(Code 1980, § 2.72) 
Sec. 78-97. - Permit fee. 
    All connections with the sanitary or combined sewers of the city shall be made only on written authorization and permits issued by the city on such forms and on payments of such fees as shall be established from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 2.73) 
Sec. 78-98. - Installation costs. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the property. The owner shall indemnify the city from all loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1980, § 2.74) 
Sec. 78-99. - Plans and specifications. 
    All applicants for sewer connection permits shall first submit plans and specifications of all plumbing construction within such building or premises and such plans and specifications shall meet the requirements of the plumbing code of the city and all orders, rules and regulations of the SWRC or state department of health. When such plans and specifications have been approved by the building inspector a construction permit shall be issued, subject to final inspection and approval when construction is completed and ready for connection with the city sewer system. 
(Code 1980, § 2.75) 
Sec. 78-100. - Inspection. 
    The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the building inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The building inspector shall then inspect the building and plumbing construction therein and if such construction meets the previous requirements as approved in the construction permit, a sewer connection permit shall be issued, subject to the applicable provisions of other sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 2.76) 
Sec. 78-101. - Repairs. 
    The cost of all repairs, maintenance and replacements of existing building sewers and their connection to public sewers shall be borne by the property owner. Such owner shall make application to perform such work to the building inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 2.77) 
Secs. 78-102-78-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 78-111. - Discharge of unpolluted water. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater (except weeping tile as defined in section 78-61), roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the building inspector and/or the SWRC. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the building inspector into a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1980, § 2.79) 
Sec. 78-112. - Prohibited uses. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this division, no person shall discharge any industrial or commercial type wastes into the city sewer system which is deleterious to the public health and safety of the people of the city. Any waste will be considered deleterious that may cause damaging effects as stated under subsection (1) of this section and/or does not conform to the limitations stated under subsection (2) of this section. 
(1)  General conditions: 
a.  Chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the materials of construction to impair the strength or durability of sewer structures. 
b.  Mechanical action that will destroy or damage the sewer structures. 
c.  Restriction of the hydraulic capacity of sewer structures. 
d.  Restriction of the normal inspection or maintenance of the sewer structures. 
e.  Placing of unusual demands on the sewage treatment equipment or process. 
f.  Limitation of the effectiveness of the sewage treatment process. 
g.  Danger to public health and safety. 
h.  Obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest. 
(2)  Specific conditions: 
a.  Acidity or alkalinity must be neutralized to a pH of 7.0 as a daily average on a volumetric basis, with a maximum temporary variation of pH 5.0 to 10.0. 
b.  Must not contain more than 10 ppm of the following gases: hydrogen, sulphide, sulphur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, or any of the halogens. 
c.  Must not contain any explosive substance. 
d.  Must not contain any flammable substance with a flash point lower than 187 degrees Fahrenheit. 
e.  Must have a temperature within the range of 32 to 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
f.  Must not contain grease or oil or other substance that will solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
g.  Must not contain insoluble substance in excess of 10,000 p.p.m. or exceeding a daily average of 500 p.p.m. 
h.  Must not contain total solids (soluble and insoluble substance) in excess of 20,000 p.p.m., or exceeding a daily average of 2,000 p.p.m. 
i.  Must not contain soluble substance in concentrations that would increase the viscosity to greater than 1.1 specific viscosity. 
j.  Must not contain insoluble substance having a specific gravity greater than 2.65. 
k.  Must not contain insoluble substance that will fail to pass a no. 8 standard sieve, or having any dimension greater than one-half inch. 
l.  Must not contain gases or vapors, either free or occluded, in concentrations toxic or dangerous to humans or animals. 
m.  Must not have a chlorine demand greater than 15 p.p.m. 
n.  Must not contain more than 100 p.p.m. or any antiseptic substance. 
o.  Must not contain phenols in excess of 0.005 p.p.m. 
p.  Must not contain any toxic or irritating substance which will create conditions hazardous to public health and safety. 
q.  Must not contain in excess of 100 p.p.m. or exceed a daily average of 25 p.p.m. of any grease or oil or any oily substance. 
All of the preceding standards and regulations are to apply at the point where industrial or commercial type wastes are discharged into a public sewer and all chemical and/or mechanical corrective treatment must be accomplished to practical completion before this point is reached. 
(Code 1980, § 2.80) 
Sec. 78-113. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the building inspector and/or the SWRC they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any inflammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the building inspector and/or the SWRC and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be substantially constructed, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(Code 1980, § 2.81) 
Sec. 78-114. - Interceptor maintenance. 
    Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 2.82) 
Sec. 78-115. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
    The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having: 
(1)  A five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight; 
(2)  Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; 
(3)  Containing any quantity or substance having the characteristics described in section 78.112; or 
(4)  Having a daily average flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the city council and/or the SWRC. Where necessary in the opinion of the city council and/or the SWRC, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or to reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 78-112, or to control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval of the city council and/or of the SWRC and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. 
(Code 1980, § 2.83) 
Sec. 78-116. - Maintenance of preliminary facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1980, § 2.84) 
Sec. 78-117. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the city council or the SWRC, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city council. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1980, § 2.85) 
Sec. 78-118. - Measurements, tests and analyses. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 78-112 and 78-115 shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 78-117 or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1980, § 2.86) 
Sec. 78-119. - Agreements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to the payment by the industrial concern of the estimated cost of the treatment. 
(Code 1980, § 2.87) 
Sec. 78-120. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage system or treatment plant. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1980, § 2.88) 
DIVISION 5. - REGULATION AND CONTROL OF THE QUANTITY AND QUALITY OF WASTES ADMITTED TO OR DISCHARGED INTO THE WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 78-121. - Delegation of authority. 
    The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as the state approved control authority, is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this division on behalf of the City of Grosse Pointe ("City"). The city has executed and hereby ratifies its delegation agreement with the City of Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which sets forth the terms and conditions of such delegated authority, consistent with this division, and shall allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform the specific responsibilities of control authority pursuant to state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98) 
Sec. 78-121.1. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is the protection of the environment, and of public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system under the jurisdiction of the city and enabling the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations, being 40 C.F.R. part 403. 
(b)  The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of the people or of employees of the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will pass inadequately treated through the system into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous manner; and 
(4)  To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system. 
(c)  This division provides for the regulation of contributors to the Detroit and city wastewater collection and treatment system through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through the enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.2. - Authority. 
    By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the city by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; the 1963 Constitution of the State of Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended, being M.C.L. 323.1 et seq.; M.S.A. 3.521 et seq.; the 1997 City Charter; the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al, Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No.77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts between the board of water commissioners and suburban communities or other governmental or private entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the system, this division shall apply to every user contributing or causing to be contributed, or discharging, pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of Detroit POTW. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.3. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this division and unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Act or the act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(i)  Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this division is a corporation, who is either (a) the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or (b) the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute documents has been assigned or delegated to said manager in accordance with corporate procedures; or 
(ii)  A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this division is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively. (See section 78-121.4(h)). 
    Available cyanide means the quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide ion (CN) hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyano-complexes of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury nickel and silver, determined by EPA method OIA-1677, or other method designated as a Standard Method or approved under 40 CFR 136. 
    Best management practices (BMP) means programs, practices, procedures or other directed efforts initiated and implemented by the user which can or do lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including but are not limited to the Detroit sewer system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control and may include technical and economic considerations. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quality of dissolved oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as measured by standard methods. 
    Board means the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of a waste stream from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.17.] 
    Centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility means any facility that treats any hazardous or nonhazardous industrial waste received from off-site by tanker truck, trailer roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms of shipment including: 
(i)  A facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from off-site, and 
(ii)  A facility that treats industrial waste generated on-site as well as industrial waste received from off-site. 
    City means the City of Grosse Pointe. 
    Compatible industrial wastewater means wastewater that is produced by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently and effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater. 
    Compatible pollutant means pollutants which can be effectively removed by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the POTW residuals and the receiving stream. 
    Composite sample means a collection of individual samples which are obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides a representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period. A minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the sample is manually collected. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403, Appendix E.] 
    Confidential information means the information which would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. (See section 78-121.9). 
    Control authority means the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department which has been officially designated as such by the State of Michigan under the provisions of 40 C.F.R § 403.12. [See 40 C.F.R.§ 403.12(a).] 
    Cooling water means the non-contact water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only function is the exchange of heat. 
    Days mean consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by this division. 
    Department means the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, and authorized employees of the department. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Michigan. 
    Director means the Director of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, or the director's designee. 
    Discharger means a person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes, or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW. 
    Domestic sewage means waste and wastewater from humans or household operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works. 
    Environmental protection agency or administrator or EPA administrator means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the authorized representatives or employees of the EPA. 
    Facility means a location, which contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable. 
    Fats, oils or grease (FOG) means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that's extractable by solvent in accordance with standard methods. 
    Flow proportional sample means a composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of the waste stream. 
    Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the stream at the time of sampling. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means the discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c) or (d). 
    Industrial user means a person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable but excludes single family and multi-family residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics. 
    Industrial waste means any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(i)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(ii)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended, (including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and State regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    May means permissive. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 33 U.S.C. § 1317 (b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category of industrial users. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342. 
    New source means: 
(i)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided, that: (a) the building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no other source is located; or (b) the building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or (c) the production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered; or 
(ii)  Construction on a site where an existing source is located resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (i)(b) or (i)(c) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; or 
(iii)  Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or operator has: (a) begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program: (1) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or (2) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or (b) entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section. 
    Pass through means discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns. 
    pH means the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by federal, state or local law, rules and regulations. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(r).]. 
    Pretreatment standards means all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a), the specific prohibitions delineated in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b), and the local or specific limits developed pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c), including the discharge prohibitions specified in section 78-121.4 of this Code. 
    Public sewer means a sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by 33 U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, including: 
(i)  Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature; 
(ii)  Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or 
(iii)  The municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of wastewater. 
    Quantification level means the measurement of the concentration of a contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the contaminant. 
    Representative sample means any sample of wastewater, which accurately and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and condition of one or more pollutants in the waste stream being sampled. Representative samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136. 
    Sanitary wastewater means the portion of wastewater that is not attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from domestic sources including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site non-commercial consumption. 
    Shall means mandatory. 
    Significant noncompliance means any violation which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(i)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same parameter; 
(ii)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(iii)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the department determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(iv)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority; 
(v)  Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance within 90 days after the scheduled date; 
(vi)  Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules within 30 days after the due date; 
(vii)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(viii)  Any other violation or group of violations which the department determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Significant industrial users means any user of the POTW who: 
(i)  Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and noncontact cooling water; or 
(ii)  Has discharges subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(iii)  Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant limitations of this division; or 
(iv)  Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or regulations, that are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to regulation under this division as determined by the department; or 
(v)  Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but not limited to, leachate or runoff; or 
(vi)  Is found by the City of Detroit or city to have a reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW. 
    Slug means any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
    Standard methods mean methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants" or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants." Where these two (2) references are in disagreement regarding procedures for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods given in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 shall be followed. 
    State means the State of Michigan. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids (total) mean the total suspended matter which floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods. 
    Total PCB means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification level being treated as zero. 
    Total phenolic compounds means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event expressed in mg/1. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or included in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or by other federal or state laws, rules or regulations. 
    Trade secret means the whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and whose secrecy the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited purposes but excludes any information regarding the quantum or character of waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into the Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into the wastewater system tributary thereto. 
    Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this division or with national categorical pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user but excludes noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    User means any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein. 
    Wastewater or waste stream means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW including infiltration and inflow waters, storm water, and cooling water. 
    Wastewater discharge permits mean permits issued by the department in accordance with section 78-121.6 of this Code. 
    Waters of the state mean groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes. 
(b)  For purposes of this division, the following acronyms shall have the meanings designated by this section: 
(1)  BMR - Baseline monitoring report. 
(2)  BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand. 
(3)  C.F.R. - Code of Federal Regulations. 
(4)  EPA - Environmental protection agency. 
(5)  FOG - Fats, oil or grease. 
(6)  l - liter. 
(7)  MDEQ - MI. Department of Environment Quality. 
(8)  mg - milligrams. 
(9)  mg/l - milligrams per liter. 
(10)  NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(11)  POTW - Publicly owned treatment works. 
(12)  RCRA -Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq. 
(13)  SIC - Standard industrial classification. 
(14)  SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq. 
(15)  TSS - Total suspended solids. 
(16)  U.S.C. - United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.4. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These general discharge prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or to any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, it shall be unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or quantity, is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any other way to persons, to the POTW, or to the operations of the POTW. Pollutants, which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but are not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140°F or 60°C using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21; or 
(2)  Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities, which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring stones; or 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than 11.5 units; or 
(4)  Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in sufficient concentration or quantity either singly or by interaction with other pollutants to cause interference, or pass through, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(5)  Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy, which either singly or by interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas, vapor, or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or may cause a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair; or 
(6)  Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum to be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines or regulations developed under 33 U.S.C. § 1345, with any criteria, guidelines, or developed and promulgated regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, or with state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used; or 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al., Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, or the City of Detroit's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit; or 
(8)  Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater being discharged; or 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public sewer which exceeds 150°F or which will cause the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to rise above 104°F (40°C); or 
(10)  Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug; or 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable federal or state regulations; or 
(12)  Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause interference with or pass through the POTW; or 
(13)  Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or a cross section dimension of one-half inch or greater which are sufficient to cause interference with the POTW. 
(b)  Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following limitations: 
(1)  Compatible pollutants. See appendix C. 
(2)  Non-compatible pollutants. No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of: 
mg/1 
Arsenic (As) ..... 1.0 
Cadmium (Cd) ..... See 
appendix C 
Chromium (Cr) ..... 25.0 
Copper (Cu) ..... 2.5 
Cyanide (CN) ..... 1.0 
Iron (Fe) ..... 1,000.0 
Lead (Pb) ..... 1.0 
Nickel (Ni) ..... 5.0 
Silver (Ag) ..... 1.0 
Zinc (Zn) ..... 7.3 
Total Phenolic Compounds: ..... 1.0 
or See appendix B 
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 136. 
(a)  The limitation for total PCB is non-detect. Total PCB shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 608, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of total PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the total PCB concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with 56-3-66.1(d). 
(b)  The limitation of Mercury (Hg) is non-detect. Mercury (Hg) shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/1, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of Mercury, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For the purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the mercury concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with section 78-121.11(d). 
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance 40 CFR Part 136. 
(3)  Compliance period. Within 30 days of the effective date of this division, the department shall notify all industrial user's operating under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement to submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective date of this division. The compliance report shall demonstrate the user's compliance or non-compliance with these limitations, and, in the event of non-compliance, include the submission of a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with the stated limitation. In no event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18 months from the effective date of this division. An industrial user who does not demonstrate compliance may petition the department for a second extension as part of an administrative consent order. The department shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a second extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon a good-faith showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to achieve compliance with this provision. 
(c)  National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. All users shall comply with the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards, which are hereby incorporated by reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements, provided, that where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this division, then the more stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. part 403 and as established by the department. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards which have been promulgated as of the effective date of this section are delineated in appendix A. 
(1)  Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R.§ 403.15. Upon notification of approval by the department, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until incorporated into an industrial user's permit. 
(2)  Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. The department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, whichever is appropriate, for authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the requirements and procedures in 40 C.F.R § 403.7. Such authorization may be granted only when the POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for which a removal credit is being sought, provided, that any limitation of such pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit neither are being exceeded nor pose the prospect of being exceeded as a result of the removal credit being granted. Where such authorization is given to the department, any industrial user desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the department, consistent with the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 and of this division. Any credits which may be granted under this section may be subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7, or as determined by the department. A requisite to the granting of any removal credit may be that the industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants removed by the POTW, such surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time. Permits shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit granted pursuant to this section. 
(3)  New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources criteria shall install, maintain in operating condition, and "start-up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time and not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(4)  Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the department may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in accordance with Sections 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(3) and/or 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(4) and shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 U.S.C. § 1317(d) and of this division. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. 
(5)  Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under Section 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit to the department a report containing the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1-7). Where reports containing this information have already been submitted to the director or regional administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40 C.F.R § 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to resubmit this information. At least 90 days before commencement of any discharge, each new source and any existing sources that become industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the department a report which contains the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1-5). In such report, new sources shall include information concerning the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the information requested in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(4) and (5). 
(d)  Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation or requirement imposed by the city, the City of Detroit or by the State of Michigan. 
(e)  Hauled in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is subject to the requirements of this division including, but not limited to, permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person proposing to unload such waste has applied for and received a permit from the department for unloading such waste in accordance with the board's rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as established by the board. Hauled in wastewater shall only be discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified in section 78-121.6 of this Code. The department may establish specific limitations for sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW treatment plants which are different than the specific limitations in this division. 
(f)  Centralized waste treatment. It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the department. Any authorization granted, or permit issued, by the department to a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall specify the type of wastewater for which treatment is provided, and discharge approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless such industrial waste or wastewater is determined by the department to require further authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has submitted an application to, and received previous approval from, the department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain further authorization from the department before discharging such wastewater. An industrial user, that provides centralized waste treatment services and files an application for the treatment and discharge of such types of wastewater to the POTW, shall provide the following minimum information in support thereof: 
(1)  The general nature, source and process(es) generating the type of wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from those processes and is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards as delineated in appendix A, shall be so designated; 
(2)  The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the wastewater; 
(3)  At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for which application is made in subsection (f)(1) of this section; 
(4)  A statement, that is certified by a professional engineer, which addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater, received or collected by the facility's treatment process(es); 
(5)  The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any other governmental agency. Upon request, the centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its permit and/or license to the department; and 
(6)  Other information requested by the department including, but not limited to, information required by section 78-121.6(c)(1) through (18) of this Code, or by rules adopted by the board. The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of such permit in accordance with the procedures contained in section 78-121.6 of this Code, will be deemed approved for discharge into the POTW. The centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all applicable provisions contained in section 78-121.6 of this Code regarding permits. In furtherance of its obligations as control authority, the department may include in the permit a requirement to report at selected intervals the information mandated in subsections (1) through (6) of this section. All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain records which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These records may be reviewed at any time by the department. 
(g)  Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted by the department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is prohibited. The department may authorize the discharge of groundwater resulting from maintenance and related activities of gas, steam, or electrical utilities through the use of general permits. Subject to appropriate reporting requirements, the general permit shall authorize discharge in accordance with the terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply with this provision within 180 days after its enactment. If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater resulting from purge, response activity, or UST projects, has applied for and received a permit from the department, the department may authorize the discharge of such wastewater. Permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures contained in section 78-121.6 of this Code, or in accordance with any rules adopted by the board. 
(h)  City right of revision. The City of Detroit and the city reserve the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by the board, additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW. [These rules and regulations shall be adopted in accordance with the rule-making procedures Section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter, if any.] Ninety days after adoption by the board, industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations. 
(i)  Accidental discharges. 
(1)  Each industrial user, which does not currently have an approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division, and all significant industrial users shall submit to the department detailed plans which show facilities and operating procedures to be implemented to provide protection against such accidental discharges. Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be implemented, provided, and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's cost or expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an approved spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan within 60 days of the effective date of this division. New significant industrial users shall submit such a plan prior to the time they commence discharging. 
For purposes of this section, the information provided shall include the approximate average and maximum quantities of such prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and constitute a concentration of five percent or greater in the raw material, chemical solution or waste material, are required to be reported. Volumes of less than 55 gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless lesser quantities could cause pass through or cause interference with the POTW. 
The industrial user shall promptly notify the department of any significant changes or modifications to the plan including, but not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance inventory. 
(2)  At least once every two years, the department shall evaluate whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise provided, all significant users shall complete, implement, and submit such a plan within 30 days of notification by the department. 
(j)  Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by this division or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of a discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal, state or city laws, rules, regulations or permit requirements, or which could cause problems to the POTW, or which has the potential to cause the industrial user to implement its plan prepared in accordance with subsection (j)(1) of this section, the industrial user shall telephone the department at its control center and notify the department of the discharge. The notification shall include the name of the caller, the location and time of discharge, the type of wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to abate the discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days after the discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences and when required by the department, the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit may be modified to include additional measures to prevent such future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or property. 
(k)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising employees whom to contact in the department in the event of an actual or excessive or prohibited discharge. 
(l)  Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the provisions of this division, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the department's POTW, or causes the department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the department for any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by the department because of said violation or discharge. Prior to assessing such costs, the department shall notify the user of its determination that the user's discharge was the proximate cause of such damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the city's NPDES permit and the department's intent to assess such costs to the user. Any such notice shall include written documentation which substantiates the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this division. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this division, or this Code, or other statutes and regulations, or at law or in equity. 
(m)  Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users, who discharge into the city collection system, shall notify the department in writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261. Such notification must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p). 
(n)  Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as defined in section 78-121.3(a) of this Code, may designate a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in definition, "authorized representative of industrial user," subsection (i) or (ii) in section 78-121.3 where: 
(1)  The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined in "authorized representative of industrial user," subsection (i) or (ii) in section 78-121.3; 
(2)  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(3)  The written authorization is submitted to the department. 
(o)  Pollution prevention. The department shall encourage and support industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention programs that are designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions beyond the levels required by this division. The department may require an industrial user to implement pollution prevention initiatives or BMP, as part of an enforcement response, or as necessary to comply with its NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.5. - Fees. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by board action. 
(b)  The board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating, maintaining, or improving the department's industrial waste control and pretreatment programs; and 
(2)  User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment costs including sludge handling and disposal; and 
(3)  Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and 
(4)  Other fees, which the board may deem necessary, to carry out the requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.6. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW any wastewater which will cause interference or pass through, or otherwise not comply with the discharge prohibitions of section 78-121.4 of this Code. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the department through permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(1)  All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the effective date of this division, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of the effective date of this division. Significant industrial users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater discharge permit are not subject to this provision. These applications are to include all information specified in section 78-121.6(c) of this Code and, where applicable, any additional information which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring report requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). 
(2)  All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The application must include all information specified in section 78-121.6(c) of this Code and, where applicable, any additional information that may be needed to satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). Until a permit is issued and finalized by the department, no discharge shall be made into the POTW. 
(3)  Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW, shall request approval from the department for the discharge(s) at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the discharge. 
(b)  Permit application or reapplication. The department may require any user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to submit the same to the department for determining whether the industrial user is a significant user, or to determine changes in the wastewater discharges from a user's facility. Within 30 days of being so notified, a user shall comply with the department's request in the manner and form prescribed by the department. Failure of the department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty to obtain a permit as required by this division. 
(1)  A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, unless an earlier date is specified or required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). The existing user shall provide a permit application which includes all the information specified in section 78-121.6(c) and (g) of this Code. 
(2)  A separate permit application shall be required for each separate facility. 
(3)  Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form prescribed by the department. 
(c)  Application or reapplication information. In support of an application or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal employer identification number, address, and location of the discharging facility; 
(2)  Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user financially and legally; 
(3)  All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the Standard Industrial Classification manual, issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended; 
(4)  Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit application form. Such parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having numeric limitations as enumerated in section 78-121.4(a) and (b) of this Code, those pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment standards regulations for applicable industries and any toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge, regulated in the previous permit, or specifically requested by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average concentrations during a one-year period shall be provided. For industries subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, the data requested herein shall be separately shown for each categorical process waste stream. Combined waste streams proposed to be regulated by the combined waste stream formula shall also be identified. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C. §1314(g) and contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, as amended. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator. 
(5)  A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, shall be so designated. As pertains to subsection (c)(4), of this section, identify which pollutants are associated with each process; 
(6)  Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in subsection (c)(4), of this section, a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are either used in the manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in subsection (c)(4). Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such information for reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity; 
(7)  A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the week: 
(8)  Denote: (i) The average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow rates including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations; (ii) each national categorical process waste stream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary water and storm water flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW; and (iii) each combined waste stream; 
(9)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each national categorical process waste stream and which connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each combined waste stream. This schematic shall be cross-referenced to the information furnished in subsection (c)(8) of this section; 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production based limits under the national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements only; 
(11)  A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this division and of the national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the industrial user to meet the applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as appropriate, certified by a qualified professional; 
(12)  Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental discharges in accordance with the requirements of section 78-121.4(i) of this Code; 
(13)  Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system for each production process; 
(14)  A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or continuous process type; 
(15)  If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable water, the industrial user's source of intake water together with the types of usage and disposal method of each water source, and the estimated wastewater volumes from each source; 
(16)  If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this division and the national categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional construction and/or implement the required operation and maintenance procedures; 
(17)  Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other waste at the facility; and 
(18)  Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare and process a wastewater discharge permit. 
(d)  Permit issuance. Upon receipt of an application, the department shall review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in writing regarding any of the following: 
(1)  The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit; 
(2)  The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant industrial user but is found by the department to have no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall make such determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6); 
(3)  The application is incomplete or the information only partially satisfies the information and data required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12 or by the department, and that additional information and data are required which shall be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is notified regarding specific information that is missing, or that the application is unacceptable; 
(4)  The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall notify the industrial user of its determination and the basis of the determination. The department may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or permit application, to the department as the control authority in accordance with the reporting requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12, or whose discharge is in violation of this division. If the department determines that an industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly by certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the draft permit, so marked, for the industrial user's review. An industrial user has 30 days from the date of mailing to file a response to the draft permit and, in accordance with the procedures contained in section 78-121.12 of this Code, 20 days from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a permit issued as final. Upon disposition by the department of any contested terms or conditions, a permit shall be issued as final. Only one facility location shall be included in each permit. 
(e)  Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to incorporate all provisions of this division, other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and user charges and fees established by the City of Detroit or city without repetition therein. In addition, permits may contain the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in section 78-121.4 of this Code, or the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards; 
(2)  Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(3)  Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the industrial user; 
(4)  Restrictions on which of the user's discharge waste streams are to be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the POTW; 
(5)  Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules; 
(6)  Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the containment of spills or slug discharges; 
(7)  Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application; 
(8)  Additional reporting requirements: 
a.  All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by the department, or on an alternative form approved by the department, indicating the status of compliance with all conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this division. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be submitted at six-month intervals on a schedule to be established by the department. Analytical data generated by the department may not be submitted in lieu of the facility's own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge permit. 
b.  Permittees not subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit a report in accordance with the requirements of section 78-121.6(e)(8)d. and e. of this Code. The report shall show the concentration of each substance for which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with section 78-121.6(e)(9) and (11) of this Code. 
c.  Permittees subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at the times and intervals specified by federal regulations and by the department. A compliance report shall be submitted to the department no later than 90 days following the final compliance date for a standard, or in the case of a new source, no later than 90 days, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(d). A report on continued compliance shall be submitted at six-month intervals thereafter on the schedule established by the department and incorporated into the industrial users discharge permit and in accordance with section 78-121.6(e)(8)d. and e. of this Code. The reports shall be either on a form prescribed by the department or on an alternate form approved by the department, and shall indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process which are limited by national categorical pretreatment standards, or which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified by the department in accordance with section 78-121.6(e)(9) and (11) of this Code. The report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharges regulated by the permit. The combined waste stream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the initial information has been furnished to the department, provided there have been no changes to the elements composing the combined waste stream. 
d.  Reports shall contain the results of representative sampling performed during the period covered by the report and of the discharge and analysis of pollutants contained therein, and, for significant industrial users subject to production based standards, shall be cross-referenced to the related flow or production and mass as required to determine compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable general pretreatment regulations, being 40 C.F.R. § Part 403, or by the department, but no less than is necessary to assess and assure compliance by the industrial user with the most stringent applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with applicable regulations contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator. 
If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the department using the procedures as prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in such report. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment system improvements or changes are necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. 
e.  This report, and those required under sections 78-121.4(c)(5) and 78-121.4(e)(8)(b) and (c) of this Code, shall include the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction, or supervision, in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of a fine and/or imprisonment for knowing violations." Said certification shall be signed by the facility's authorized representative, as defined in section 78-121.3(a)(2) of this Code. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of the authorized representative definition must be submitted to the department prior to, or together with, any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
f.  If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation, the user shall notify the department within 24 hours of the time said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. In addition, the user shall repeat the sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the department within 30 days after said user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation. 
(9)  In the event the director determines that an industrial user is discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the department has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To the extent the department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are more restrictive than established in this division, the department shall provide written documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection against pass through, interference, or violation of the NPDES permit; 
(10)  Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and 
(11)  Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this division. 
(f)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period. Except as deemed necessary by the department, or as otherwise provided for under this division, permits shall be issued for a specified period of not more than five years nor less than one year. The existing permit for significant industrial users, who timely submit an application for permit reissuance to the department, shall be automatically extended until a permit is issued as final. 
(g)  Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the department during the term of the permit as limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements identified in section 78-121.4 of this Code are amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for a permit modification includes, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's facility or operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user's effluent. It shall be the industrial user's duty to request an application form and apply for a modification of the permit within 30 calendar days of the change; 
(2)  Change(s) in the department's NPDES permit; 
(3)  Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a court order; 
(4)  Any changes necessary to fulfill the department's role as control authority; 
(5)  An industrial user's noncompliance with portions of an existing permit; 
(6)  A change of conditions within the POTW; 
(7)  A finding of interference or pass through attributable to the industrial user; 
(8)  Amendments to, or promulgation of, national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements including 40 C.F.R. Part 403 and those delineated in appendix A of this division. Permittees shall request an application form and apply to the department for a modified permit within 90 days after the promulgation of a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard to which the industrial user shall be subject. Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be confined to that information related to the newly promulgated or amended national categorical pretreatment standard or requirement. However, information previously submitted need not be duplicated, insofar as the previously submitted information continues to be current and applicable. In addition, the department may initiate this action; 
(9)  Changes in the monitoring location. (See section 78-121.7 of this Code); 
(10)  Typographical errors or omissions in permits; 
(11)  The department may modify the permit on its own initiative based on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or 
(12)  The user may request a modification of the permit. 
When initiated by the department, the industrial user shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit. The department will issue a draft permit and an industrial user has 30 days to file a response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the department will issue a final permit and, unless appealed in accordance with the procedures contained in section 78-121.12 of this Code, the permit will become effective 20 days after issuance. 
(h)  Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without notice to and written approval of the department, and providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator. It shall be the permit holder's duty to notify the department of any such change at least 30 days before the date of the change. Wastewater discharge permits, which do not receive the written approval of the department prior to the change, shall be null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it has occurred, the department may revoke a permit. If a change takes place, the department may require the application for a new or modified permit. Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and conditions of any existing permit which the department allows to be retained. 
(i)  Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall promptly notify the department in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and apply for a modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the change. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.7. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their discharge by the department and the industrial user, and to enable the department to conduct such other monitoring and sampling as required for determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and standards as provided for in this division. In the event the department determines that the monitoring facility identified in the permit application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be identified, or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative sample of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise determined at the discretion of the department, said facility shall be provided within 90 days of receipt of notification by the department. The industrial user shall provide the department with: 
(1)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges into the POTW; 
(2)  A flow schematic showing: (i) which connections receive each national categorical process waste stream, (ii) which connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water, and (iii) which lines handle each combined waste stream. This report shall be certified by a professional engineer. If a significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring facilities within the prescribed time limits, then the department may install such structure or device and the significant user shall reimburse the department for any costs incurred therein. 
(b)  The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user's premises in a location readily accessible to the department. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the industrial user, the department may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area when there is room and the location will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals which may be required from other government agencies for the location and construction of monitoring facilities. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling or monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the department's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. (See section 78-121.6(g)). 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.8. - Inspection, sampling and record-keeping. 
(a)  For purposes of administering and enforcing this division, any other applicable provisions of this Code or applicable state or federal laws and regulations, the department may inspect the establishment, facility or other premises of the industrial user. The department's employees or authorized representative shall have access to the industrial user's premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering activities. 
(b)  Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon arrival at the industrial user's premises, the department shall inform the industrial user, or the industrial user's employees, that sampling and/or inspection is commencing, and that the facility's authorized representative has the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling. The department shall neither refrain from, nor be prevented or delayed from, carrying-out its inspection or sampling duties due to the unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to observe or participate in the inspection or sampling activity. 
(c)  While performing work on private property, employees or authorized representatives of the department shall observe all reasonable safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as established by the industrial user. Duly authorized employees or representatives of the department shall bear proper credentials and identification, and at the industrial user's option may be accompanied by a duly authorized representative of the industrial user. Duly authorized department representatives shall not be restricted from viewing any of the facility sites. department employees or representatives may take photographs of facilities subject to this division. Which shall be maintained by the department as confidential in accordance with section 78-121.9 of this Code. 
(d)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, personnel from the department will be permitted to enter for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(e)  Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The department may require such samples to be split with the department for the department's independent analysis. 
(f)  Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from monitoring activities required by this division, or by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(n). Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years. This period of record retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user, or the operation of the City of Detroit's Industrial Waste Program, or when requested by the department, by the state, or by the EPA. 
(g)  Upon the request of the department, industrial users shall furnish information and records relating to discharges into the POTW. Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the department at all reasonable times, and allow the department to copy such records. 
(h)  In the event the department obtains samples, and analyses are made of such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be promptly furnished upon written request by the industrial user's authorized representative. When requested by the industrial user, the department employee or representative shall leave with the user, a portion of any sample of the user's discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user's independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the department shall be controlling unless proven invalid. 
(i)  In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user's discharge is obtained by the department, and then analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136, and found to contain concentrations of pollutants which are two or more times greater than the numeric limitations as listed in section 78-121.4(b) of this Code, or as contained in the facility's wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan, and shall provide a written report to the department within 14 days, which describes the cause of greater concentration and provides a description of the means by which future discharge concentrations will be held to values of less than two times the limitation in the future. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.9. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. 
When submitted to the department, all information claimed to be confidential must be clearly marked "confidential." When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report determined by the department to disclose trade secrets or trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and to the state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs, provided, however that information shall be treated as confidential by the governmental agency, until such time as the information has been determined to be non-confidential by the governmental agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the department releases pursuant to a request of another governmental agency, should be handled by the other governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality procedures. The department cannot control how another governmental agency handles such confidential information, and assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the information released to the governmental agency. The department will use sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the existence of the industrial user's confidentiality claim. 
The department shall determine whether the information requested to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements of confidential information as defined herein. The decision of the department shall be made in writing. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(b)  Except as otherwise determined by the department or provided for by applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file with the city shall be made available upon request by such user or the user's authorized representative during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.10. - Statutes, laws and regulations. 
    The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards defined in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this division to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated by any private organization, or by any element or organization of government other than the city shall be construed to apply to such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect or as amended or promulgated, from the date of enactment of this division. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.11. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be a violation of this division for any user to: 
(1)  Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's discharge; 
(2)  Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time frames provided in section 78-121.6 of this Code; 
(3)  Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises, waste discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
(4)  Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a violation pursuant to this subsection, provided, that upon request reasonable access to the facility is promptly provided to the department; 
(5)  Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the department's monitoring devices including, but not limited to, samplers; 
(6)  Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit; 
(7)  Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of this division including any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of this division shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this division, and such permits shall remain in effect and be enforceable under this division until a superseding permit is effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements on the date specified in the federal Regulations, regardless of compliance schedules. 
(b)  Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards where the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section are met. 
(1)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset and where this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
(i)  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(ii)  The period of noncompliance including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(iii)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(2)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof; 
(3)  The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this division upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(c)  Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (c)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a bypass shall submit notice to the department at least ten days in advance. 
(2)  Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(3)  Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and the department may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The industrial user properly notified the department as described in subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(4)  Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in subsection (c)(3) of this section, the department may approve an anticipated bypass. 
(d)  Where one or more of the measurements taken for any pollutant defined in section 78-121.4 of this Code during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum non-detect limit for the same parameter, the industrial user may develop and implement pollution prevention initiatives, or a BMP, as part of its response. The department may, as part of an administrative order, also require development of a BMP as a part of the department's enforcement response. Upon approval of the department, these pollution prevention initiative, or BMPs shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge permit. Industrial users shall provide, at six-month intervals, analytical results and certifications in support of its implementation of an approved pollution prevention initiative or BMPs. Upon demonstration of compliance, the industrial user may request to be relieved of this implementation requirement. 
(e)  Emergency suspensions and orders. The department may order suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the department, such suspension is necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event the department provides informal notification under this section, written confirmation and an order shall be provided within 24 hours. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the department shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or services, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or the environment. In the event such steps are taken, the director shall notify the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of such action and order, and the specific recourse available. In any event, the department shall provide the industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing before the director, or his designated representative, within ten days of such action. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement to the department within 15 days of the occurrence describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination of the noncomplying discharge, the department shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment service. 
(f)  Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened discharge as specified in subsection (e) of this section, whenever the department has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated or is violating this division, the department shall serve a written notice stating the nature of the violation upon such industrial user. Where applicable, the department shall pursue appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its approved enforcement response plan. The failure of the department to issue a notice of violation shall not preclude the department from escalating its enforcement response. 
(g)  Administrative actions. Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or requirement or any prohibition of this division, the department, may initiate appropriate administrative enforcement action, except in the case of emergency or flagrant violation, in order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to remedy such violation as soon as possible. 
(1)  a.  Conferences. The department may order any person, who violates this division, to attend a conference wherein the department may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at least ten days before the scheduled conference and shall set forth the date, time, and place thereof. The conference shall be conducted by a representative of the department. The industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with this division. Nothing contained herein shall require the department to accept or agree to any proposed plan or schedule, or to prevent the department from proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth in subsection (g)(2) of this section. If the attendees agree upon a compliance schedule, the user and the department's duly authorized representative may enter, by consent, into a compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth the terms of such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this division and any procedures, requirements, and agreements hereunder. 
b.  Compliance schedules. The user and the department may agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions, and time periods or schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of violation. These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance agreement, administrative consent order. Schedules developed under this subsection shall adhere to the following conditions: 
(i)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities, or to the implementation of additional operation and maintenance procedures required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements and standards including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, and completing construction; 
(ii)  No single increment referred to in subsection (g)(1)b.(i) of this section shall exceed nine months; 
(iii)  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the department including, at a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason(s) for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule; and 
(iv)  Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in the industrial user being found in violation of this division. 
Administrative orders. The department may order any industrial user, who violates or continues to violate this division or a duly issued permit, to install and to properly operate devices, treatment facilities, or other related appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain such other requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the violation including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices, implementation of a waste minimization assessment to identify and implement feasible source reduction, and recycling practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent order, which is the result of an agreement, or a unilateral administrative order. 
(2)  Show cause hearing. The department may order any industrial user, who violates this division or allows such violation to occur, to show cause before the department why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing before the department regarding the violation, the reason(s) why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the industrial user to show cause before the department why any proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally, or by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or its authorized representative. 
a.  Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures adopted by the board. A hearings officer shall conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may: 
(i)  In the name of the board, issue notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing; 
(ii)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the director for action thereon. 
b.  Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter. 
(3)  Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the hearings officer shall issue order to the industrial user directing any of the following actions: 
a.  Immediate compliance with the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction or requirement of this division, or applicable local, state or federal law or regulation; 
b.  Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment equipment be accomplished within a specified time period; 
c.  Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and quantity as determined by self- monitoring and analysis during a specified time period; 
d.  Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a compliance date; 
e.  Control of discharge quantities; 
f.  Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection, monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's activities by the department during compliance efforts; and/or 
g.  Any such other orders as are appropriate including, but not limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services, or revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, or orders directing that following a specified time period sewer or wastewater treatment service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or operation and maintenance practices have been employed. 
h.  A finding the user has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation either of this division or of a duly issued permit did not occur. 
(4)  Public notification of significant noncompliance. The department shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of Detroit and that list of all industrial users which were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the previous 12 months. All industrial users identified in a proposed publication shall be provided with a copy of the proposed notice at least 30 days before publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy. 
(h)  Legal actions. 
(1)  Criminal action: Any user, who violates any provision of this division including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division or wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required under this division, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation per day, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. The department is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek prosecution of criminal charges against any person violating any provision of this division. 
(2)  Civil action: Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or requirement or any requirement of this division, the director may commence a civil action to compel compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from discharging, and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. The department or board may also seek additional legal and/or equitable relief. The commencement of suit neither constitutes an exclusive election of remedies nor prohibits the department, director, board, or City of Detroit from commencing action in Federal Court for discharges believed to be in violation of this division, state and federal requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the City of Detroit's NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or requirements. In addition, the City of Detroit may recover the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, and other unusual expenses related to enforcement activities or litigation against the person found to have violated this division, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(3)  All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 78-121.12. - Reconsideration and appeal. 
    Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest actions, determinations, or decisions of the department which result from its construction, application and enforcement of this division. The procedures contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with respect to construction, application, and enforcement of this division. 
(a)  Selection of reconsideration or of appeal. 
(1)  Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by any action, determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the department by the director, or an authorized representative, and that interprets, implements or enforces the provisions of this division. 
(2)  An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharge or other discharger, who is adversely affected (i) by a permit issued as final by the department, or (ii) by an administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing, or after a hearing for reconsideration. 
(3)  Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this division, a request for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized representative, and received at the department's general offices within 20 days from the date of the occurrence of the action, determination, or decision in dispute. A request for reconsideration shall contain the requester's name and address, a brief statement of the reason(s), and the factual basis underlying the request. 
(4)  A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of the department. Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either is not filed within the time period provided for in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to reconsideration appeal may be deemed waived. 
(b)  Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for reconsideration, the department shall notify the applicant of the time and place for a hearing. 
(1)  A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings officer who is designated by the director and may be an employee of the department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in the form of a recommendation to the director and embodied in an administrative order. Except for an administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to by both parties, an administrative order is appealable in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  Where improperly or untimely submitted, the department may reject a request for reconsideration. The department shall notify the requester in writing that the request has been rejected. 
(3)  Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing shall be conducted neither less than ten days nor more than 30 days after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the hearings officer, the hearing may be continued for a reasonable time. 
(4)  The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall present their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection with the issue(s) being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound by the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be transcribed and the requester may obtain a copy of the hearing transcript, as appropriate, from the department or from the court reporter. 
(5)  Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearings officer shall issue a final decision, which shall contain a recommendation to the director. The hearings officer shall send such decision to the requester by certified mail. 
(6)  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through, interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the hearing for reconsideration. 
(c)  Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for an appeal, the department shall notify the applicant in writing regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures set by the board until rules are promulgated pursuant to Section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter. In addition: 
(1)  Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the department's action, determination or decision regarding the request for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance with this division. 
(2)  Where a request either is not filed within the time period contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to appeal may be deemed waived. Where untimely or improperly submitted, the department may reject the request for an appeal, and shall notify the requester in writing that such request has been rejected. 
(3)  The department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the close of the hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold, modify or reverse the action, determination, or decision of the department. 
(4)  The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be submitted to the Board which shall render a final decision within 30 days of its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(5)  In accordance with applicable law, the user or the department may appeal any final decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(6)  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass through, interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Appendix A 
Aluminum Forming 40 C.F.R. Part 467 Asbestos Manufacturing 40 C.F.R. Part 427 Battery Manufacturing 40 C.F.R. Part 461 Builder's Paper and Board Mills 40 C.F.R. Part 431 Canned and Preserved Fruits/Vegetables 40 C.F.R. Part 407 Canned and Preserved Seafood Proc. 40 C.F.R. Part 408 Carbon Black Manufacturing 40 C.F.R. Part 458 Cement Manufacturing 40 C.F.R. Part 411 Centralized Waste Treatment 40 C.F.R. Part 437 Coal Mining 40 C.F.R. Part 434 Coil Coating 40 C.F.R. Part 465 Copper Forming 40 C.F.R. Part 465 Dairy Products Processing 40 C.F.R. Part 405 Electrical and Electronic Components I & II 40 C.F.R. Part 469 Electroplating 40 C.F.R. Part 413 Explosives Manufacturing 40 C.F.R. Part 457 Feed Lots 40 C.F.R. Part 412 Ferroalloy Manufacturing 40 C.F.R. Part 424 Fertilizer Manufacturing 40 C.F.R. Part 418 Glass Manufacturing 40 C.F.R. Part 426 Grain Mills 40 C.F.R. Part 406 Gum and Wood Chemicals Mfg. 40 C.F.R. Part 454 Hospital 40 C.F.R. Part 460 Ink Formulating 40 C.F.R. Part 447 Inorganic Chemicals Manufacture (I & III) 40 C.F.R. Part 415 Iron and Steel 40 C.F.R. Part 420 Landfills 40 C.F.R. Part 445 Leather Tanning & Finishing 40 C.F.R. Part 425 Meat Products 40 C.F.R. Part 432 Metal Finishing 40 C.F.R. Part 433 Metal Molding and Casting 40 C.F.R. Part 464 Metal Products and Machinery 40 C.F.R. Part 438 Mineral Mining and Processing 40 C.F.R. Part 436 Nonferrous Metals Forming 40 C.F.R. Part 471 Nonferrous Metals Mfg. I 40 C.F.R. Part 421 Nonferrous Metals Mfg. II 40 C.F.R. Part 421 Ore Mining and Dressing 40 C.F.R. Part 440 Organic Chemicals, Plastics, and Synthetic Fibers 40 C.F.R. Part 414 Paint Formulating 40 C.F.R. Part 446 Paving and Roofing Material 40 C.F.R. Part 443 Pesticide Chemicals 40 C.F.R. Part 455 Petroleum Refining 40 C.F.R. Part 419 Pharmaceutical 40 C.F.R. Part 439 Phosphate Manufacturing 40 C.F.R. Part 422 Photographic 40 C.F.R. Part 459 Plastics Molding and Forming 40 C.F.R. Part463 Porcelain Enameling 40 C.F.R. Part 466 Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard 40 C.F.R. Part 430 & 431 Rubber Manufacturing 40 C.F.R. Part 428 Soap and Detergent Mfg. 40 C.F.R. Part 417 Steam Electric 40 C.F.R. Part 423 Sugar Processing 40 C.F.R. Part409 Textile Mills 40 C.F.R. Part 410 Timber Products 40 C.F.R. Part 429 Transportation Equipment Cleaning 40 C.F.R. Part 442 Waste Combusters 40 C.F.R. Part 444  
(Ord. No. 307, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Appendix B 
An industrial user may elect, in lieu of the total phenols limitation specified in section 78-121.4(b)(2), to substitute specific limitations for each of the eight individual phenolic compounds identified under the total phenols limitation. The following specific limitations, expressed in mg/l, shall be applied in lieu of the total phenols limitation, upon election; 
2-Chlorophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 
4-Chlorophenol ..... 2.0 mg/1 
4-Chloro-3-methylphenol ..... 1.0 mg/l 
2,4-Dichlorophenol ..... 5.5 mg/l 
2,4-Dinitrophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 
4-Methylphenol ..... 5.0 mg/l 
4-Nitrophenol ..... 15.0 mg/l 
Phenol ..... 14.0 mg/l 
Following election, the wastewater discharge permit shall be modified to incorporate these substituted parameters and an industrial user shall be responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these parameters. 
(Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Appendix C. Interim Discharge Limitations 
    No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant discharge limitations: 
(1)  Compatible pollutants: 
a.  Any fats, oil or grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than 1,500 mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a 24-hour period. 
b.  Any total suspended solids (TSS) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
c.  Any biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
d.  Any Phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l. 
Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples collected over an operating period representative of a user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR Part 146. 
(2)  Noncompatible pollutants: 
Cadmium (Cd) 1.0 mg/l 
(Ord. No. 371, § I, 12-18-06) 
Secs. 78-122-78-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER RATES 

Sec. 78-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the city water department. 
    Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities, and other efforts required to operate and maintain the waste water transportation and treatment system, and the drinking water distribution and treatment system, consistent with insuring adequate treatment of wastewater and drinking water to produce an effluent in compliance with the applicable NPDES Permit and other applicable state and federal regulation. Operation and maintenance costs include cost of replacement. 
    Premises means each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having any connection to the water distribution system of the city, or the sewage disposal system of the city, or eligible for such a connection. 
    Replacement means the obtaining and installing of any equipment, accessories and appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the public owned treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance to such standards as the facilities and equipment were originally designed and constructed, to comply with other applicable state and federal regulations, and to preserve its financial integrity. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the city water department. 
(Code 1980, § 2.111; Ord. No. 381, § I, 5-18-09) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-142. - Basis of charges. 
    All water service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed as determined by the meter installed in the premises of water or sewage disposal service customers by the department. No free water service or sewage disposal service shall be furnished to any person. 
    Rates shall provide for the recovery of costs from the users of the water and/or wastewater system(s) sufficient to administer regulatory activities and to meet the costs of operation, maintenance, improvement and replacement of the facilities, equipment and appurtenances. 
(Code 1980, § 2.112; Ord. No. 381, § II, 5-18-09) 
Sec. 78-143. - Water and sewer rates. 
    Charges for water service to each premises within the city connected with the water supply system, and charges for sewage disposal service to each premises within the city having any sewer connection with the public sewers, for each bi-monthly (two-month) period, shall be as follows for water consumed and sewage generated on or after July 1, 2018 and for bills issued beginning July 1, 2018, and thereafter. 
(1)  For water and sewer used for nonresidential customers, a bi-monthly surcharge shall be invoiced equivalent to two months' charges from the City of Detroit for Industrial Waste Control meter charges as established from time to time by the City of Detroit, Michigan Water and Sewerage Department. 
(2)  For water and sewer used for nonresidential customers who release pollutants in excess of the limits established by the City of Detroit for Industrial Waste Control Excess Strength Surcharge requirements as established from time to time by the City of Detroit, Michigan Water and Sewerage Department, a payment to the City of Detroit at the established rates based on City of Detroit invoices. 
(3)  Commodity Charges for all bills issued after July 1, 2018, and thereafter shall be: 
Water commodity charge ..... $36.69/MCF 
Sewer commodity charge ..... 32.80/MCF 
(4)  A bi-monthly fire service readiness to serve charge shall be charged to all premises with private fire service connections for each connection in the following amounts: 
From July 1, 2018, until amended ..... $61.61 
(5)  All premises connected to the public water and/or sewer system shall be billed a bi-monthly water readiness to serve charge for all bills issued after July 1, 2018, at the following rates: 
READINESS TO CHARGES Meter Size 
(inch) Water Charge 
(Bi-Monthly) Sewer Charge 
(Bi-Monthly) Combined 
(Bi-Monthly Charge) 5/8$4.09 $3.73 $7.82 3/4 4.09 3.73 7.82 1 10.22 9.33 19.55 1.5 20.43 18.67 39.10 2 32.69 29.87 62.56 3 65.39 59.73 125.12 4 102.17 93.33 195.50 6 204.33 186.67 391.00 8 326.93 298.67 625.60 10 469.97 429.33 899.30  
(6)  All premises connected to the public water and/or sewer system shall be billed a bi-monthly water debt service charge and/or sewer debt service charge for all bills issued after July 1, 2018, at the following rates: 
DEBT SERVICE CHARGES Meter Size 
(inch) Water Charge 
(Bi-Monthly) Sewer Charge 
(Bi-Monthly) Combined 
(Bi-Monthly Charge) 5/8$7.40 $9.36 $16.76 3/4 7.40 9.36 16.76 1 18.50 23.40 41.90 1.5 37.00 46.80 83.80 2 59.20 74.88 134.08 3 118.40 149.76 268.16 4 185.00 234.00 419.00 6 370.00 468.00 838.00 8 592.00 748.80 1,340.80 10 851.00 1,076.40 1,927.40  
(7)  All industrial premises connected to the public water and/or sewer system shall be billed a bi-monthly water industrial damage control charge and/or sewer industrial damage control charge for all bills issued after July 1, 2018, at the following rates: 
INDUSTRIAL DAMAGE CONTROL CHARGES Meter Size 
(inch) Water Charge 
(Bi-Monthly) Sewer Charge 
(Bi-Monthly) Combined 
(Bi-Monthly Charge) 5/8$24.57 $32.90 $57.47 3/4 24.57 32.90 57.47 1 61.43 82.25 143.68 1.5 122.87 164.50 587.37 2 196.59 263.20 459.79 3 393.17 526.40 919.57 4 614.33 822.50 1,436.83 6 1,228.67 1,645.00 2,873.67 8 1,965.87 2,632.00 4,597.87 10 2,825.93 3,783.50 6,609.43  
(Ord. No. 275, § 1(2.113), 6-15-92; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 6-20-94; Ord. No. 296, § 1, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 299, § 1, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 304, § 1, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 308, § 1, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 310, § 1, 11-16-98; Ord. No. 314, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 320, § 1, 6-19-00; Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-18-01; Ord. No. 332, § I, 6-17-02; Ord. No. 338, § 1, 5-12-03; Ord. No. 346, § 1, 5-10-04; Ord. No. 355, § 1, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 5-15-06; Ord. No. 373, § 1, 5-21-07; Ord. No. 376, § 1, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 381, § III, 5-18-09; Ord. No. 395, § I, 5-16-11; Ord. No. 406, § I, 5-21-12; Ord. No. 413, § I, 5-19-14; Ord. No. 420, § I, 5-18-15; Ord. No. 426, § I, 5-16-16; Ord. No. 427, § I, 8-15-16; Ord. No. 429, § I, 5-15-17; Ord. No. 433, § I, 5-21-18) 
Sec. 78-144. - Multiple users on single meter. 
    Where two or more families or business concerns are using one water meter, the minimum charges under section 78-142 and section 78-143 shall be multiplied by the number of families or business concerns on the meter. 
(Code 1980, § 2.115) 
Sec. 78-145. - Service to city. 
    The city shall pay the same water and sewer rates for service to it as would be payable by a private customer for the same service, except that for water furnished through fire hydrants and for the availability of such water, the city will pay the sum of $10.00 per year per hydrant, which charge is hereby determined to be the reasonable cost and value of such service. All such charges for service shall be payable quarterly from the current funds of the city, or from the proceeds of taxes. 
(Code 1980, § 2.116) 
Sec. 78-146. - Billing. 
    Charges for services furnished by the system shall be billed and collected semiannually or oftener, as shall be determined by the council. Such charges shall become due at such times, not exceeding 40 days after the reading of the water meter, as shall be established by resolution of the council, and if such charges are not paid on or before the due date, then a penalty of five percent shall be added. 
(Code 1980, § 2.117) 
Sec. 78-147. - Collection. 
    The city treasurer is authorized to enforce the payment of charges for water service to any premises by discontinuing the water service to such premises and the payment of charges for sewage disposal service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing either the water service or the sewage disposal service to such premises, or both, and an action of assumpsit may be instituted by the city against the customer. The charges for water service and sewage disposal service, which, under the provisions of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), as amended, are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are recognized to constitute such lien; and the city treasurer shall, annually on March 1, certify all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises prior to October 1 of the preceding year which remain unpaid on March 1, to the city assessor who shall place the same on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as single lot assessments as provided in section 1-15. In cases where the city is properly notified in accordance with Act No. 94 that a tenant is responsible for water or sewage disposal service charges, no such service shall be commenced or continued to such premises until there has been deposited with the city treasurer a sum sufficient to cover four times the average quarterly bill for such premises as estimated by the superintendent, such deposit to be in no case less than $15.00. Where the water service to any premises is turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges or sewage disposal service charges, the water service shall not be recommenced until all delinquent charges have been paid and a deposit as in the case of tenants is made and there shall be a shutoff charge of $2.00. In any other case where, in the discretion of the city treasurer, the collection of charges for water or sewage disposal service may be difficult or uncertain, he may require a similar deposit. Such deposits may be applied against any delinquent water or sewage disposal service charges and the application thereof shall not affect the right of the treasurer or superintendent to turn off the water service and/or sewer service to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear interest and the deposit, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the customer making the deposit when he shall discontinue receiving water and sewage disposal service or, except as to tenants as to whom notice of responsibility for such charges has been filed with the city, when any eight successive quarterly bills shall have been paid by the customer with no delinquency. 
(Code 1980, § 2.118) 
Chapter 82 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Care of trees and shrubs, MCL 247.241 et seq., MSA 9.361 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1-82-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOXIOUS WEEDS 

Sec. 82-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Noxious weeds includes Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.), poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicodendron vernix), dock weeds (Rumex crespus) or other plant which in the opinion of the city council is regarded as a public nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 9.26(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-27. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    In order to effectively enforce and control the elimination of noxious weeds, all noxious weeds, wild brush or grass which are of a height of six inches or more growing or lying upon any property in the city are declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 9.26(2)) 
Sec. 82-28. - Duty to cut or destroy. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner, possessor or occupier of land and of every person having charge of any land in the city to cut or destroy, or cause to be destroyed or cut, all public nuisances enumerated in sections 82-26 and 82-27. 
(Code 1980, § 9.26(3)) 
Sec. 82-29. - Failure to comply; work done by city, recovery of costs. 
    If any person mentioned in section 82-28 shall fail to comply with the provisions of section 82-28 the city manager shall, through the appropriate department or agency of the city, after giving notice pursuant to section 1-14, cause all such noxious weeds to be cut or destroyed upon the land of such person who has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with section 1-15. 
(Code 1980, § 9.26(5)) 
Secs. 82-30-82-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 82-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the department of parks of the city. 
    Park means all public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city to which the public has free access as a park. 
    Prohibited species means any tree of the species of poplar (Populus Sp.), willow (Salix Sp.) and box elder (Acer Negundo). 
    Public utility means any person owning or operating any pole, line, pipe or conduit located in any public street or over or along any public easement or right-of-way for the transmission of electricity, gas, telephone service or telegraph service. 
    Street means all the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, highways and boulevards in the city. 
    Tree means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation. 
(Code 1980, § 3.51(1)-(6)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-52. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article, except as otherwise specifically stated in this article, shall apply only to public streets, parkways, parks and other land publicly owned or controlled by the city. 
(Code 1980, § 3.51(7)) 
Sec. 82-53. - Enforcement officer. 
    The city manager shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1980, § 3.52) 
Sec. 82-54. - Permits for tree planting, care, removal. 
    The city manager shall have control over all trees located within the street right-of-way and parks in the city and the planting, care and removal thereof, subject to the regulations contained in this article. The owner of land abutting on any street may, upon obtaining prior written permission of the city manager, prune, spray, plant or remove trees in that part of the street abutting his land not used for public travel, but no person shall otherwise prune, spray, plant or remove any tree in any street or park. Every such permit shall specify the extent of the authorization and the conditions to which it is subject. Where an owner of abutting property requests the removal of a tree, the city manager is authorized, in his discretion, to require, as a condition to granting of approval for such removal, that such property owner make the removal in accordance with regulations established by the department and assume all or any part of the costs of removing such tree. 
(Code 1980, § 3.53) 
Sec. 82-55. - Public tree removal. 
    The department shall have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve, and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure safety or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city manager may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition, or which is of a prohibited species, or is affected with any injurious disease, fungus, insect or other pest. Whenever the department shall remove any tree, plant or shrub, solely for the purpose of constructing any public work, the city manager shall, if practicable, replace the same at public expense, at some nearby location by planting another tree, plant or shrub, not necessarily of the same type. 
(Code 1980, § 3.54) 
Sec. 82-56. - Planting, spacing of shade, ornamental trees. 
    Future plantings of shade and ornamental trees in the streets, parks and public places of the city may be done by the department upon payment of certain fees and charges and in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be established by the city council insofar as such rules and regulations do not conflict with any other provisions of this article. No future planting of shade and ornamental trees or shrubs in the highways, parks and public places by owners or anyone employed by them shall be permitted without the approval of the city manager and in compliance with the following rules as to spacing: Large trees shall be spaced not less than 40 feet, medium trees not less than 35 feet, and small trees not less than 30 feet. However, any owner of a single lot may, in order to provide a tree in front of his lot, secure special permission from the department to plant a tree within a less distance from an existing tree than the spacing above-mentioned, but shall in no case make a special planting within 20 feet of any existing tree located in the street or other public place. No tree shall be planted in parkways between the curb and sidewalk less than three and one-half feet from the curb line, nor less than three feet from the sidewalk; provided, however, where the parkways are less than six feet six inches in width any trees planted therein shall be located not less than two feet six inches from the curb and as near midway between the curb and sidewalk as possible. No tree shall be planted nearer to the intersection of any streets than 20 feet from the corner of the intersection. 
    The approved trees are as follows: 
(1) Small: Eastern Redbud Japanese Tree Lilac Kousa Dogwood Red Crabapple White Crabapple (2) Medium: Callery Pear Hophornbeam Littleleaf Linden River Birch (3) Large: Bur Oak Ginko (males only) Hackberry London Plantree Red Maple Red Oak Sugar Maple Tuliptree White Oak  
    Any trees not on the approved list may only be planted with the approval of the City Manager. 
(Code 1980, § 3.55; Ord. No. 431, § I, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 82-57. - Tree protection. 
    No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, or set any fire within ten feet of any tree, or permit any fire, or the heat thereof, to injure any portion of any tree. No toxic chemicals or other injurious materials shall be allowed to seep, drain or be emptied on, near or about any tree. No electric wires or any other lines or wires shall be permitted to come in contact with any tree or shrub in any manner that shall cause damage thereto, and no person shall attach any electric insulation to any tree. No person shall use any tree as an anchor except by special written permit from the city manager, and no material shall be fastened to or hung on any tree. All persons having under their care, custody or control facilities which may interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree shall, after notice thereof by the department, promptly abate such interference in such manner as shall permit the trimming or removal of such tree by the department. 
(Code 1980, § 3.56) 
Sec. 82-58. - Excavations near trees. 
    Excavations and driveways shall not be placed within five feet of any tree without written permit from the city manager. Any person making such excavation or construction shall guard any tree within six feet thereof with a good substantial frame box to be approved by the department, and all building material or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any tree. 
(Code 1980, § 3.57) 
Sec. 82-59. - Covering surface near trees. 
    No person shall place within the street right-of-way any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which will in any way impede the full and free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, except a sidewalk of authorized width and location. 
(Code 1980, § 3.58) 
Sec. 82-60. - Gas main leakage. 
    Gas pipes or mains within any public rights-of-way or on any public property shall be so maintained as to avoid any leakage therefrom. If a leak exists or occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of the pipe and main, and the leak shall be repaired within 24 hours. Any damage to trees, shrubbery or grass resulting from the escape of gas from a pipe or main shall be repaired, and the cost of the work, including the cost of removal and the replacement of any trees, shall be levied against the owner of the pipe or main causing the damage. 
(Code 1980, § 3.59) 
Sec. 82-61. - Private trees; clearance, trimming. 
    Every owner of any tree on private property overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall trim the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or right-of-way. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, such trimming to be confined to the area immediately above the right-of-way. 
(Code 1980, § 3.60) 
Sec. 82-62. - Corner clearance. 
    All shrubs and bushes located at or adjacent to a street intersection shall conform to the requirements of chapter 90. Any owner of any property failing to trim any trees, shrubs or bushes in conformity with this section or section 82-61 shall be notified by the city manager, in the manner provided in section 1-14, to do so and such notice shall require trimming in conformity with this section within ten days after the date of the notice. Upon the expiration of such period, the city manager may cause the trimming to be done and the cost thereof may be collected from the owner of the property as a single lot assessment in accordance with section 1-15. 
(Code 1980, § 3.61) 
Sec. 82-63. - Private trees; diseases and infestations. 
    When the city manager shall discover that any tree growing on private property within the city is afflicted with any dangerous and infectious insect infestation or tree disease, he shall forthwith serve a written notice upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant of the property, in the manner specified in section 1-14, describing the tree, its location and the nature of the infestation or tree disease and ordering the owner, agent and occupant to take such measures as may be reasonably necessary to cure such infestation or disease and to prevent the spreading thereof, specifying the measures required to be taken. Such order may require the pruning, spraying or destruction of trees as may be reasonably necessary. Every such notice shall be complied with within ten days after service thereof, upon the owner, agent or occupant of the property on which the afflicted tree is located, or within such additional time as may be stipulated in the notice. 
(Code 1980, § 3.62) 
Sec. 82-64. - Diseased elms declared nuisance. 
    Any elm tree within the city which is found to be infected with the Dutch elm disease fungus (Ceratostomella ulmi), or any elm tree, or parts thereof, which are dead or dying and serve as a breeding place for the bark beetles (Scolytus multistriatus and Hylurgopinus rufipes), which carry and transmit Dutch elm disease, is declared a public nuisance. 
(Code 1980, § 3.64) 
Sec. 82-65. - Elm tree condemnation and removal. 
    Every person who owns or has under his control an elm tree within the city limits which has been condemned as a public nuisance shall cut down and remove it. Any owner or person in control of any condemned elm tree located within the city limits who shall fail or refuse to cut down and remove it within 15 days after having been notified so to do by the city shall be guilty of a violation of this Code and shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. If, at the expiration of the 15-day time limit in the notice, the requirements thereof have not been complied with, the city manager shall cause the condemned elm tree to be cut down and removed. The cost of the nuisance abatement shall be charged against the premises and the owner in accordance with provisions of section 1-15. 
(Code 1980, § 3.65) 
Sec. 82-66. - Inspections. 
    The city shall have power to go upon any private lands for the purpose of inspection and determining whether any elm tree located thereon is or may be infected with Dutch elm disease, and if any elm tree is found to be so infected to place a distinguishing mark thereon, by blaze or otherwise. 
(Code 1980, § 3.66) 
Sec. 82-67. - Lawn extensions. 
    On residence streets, the abutting owner or occupant may maintain a planting strip on the lawn extension between the sidewalk and curb and may plant flowers, trees and shrubbery therein in conformity with this article. No person shall willfully injure or destroy any grass, flower, tree or shrub upon any such planting strip or throw any papers, refuse or other thing thereon. No person shall drive an automobile, bicycle or other vehicle upon or over any such planting strip. 
(Code 1980, § 3.67) 
Sec. 82-68. - Overhead lines; trimming permits. 
    The city manager shall grant permission to public utilities to trim and keep trimmed all trees within the streets, alleys, parks and public places of the city, in such a manner as shall keep the overhead lines of such public utilities safe and accessible. Such trimming shall be done in accordance with approved practices and under the general direction of the department. Such permission, as provided for in this section, shall require reasonable prior notice to the city before any work is commenced thereunder. Provided, however, that in the event of an emergency requiring immediate maintenance work on the overhead lines of the public utilities, prior notice of commencing work under the permit shall not be required. The word "emergency" as used in this section shall be defined to mean the occurrence or happening of an event which could not be foreseen by the exercise of reasonable care and foresight, which might cause damage to the overhead lines of the public utilities. 
(Code 1980, § 3.68) 
Chapter 86 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HARBOR AND PIER USE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 344, § I, adopted December 15, 2003, amended Ch. 86, Art. II in its entirety. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 3.31-3.43 of the 1980 Code. 
Cross reference- Information regarding Neff Park, where these facilities are located, § 50-26 et seq. 

Sec. 86-26. - Purpose. 
    This article shall govern the mooring and use of boats at the city pier and in the city harbor and shall provide the basis for issuance, expiration and revocation of permits for such mooring and use. 
(Ord. No. 344, § I, 12-15-03) 
Sec. 86-27. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager is empowered to make such rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the city council, and is empowered to issue permits, pertaining to the conduct and use of the harbor, pier and public grounds as are necessary to administer the same and to protect public property and the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public, and no person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 344, § I, 12-15-03) 
Sec. 86-28. - Inspections. 
    The director or acting director of the department of public safety, or any member thereof, duly authorized by his superior, shall have the authority to inspect all boats moored at the pier or dock and the department may make reasonable rules and regulations concerning the establishment and maintenance of fire extinguishers and other equipment in, upon or near all boats for the protection of the property of the city and other owners from loss or damage by fire. 
(Ord. No. 344, § I, 12-15-03) 
Sec. 86-29. - Liability. 
    The city, in permitting boats to moor in the harbor, shall not be charged with any responsibility for loss or damage by fire, theft, collision or any other cause. All boats shall be operated and moored at the owner's risk. The holder of a mooring permit shall be liable to the city, and to all others lawfully using such facilities, for any loss, injury or damage resulting from the permit holder's negligence. 
(Ord. No. 344, § I, 12-15-03) 
Sec. 86-30. - Display of permit. 
    The permit as issued by the manager must be displayed upon request to any city officer, attendants or guards by the holders thereof to gain admission to or make use of the pier, dock or harbor. 
(Ord. No. 344, § I, 12-15-03) 
Sec. 86-31. - Cancellation of permit. 
    The city expressly reserves the right to refuse, revoke or cancel any mooring permit for nonconformance or violations of any of the provisions of the regulations adopted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 344, § I, 12-15-03) 
Secs. 86-32-86-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SHORELINE PROTECTION 

Sec. 86-61. - Construction, maintenance of dikes, barriers, seawalls and similar structures. 
(a)  The owners of properties abutting Lake St. Clair shall construct and maintain a dike, barrier, seawall, bulkhead or breakwall of such size and of such materials (to include steel or poured concrete or wood) as to prevent erosion of earth or other materials into the waters of Lake St. Clair, including any substance or liquid that may cause pollution of the waters. Riprap or gabion shall not be used, except as emergency flood prevention control measure when authorized and/or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the city. 
(b)  The owner of such properties shall obtain permits as may be required by federal and state agencies and departments before commencing construction of such dikes, barriers, seawalls, bulkheads or breakwalls, boathouses, catwalks, pilings and boat hoists. Further, the owner shall also submit drawings, together with specifications, to the building department of the city and, after obtaining any required federal and state approvals, shall apply for and obtain a permit from the building department before construction can be commenced. The city council may from time to time establish by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for the permit. 
(Code 1980, § 4.71) 
Sec. 86-62. - Rising waters; barriers, dikes, emergency measures. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager finds that, because of the rising of the level of the waters in Lake St. Clair, the safety, health, property and general welfare of the public is endangered by floodwaters and that immediate action is necessary to protect the public interest, he shall notify the owners and occupants thereof by ordinary mail, addressed to the address given in the last assessment roll, and shall also post a notice on every lot or building or structure thereon to immediately provide adequate barriers, dikes or other embankments to protect against the overflow of waters. Should any such owner or occupant fail to so provide, the city manager, in his discretion, and at the direction of the city council, may, but is not required to proceed to provide such barriers, dikes or embankments by or through any officer or department of the city or outside contractor. 
(b)  If the owner or occupant of any such lot or premises, when ordered by the city manager to provide adequate barriers, dikes or other embankments shall neglect to do so, the city manager at the direction of the council may cause the work to be done under the direction of the city, by the city or by outside contractors, and such expense shall be charged against the lot or premises and recovered as a single-lot assessment thereon as provided in this Code, or such expense may be recovered by the city in an action for debt or assumpsit against the owner or occupant of any such lot or premises. 
(Code 1980, § 4.72) 
Chapter 90 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; planning, ch. 54; signs, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; waterways, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Preamble. 
    In accordance with the authority and intent of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, P.A. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq.) as amended, the city desires to provide for the orderly development of the city, which is essential to the well-being of the community, and which will place no undue burden upon developers, commerce or residents. The city further desires to ensure the provision of adequate sites for commerce and residence; to provide for the free movement of vehicles upon the proper streets and highways of the city; to protect commerce and residences against incongruous and incompatible uses of land, and to promote the proper use of land and natural resources for the economic well-being of the city as a whole; to ensure the provision of adequate space for the parking of vehicles of customers using commercial and retail areas; and that all uses of land and buildings within the city be so related as to provide for economy in government and mutual support. The result of such purposes of this chapter, which relates to the city's comprehensive development plan, will promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the residents, shoppers and workers in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 5.1; Ord. No. 370, § I, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-2. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Code 1980, § 5.2) 
Sec. 90-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building means a subordinate building or structure on the same lot, or part of the main building occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use, other than play equipment and play structures as defined herein. 
    Accessory building-attached means a subordinate building or structure on the same lot, or that is an integrated part of the main building occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use, other than play structures as defined herein. Integrated part shall mean connected to the principal structure by a common wall, enclosed breezeway, or covered porch. 
    Accessory building-detached means a subordinate building or structure on the same lot, occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use that is not connected to the principal structure. Unenclosed breezeways, arbors, or patios do not constitute a connection to the principal structure for the purpose of this definition. 
    Accessory use means a use naturally and normally incidental to, subordinate to, and auxiliary to the permitted use of the premises. 
    Alley means any dedicated public way providing a secondary means of ingress to or egress from land or structures thereon, as designated upon the zoning map. 
    Alteration means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy; any change in structural members of a building, such as walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders or any change which may be referred to in this chapter as altered or reconstructed. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms used as a dwelling for one family which may do its cooking therein. 
    Apartment house means a structure with three or more apartments sharing a building and a lot; may be for rent, or for sale as a condominium. 
    Automobile service station means a building or structure designed or used for the retail sale or supply of fuels, lubricants, air, water and other operating commodities for motor vehicles, aircraft or boats, and including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such vehicles, and including space for facilities for the temporary storage of vehicles not over 48 hours, minor repair or servicing, but not including bumping, painting, refinishing, major repairs and overhauling, steam cleaning, rustproofing or high-speed washing thereof. 
    Bank means an establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, for the extension of credit, and for facilitating the transmission of funds by drafts or bills of exchange. A bank shall be construed to mean an establishment wherein all business is transacted with customers totally within a building, and shall not include drive-in teller windows, booths and accessory structures designed to serve customers while in their automobiles. 
    Basement means a portion of a building partly or wholly below the finished grade level and so located that the vertical distance from the grade level to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the grade level to the ceiling. (See illustration, Table A, at the end of this section.) 
    Billboard means any construction or portion thereof upon which a sign or advertisement is placed, painted, or otherwise designated for the purpose of making anything known to the general public, but not including bulletin boards used to display official court or public office notices. 
    Block means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets or between the nearest such streets and unsubdivided acreage or lake; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Board of zoning appeals means the board of zoning appeals of the city. 
    Buildable area means the space of a lot remaining after the minimum open space requirements of this chapter have been complied with. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or chattel. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the reference level to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof; to the deck of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip and gambrel roofs. (See illustration, Table B, at the end of this section.) 
    Building inspector means the building inspector of the building department or his authorized representative. 
    Building line means a line established, in general, parallel to the front street right-of-way line between which line and the front street line no part of a building shall project, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. 
    Building, principal means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot in which it is located. 
    Building, separate means any portion of any structure completely separated from every other portion by masonry or a fire wall, which wall extends from the ground to the roof. 
    Carport means a building or structure which is not completely enclosed, and which is designed or used for the storage of not more than three motor vehicles not more than one of which may be a commercial vehicle not larger than a regularly manufactured pickup or panel truck of three-fourths ton capacity, owned by and for the private use of the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Catering hall or banquet hall means any establishment whose principal business is the sale of foods or beverages in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or principal method of operation includes one of the following characteristics: 
(1)  A minimum of 25 percent of the useable floor area (excluding kitchens) is devoted to a room, hall or combination of rooms or halls available for rental or leasing, these facilities not being open to the general public; 
(2)  Such rooms are made primarily available for use by private groups, or for meetings of groups, clubs and organizations or for social affairs; or 
(3)  The general tenure of a customer using the premises is in excess of two hours. 
    City engineer means the city engineer or his authorized representative. 
    Clerk means the clerk of the city. 
    Convalescent home means a home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, wherein two or more persons are cared for. Such home shall conform and qualify for license under state laws. 
    Court means an open unoccupied space other than a yard, and bounded on at least two sides by a building. A court extending to the front lot line or front yard, or to the rear lot line or rear yard is an outer court. Any other court is an inner court. 
    Density means the number of families residing on, or dwelling units developed on, an acre of land. As used in this chapter, all densities are stated in families per net acre, that is, per acre of land devoted to residential use, exclusive of land in streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, school yards, or other public lands and open spaces. 
    District means a portion of the city within which, on a uniform basis, certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and within which certain yards, open spaces, lot areas and other requirements are established. 
    Drive-in establishment means a business establishment, other than a drive-in restaurant, so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle, and may include drive-in banks, drive-in cleaners, and drive-in laundries. 
    Drive-in restaurant means a drive-in restaurant or other drive-in establishment serving food and/or drink so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons for consumption on the premises while in the motor vehicle. 
    Dwelling, multiple means a building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the building. This definition includes three-family houses, four-family houses and apartment houses, but does not include hotels, motels, trailer camps or mobile home parks. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof designed or used as a place of residence for a single family. 
    Erected means built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon or any physical operations on the premises required for the building. Excavations, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers, poles and other similar equipment, and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings other than such buildings as are primarily enclosures or shelters of the above essential service equipment. 
    Family means one or more persons living together and interrelated by bonds of consanguinity, marriage or legal adoption, and occupying the whole or a part of a dwelling unit as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, or a group of not more than three persons who need not be related by bonds of consanguinity, marriage or legal adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit and occupying a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, boardinghouse, fraternity or sorority house. A family shall be deemed to include domestic servants, gratuitous guests and not more than three foster or boarded children who are sponsored or whose room and board is paid by a recognized child care agency or organization. 
    Filling means the depositing or dumping of any matter on or into the ground, except deposits resulting from common household gardening. 
    Floor area, gross means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors within outside walls of a building including basement, elevator shafts and stairwells at each story, floor space used for mechanical equipment, penthouse, half story, and mezzanine or interior balcony. (See illustration, Table C, at the end of this section.) 
    Floor area, usable means any floor area within outside walls of a building exclusive of areas in cellars, basements, utility areas, unfinished attics, garages, open porches and accessory buildings. (See illustration, Table C, at the end of this section.) 
    Foster child means a child unrelated to a family by blood or adoption with whom he lives for the purposes of care and/or education. 
    Garage apartment means a room or suite of rooms in an accessory building used as a dwelling unit for one family which may do its cooking therein. 
    Garage, commercial means any premises used for the storage, care, repair or refinishing of motor vehicles, but not including a place where any such vehicles are for hire or sale. (See also definition of Automobile service station. ) 
    Garage, community means a series of private garages located jointly on a parcel of land under a single ownership. 
    Garage, private means an enclosed building or structure not larger than the principal building on same lot, if any, which is completely enclosed by solid walls except for windows and garage doors and which is used primarily for the storage of not more than three motor vehicles, not more than one of which may be a commercial vehicle not larger than a regularly manufactured pickup or panel truck of three-fourths ton capacity, owned by and for the private use of the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. See sections 90-207(4), 90-222(1). 
    Home occupation means any use customarily conducted entirely within the dwelling and carried on entirely by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof; provided further, that no article or service is sold or offered for sale on the premises, except such as is produced by the occupation; that the occupation shall not require internal or external alterations or construction features, equipment, machinery, outdoor storage or commercial signs. Clinics, hospitals, barbershops, beauty parlors, tearooms, tourist homes, animal hospitals, kennels, millinery shops, and childcare day nurseries, among others, shall not be deemed to be home occupations. 
    Hospital means an institution providing health services, primarily for inpatients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff offices. 
    Hotel means a building occupied as a more or less temporary abiding place for individuals who are lodged with or without meals in rooms consisting of a minimum of one bedroom and a bath, occupied for hire, and which typically provides hotel services such as maid service, the furnishing and laundering of linens, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use of furniture, a dining room and general kitchen, and meeting rooms. 
    Housing for the elderly means: 
(1)  Independent elderly housing means housing for the elderly or seniors provided in a multiple-family form with full facilities for self-sufficiency in each individual unit. 
(2)  Assisted living means housing for the elderly or seniors provided in a multiple-family housing form with central dining facilities provided as a basic service to each unit. Dependent elderly housing may also include congregate care or assisted care facilities where some assistance with the activities of daily living is provided. 
(3)  Convalescent or nursing home means a home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, wherein two or more persons are cared for. Such home shall conform and qualify for license under state laws. 
    Inspector means the building inspector of the city. 
    Live-work means a dwelling unit that contains a ground floor commercial component occupied by the same occupant. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same parcel of property with a building or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot means land occupied or to be occupied by a use, building or structure and permitted accessory buildings together with such open spaces, lot width and lot area as are required by this chapter and having its principal frontage upon a public street or upon a private way used for street purposes. A lot need not be a lot of record. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area of a lot within the lot line as defined. For lots fronting or lying adjacent to private street or public alleys, lot area shall be interpreted to be that area within the lot lines measured to the center of the adjacent private street or public alley. 
    Lot, corner means a lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut for their full length upon a street, provided that such two sides intersect at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. Where a lot is on a curve, if tangents through the extreme point of the street line of such lot make an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees, it is a corner lot. In the case of a corner lot with curved street line, the corner is that point on the street lot line nearest to the point of intersection of the tangents described above. (See illustration, Table D, at the end of this section.) 
    Lot coverage means the part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings or structures, and permanent swimming pools. 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear lot line. 
    Lot, double frontage means an interior lot having frontages on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, one street will be designed as the front street in the plat and the request for a building permit. (See illustration, Table D, at the end of this section.) 
    Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot. (See illustration, Table D, at the end of section.) 
    Lot, lakefront means a lot adjoining Lake St. Clair. 
    Lot lines means the property lines bounding the lot. 
(1)  Front lot line. In the case of a lot abutting upon one public or private street, the front lot line shall mean the line separating such lot from such street right-of-way. In the case of any other lot, the owner shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the privilege of electing any street lot line, the front lot line, providing that such choice, in the opinion of the building inspector, will not be injurious to the existing, or the desirable future development of adjacent properties. (See illustration, Table E, at the end of this section.) 
(2)  Rear lot line. Ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line of the lot shall be considered to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining depth of rear yard. In cases where none of these definitions are applicable, the building inspector shall designate the rear lot line. (See illustration, Table E, at the end of this section.) 
(3)  Side lot line. Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. (See illustration, Table E, at the end of this section.) 
(4)  Street or alley lot line. A lot line separating the lot from the right-of-way of a street or an alley. 
    Lot width means the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the side lot lines. Where the side lot lines are not parallel, the lot width shall be considered as the average of the width between such side lot lines. 
    Mobile home means any structure intended for or capable of human habitation, sleeping or cooking, mounted on wheels or any other devices and capable of being moved from place to place, either by its own power or by the power supplied by some vehicle attached thereto. This definition shall not include travel homes eight feet or under in width and 32 feet or under in length as defined in this section. 
    Motor vehicle repair means general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of a motor vehicle; collision service such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; overall painting; but not including undercoating of automobiles unless conducted in a completely enclosed spray booth. 
    Municipal use means any use of land, building or structure, owned or controlled by the City of Grosse Pointe or an agency, commission or instrumentality thereof, which serves a public purpose. 
    Nonconforming building means a nonconforming building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the provisions of the chapter in the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nursery, day nursery, nursery school or child care center means an establishment wherein three or more children not related by bonds of consanguinity or fostership to the family residing on the same premises are, for remuneration, cared for. Such nurseries or centers need not have a resident family on premises. 
    Off-street parking lot means a facility providing vehicular parking spaces, along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than two automobiles. 
    Parking space means a rectangular area of not less than nine feet wide by 20 feet long, for each automobile or motor vehicle, such space being exclusive of necessary drives, aisles, entrances or exits and being fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Play structure means any structure transported or built on-site, or fabricated and assembled on-site, that is designed to be used by climbing thereon or entering therein. A play structure is an accessory building under this chapter. Sheds designed for and used for the storage of yard equipment shall also be considered as accessory buildings under the provisions of this chapter 90, zoning, but shall not be deemed to be play structures. 
    Public utility means any person, municipal department or board, duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public electricity, gas, steam, communications, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Reference level, for any building within ten feet of the front lot line, means the official established curb grade opposite the center of the front of such building; for any building more than ten feet from the front lot line, or where no curb grade is established, the reference level is the mean level of the finished grade of the ground across the front of such building. When the mean finished grade abutting any portion of a building varies five feet or more from that at the front, such mean may be taken as the reference level for such portion of the building. 
    Rubbish means the miscellaneous waste materials resulting from housekeeping, mercantile enterprises, trades, manufacturing and offices, including other waste matter such as slag, stone, broken concrete, fly ash, ashes, tin cans, glass, scrap metal, rubber, paper, rags, chemicals or any similar or related combinations thereof. 
    Satellite dish antenna means an electronic device which can collect electromagnetic waves transmitted from a satellite for conversion into television or sound. 
    Sign, outdoor advertising means any "sign" as defined in section 58-2 of this Code, placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building, structure or thing whatsoever. The term "placed" as used in the definition of outdoor advertising sign and outdoor advertising structure shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, mailing, gluing, sticking, carving or other fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. See also "billboard." 
    Single parcel ownership means possession of a parcel of property wherein the owner does not own adjoining vacant property or developed property. 
    Soil removal means the removal of any kind of soil or earth matter which includes topsoil, sand, gravel, clay or similar materials or any combination thereof, except common household gardening and general farm care. 
    State equalized valuation means the value shown on the city assessment roll as equalized through the process of state and county equalization. 
    State licensed residential facilities: means any structure constructed for residential purposes that is licensed by the State of Michigan pursuant to Public Act 287 of 1972, Public Act 11 of 1973, or Public Act 218 of 1979 and provides residential services to six or fewer persons under 24-hour supervised care. These acts provide for the following types of residential structures: 
(1)  Adult foster care family home means a private residence with the approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee shall be a member of the household, and an occupant of the residence. 
(2)  Family day care home means a private home in which one but fewer than seven minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Family day care home includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
(3)  Foster family home means a private home in which one but not more than four minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the household under the Michigan Adoption Code are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
(4)  Foster family group home means a private home in which more than four but fewer than seven minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood or marriage, or who are not placed in the household under the Michigan Adoption Code are provided care for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
    Story means that portion of a building, other than a cellar or mezzanine, included between the surface of any floor and the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. (See illustration, Table G, at the end of this section.) 
(1)  Mezzanine: Shall be deemed a full story when it covers more than 50 percent of the story underneath the mezzanine, or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more. For the purpose of this chapter, a basement or cellar shall be counted as a story if over 50 percent of its height is above the level from which the height of the building is measured, or if it is used for business purposes, or if it is used for dwelling purposes by other than a janitor or domestic servants employed in the same building including the family of the same. 
(2)  Ground story: The lowest story of a building, the floor of which is not more than 12 inches below the elevation of the reference level. 
(3)  Half story: The part of a building between a pitched roof and the uppermost full story, such part having a floor area which does not exceed one-half of the floor area of the full story. 
    Street means a thoroughfare which affords traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare except an alley. A public street is a street accepted by dedication or otherwise by the city. A private street is a street not so accepted, or any street designated as a private street upon a recorded plat. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having such location. 
    Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any change in the width or number of exits, or any substantial change in the roof. 
    Structure, outdoor advertising means any structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising sign may be placed, including also outdoor advertising statuary. 
    Terrace dwelling means a series of attached single-family private dwellings separated from one another by common or party walls of fireproof construction, and composed of three to 12 attached one-family dwellings, not more than 21/2 stories in height in which each dwelling unit has its own front entrance and rear entrance, except as otherwise provided in section 90-251 et seq. 
    Travel home or travel trailer means any structure intended for or capable of human habitation, sleeping or eating, mounted upon wheels and capable of being moved from place to place, either by its own power or power supplied by some other vehicle attached thereto. This definition shall include all such vehicles eight feet or under in width and 32 feet or under in length. Such definition shall include travel trailers, motor homes, campers, etc. 
    Use means the purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, let or leased. 
    Utility room means a room or space, located other than in the basement, specifically designed and constructed to house any home utilities or laundry facilities. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The measurement of a yard is the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building or structure. (See illustration, Table H, at the end of this section.) 
    Yard, front means a yard extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest line of the principal building on the lot. 
    Yard, rear means a yard extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the principal building or of accessory building attached thereto on the lot. 
    Yard, side means a yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard or, in the absence of either of such yards, to the front and rear lot lines as the case may be; except that on a corner lot, the side yard adjacent to a street shall extend the full depth of the lot. 
    Zone or zoning district means a portion of the city within which, on a uniform basis, certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and within which certain yards, open spaces, lot areas and other requirements are established. 
Drawing, Table A 
 Drawing, Table B-ms 1888 
 Drawing, Table C-ms 1889 
 Drawing, Table D-ms 1890 
 Drawing, Table E-ms 1891 
 Drawing, Table F-ms 1892 


Table G-Basic Structural Terms 


Table H-Yard Requirements 
(Code 1980, §§ 5.3-5.13; Ord. No. 309, § 3, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 327, §§ I, II, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 350, § I, 11-1-04; Ord. No. 357, § I, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 358, § I, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 370, § II, 10-16-06; Ord. No. 407, §§ I, II, 7-15-13; Ord. No. 414, § IV, 6-16-14) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-4. - Districts. 
    The city is divided into 11 zoning districts known as follows: 
E-R Estate Residential District. 
R-1A Single-Family Residential District. 
R-1B Single-Family Residential District. 
R-T Terrace District. 
RO-1 Restricted Office District. 
C-1 Local Business District. 
C-2 Central Business District. 
T Transition District. 
T-1 Transition-1 District. 
T-2 Transition-2 District. 
P-1 Vehicular Parking District. 
(Code 1980, § 5.21; Ord. No. 358, § II, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 407, § III, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-5. - Zoning map. 
    The boundaries of the zoning districts are shown upon the map which is on file in the city clerk's office and made a part of this chapter, which map is designated as the zoning map of the city. The zoning map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon are a part of this chapter and have the same force and effect as if the zoning map and all such notations, references and other information shown thereon were fully set forth or described in this chapter. Except where references on the map are to a street or other line designated by the dimensions shown on the map, the district boundary lines follow lot lines or the centerlines of the street or alley rights-of-way or such lines extended and the corporate limits of the city as they existed at the time of the adoption of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 5.22) 
Sec. 90-6. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1980, § 5.27) 
Sec. 90-7. - Scope. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 5.28) 
Sec. 90-8. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person violating or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imposition of a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by imposition of both fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1980, § 5.202) 
Sec. 90-9. - Validity. 
    This chapter and the various articles, sections, paragraphs and clauses thereof are declared to be severable. If any article, section, paragraph or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1980, § 5.203) 
Sec. 90-10. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comforts, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises, and likewise not in conflict with this chapter; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction or requires larger open spaces, or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such chapter or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1980, § 5.201) 
Sec. 90-11. - Street and alley rights-of-way. 
    All street and alley rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such street and alley rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street or alley serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such street or alley, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. 
(Code 1980, § 5.29) 
Sec. 90-12. - Permitted uses. 
    No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, designed or arranged for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the building or land is located. 
(Code 1980, § 5.30) 
Sec. 90-13. - Permitted area. 
    No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
(Code 1980, § 5.31) 
Sec. 90-14. - Permitted height. 
    No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit established in this chapter for the district in which the building is located, except that roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, stage lofts and screens, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, individual domestic radio and television aerials and wireless masts, water tanks or similar structures may be erected above the height limits prescribed in this chapter. No such structure may be erected to exceed by more than 15 feet the height limits of the district in which it is located; nor shall such structure have a total area greater than 25 percent of the roof area of the building, nor shall such structure be used for any residential purpose or any commercial purpose other than a use incidental to the main use of the building. 
(Code 1980, § 5.32) 
Sec. 90-15. - Buildings on zoning lot. 
    Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered to provide dwelling units shall be located on a lot and in no case shall there be more than one such building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 5.33) 
Sec. 90-16. - Lots, yards, open spaces. 
    No space which for the purpose of a building or dwelling group has been counted or calculated as part of a side yard, rear yard, front yard or other open space required by this chapter may by reason of change in ownership or otherwise be counted or calculated to satisfy or comply with a yard, court or other open space requirement of or for any other building. In any residential district, the front and rear yard requirements of a double frontage lot shall be the same as prescribed for any single lot in the zone wherein the double frontage lot is located. 
(Code 1980, § 5.34) 
Sec. 90-17. - Yard encroachments. 
(a)  The following shall be considered as part of the building and shall not be allowed to encroach into any required yard or open space: 
(1)  Outside stairways. 
(2)  Fire escapes. 
(3)  Fire towers. 
(4)  Enclosed porches. An "enclosed porch" shall mean any porch with screen(s), roof(s) or removable storm window sash. 
(5)  Balconies at any level of the building. 
(6)  Boiler flues. 
(7)  Other similar projections. 
(b)  The following structure may encroach or project a maximum of 12 inches into a required yard: 
(1)  One fireplace or chimney, which does not exceed eight feet in width. 
(c)  The following may encroach or project a maximum of 18 inches into a required yard or open space: 
(1)  Cornices not exceeding 18 inches in width, including the width of the gutter or downspout. 
(d)  The following may encroach or project a maximum of 12 feet into a required front or rear yard, but in no case shall the encroachment be closer than four feet to an interior side lot line, or closer than five feet to a side lot line abutting upon a street: 
(1)  Platforms. 
(2)  Terraces. 
(3)  Steps below the first floor. 
(4)  Unenclosed porches 
(5)  Ground level unenclosed projections not over one story in height. 
(e)  The minimum yard spaces, including lot area per family and maximum lot coverage required by this chapter for each and every building existing at the time of the passage of this chapter or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other building. 
(Code 1980, § 5.35; Ord. No. 374, § V, 8-20-07) 
Sec. 90-18. - Use of yard spaces, other open areas for storage. 
(a)  No front or other yard shall be used for the storage or parking of automobiles or any other material or equipment; provided that in residential areas not more than three automobiles with a current license and in operating condition may be parked on an approved service driveway, extending from the street directly to a side yard or a garage. (See also section 90-26.) 
(b)  No machinery, equipment, vehicles, lumber piles, crates, boxes, building blocks or other materials either discarded, unsightly or showing evidence of a need for repairs, with or without a current license, shall be stored, parked, abandoned or junked in any open area that is visible from the street, public place or adjoining residential property; and should such use of land occur, it shall be declared to be a nuisance. In addition to penalties if such nuisance is not abated within ten days after the owner of the land is notified by the city manager, the city may perform the necessary work to eliminate the nuisance at the expense of the property owner; and if the property owner fails to reimburse the city within 30 days after receiving notice of the amount due from the city treasurer, the amount shall become a lien upon the property. 
(Code 1980, § 5.36) 
Sec. 90-19. - Substandard lots. 
    Any residentially zoned lot which was of record at the time of the adoption of this chapter that does not meet the requirements of this chapter for yards or other areas of open space may be utilized for single residence purposes, provided the area for such yard or court in width, depth, or open space is not less than 80 percent of that required by the terms of this chapter, except that vacant lots having in the aggregate a continuous frontage of 120 feet or more, regardless of ownership, shall not be subject to this exception. The purpose of this provision is to permit utilization of recorded lots which lack adequate width or depth as long as reasonable living standards can be provided. 
(Code 1980, § 5.37) 
Sec. 90-20. - Street access. 
    No dwelling shall be built, moved or converted upon a lot having a frontage of less than 20 feet upon a public street, or upon a private street or other permanent easement giving access to a public street. No building permit shall be issued for any construction located on any lot or parcel of land in the city that does not abut on a public street or highway or upon a private street fully improved according to chapter 70, relating to new subdivisions; provided, that this chapter shall not be the basis for preventing the issuance of a building permit for ordinary repair or maintenance of any building that is already erected on the date of the adoption of this chapter upon a lot or parcel of land that does not so abut such a street or highway. For the purpose of this chapter, no lot or parcel of land shall be construed to abut on such a street or highway unless it includes title to a minimum frontage of 20 feet on such a street or highway and title to land providing access not less than 20 feet in width from such street or highway to the proposed construction. 
(Code 1980, § 5.38) 
Sec. 90-21. - Visibility at intersections. 
    No structure, wall, fence, shrubbery or trees shall be erected, maintained or planted on any lot which will obstruct the view of the driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection, excepting that shrubbery and low retaining walls not exceeding 21/2 feet in height above the curb level and shade trees where all branches are not less than eight feet above the street level will be permitted. For residential corner lots, this unobstructed area will be a triangular section of land formed by the two street curblines and a line connecting them at points 30 feet from the intersection of the curblines, or in the case of a rounded corner, the unobstructed area shall be construed to be an area formed by the curved curbline and an arc with a radius of 30 feet measured from the midpoint of the rounded corner at the curb extending from one street curb to the other street curb (e.g., the area being a football shape with two arcs facing each other, connected at each curbline). 
(Code 1980, § 5.39) 
Sec. 90-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 408, § I, adopted July 15, 2013, repealed § 90-22, which pertained to dwellings in nonresidential districts and derived from the Code of 1980, § 5.40. 
Sec. 90-23. - Dwellings in other than main structure. 
    No residential structure shall be erected upon the rear of a lot or upon a lot with another dwelling, other than servants' quarters serving the principal building on the lot in accordance with requirements of section 90-207(4). 
(Code 1980, § 5.41) 
Sec. 90-24. - Number of buildings on lot, restricted. 
    Each dwelling hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot and, except in the case of a terrace housing project, there shall be not more than one main building and an accessory building on any single lot. In order to permit the assembly of two or more adjoining lots by the owner of the lots for the purpose of erecting or constructing a principal building on the lots, there shall be required a declaration of restrictions running with the land executed by the owner and recorded with the county register of deeds, consolidating the lots into one single parcel which shall henceforth be deemed by the building inspector as a single lot and subject to all of the provisions contained in this chapter. The location of the dwelling and its accessory building on the lot shall conform with the general plan and scheme of the subdivision in which the lot is located. 
(Code 1980, § 5.42) 
Sec. 90-25. - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  No more than one detached accessory building may be located on a residential lot except that a second detached accessory building no more than 100 square feet in area and no more than ten feet in height at the highest point may be located on a residential lot, provided the combined floor area of all accessory buildings does not exceed the maximum permitted area for accessory buildings allowed in the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(2)  Attached accessory buildings shall be subject to, and must conform with all regulations of this chapter applicable to main or principal buildings. 
(3)  Detached accessory buildings shall only be located in a rear yard. Further, in no instance shall such a building be nearer than three feet to any adjoining side lot line nor closer than six feet to any adjoining rear lot line. 
(4)  The highest point of a detached accessory building shall not exceed 20 feet. A detached accessory building greater than 18 feet in height at the highest point must maintain a minimum roof pitch of 6:12. Further, in no instance shall the highest point of a detached accessory building exceed the highest point of the main building. 
(5)  No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to any main or principal building. On lots that are less than 100 feet deep, the building inspector may allow this distance to be reduced if he determines that there is adequate fire separation. 
(6)  In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both street frontages wherever there are any principal buildings fronting on the streets in the same block or adjacent blocks. 
(7)  In the case of corner lots detached accessory buildings shall be set back from the lot line adjacent to the side street at least as far as the main building and in no case shall be closer than 17 feet to the sidewalk, or to the property line if no sidewalk exists. The building inspector may allow a detached accessory building to be set back a minimum of 12 feet from the lot line adjacent to the side street on lots with a lot width of 40 feet or less if there are no other locations for a detached accessory building on the lot, provided that the proposed detached accessory building will be in keeping with the general development pattern of the immediately surrounding neighborhood. 
(8)  When an accessory building is located in the rear yard area on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the required front yard setback of the lot to its rear, the accessory building shall be set back from the street side at least as far as the established front yard setback of the lot at the rear of the subject corner lot. 
(9)  Generally, attached accessory buildings shall be located completely to the rear of the principal building except as permitted on corner lots in section 90-25(8). However, on lots over 20,000 square feet where the principal building is set back a minimum of 50 feet from the front property line, an attached accessory building may project in front of the principal building, if the attached accessory building will meet the applicable front yard setback and, also, will be less than 50 percent of the width of the principal building. 
(10)  In any residential zone, no attached accessory building shall be erected closer to the side lot line than the permitted distance for the dwelling. 
(11)  Accessory buildings in single-family districts on lots that are less than 6,000 square feet in area shall not exceed 60 percent of the required rear yard or 600 square feet, whichever is less. Accessory buildings in two-family districts on lots that are less than 6,000 square feet in area shall not exceed 60 percent of the required rear yard or 800 square feet, whichever is less. Accessory buildings in single family and two-family districts on lots that are between 6,000 square feet and 11,999 square feet in area shall not exceed 65 percent of the required rear yard or 800 square feet, whichever is less. Accessory buildings in single family and two-family districts on lots that are 12,000 square feet, or more in area shall not exceed 40 percent of the required rear yard or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less. In no case shall an accessory building exceed the ground floor of the main structure. 
(12)  All accessory buildings shall be included in the determination of compliance with the maximum lot coverage standards as specified in section 90-351 for the zoning district in which they are located. 
(13)  All accessory buildings having a roof and walls shall be provided with a slab foundation and rat wall. Accessory buildings of more than 400 square feet must have a footing that complies with the International Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 1980, § 5.43; Ord. No. 350, § II, 11-1-04) 
Sec. 90-26. - Parking, storage of mobile homes, travel homes, boats, trucks, other items. 
    Mobile homes, travel homes, boats, trucks and other items shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  No mobile home may be stored or parked on any lot. 
(2)  No more than one travel home, and no more than one boat may be parked on any lot which is zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(3)  Travel homes and boats, where parked or stored, shall be located only in the rear yard, and in addition shall conform to the required yard space requirements for accessory buildings in the zoning district wherein located. 
(4)  On lots zoned for residential use, the maximum permitted lot coverage of all buildings, including travel home or boat storage space, shall not be exceeded. 
(5)  All travel homes and boats shall be locked or secured at all times when not in use so as to prevent access thereto by children or others. 
(6)  A suitable covering (e.g., tarpaulin) shall be placed over all boats and travel devices whenever they are not enclosed, in order to prevent vandalism by or injury to children. 
(7)  Commercial trucks and trailers shall not be parked or stored on residentially zoned property at any time, except as provided for under section 90-207(4). 
(8)  It shall be a prohibited use in all residentially zoned districts to park or store power driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, or any other miscellaneous scrap or salvageable material. 
(9)  It shall be a prohibited use in all zoned districts to park or store wrecked or junked vehicles. 
(Code 1980, § 5.44) 
Sec. 90-27. - Automobile service stations and public garages. 
    In order to regulate and control the problems of noise, odor, light, fumes, vibration, dust, danger of fire and explosion, and traffic congestion which result from the unrestricted and unregulated construction and operation of automobile service stations, and to regulate and control the adverse effects which these and other problems incidental to the automobile service station may exercise upon adjacent and surrounding areas, the following additional regulations and requirements are provided for automobile service stations located in any zone. All automobile service stations erected after the effective date of this Code shall comply with all requirements of this section. No automobile service station existing on the effective date of this Code shall be structurally altered so as to provide a lesser degree of conformity with the provisions of this section than existed on the effective date of this Code. 
(1)  An automobile service station shall be located on a lot having a frontage along the principal street of not less than 140 feet, and having a minimum area of not less than 14,000 square feet. 
(2)  An automobile service station building housing an office and/or facilities for servicing, greasing and/or washing motor vehicles shall be located not less than 40 feet from any street lot line, and not less than 25 feet from any side or rear lot line adjoining a residentially zoned district. 
(3)  All driveways providing ingress to or egress from an automobile service station shall be not more than 30 feet wide at the property line. No more than one curb opening shall be permitted for each 50 feet of frontage or major fraction thereof along any street. No driveway or curb opening shall be located nearer than 20 feet to any corner or exterior lot line, as measured along the property line. No driveway shall be located nearer than 30 feet, as measured along the property line, to any other driveway giving access to or from the same automobile service station. 
(4)  A raised curb six inches in height shall be erected along all street lot lines, except for driveway openings. 
(5)  The entire lot, excluding the area occupied by a building, shall be hardsurfaced with concrete or a plant-mixed bituminous material, or, if any part of the lot is not so surfaced, then that area shall be landscaped and separated from all surface areas by a low barrier or curb. 
(6)  All lubrication equipment, motor vehicle washing equipment, hydraulic hoists and pits shall be enclosed entirely within a building. All gasoline pumps shall be located not less than 15 feet from any lot line, and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles shall not be supplied with gasoline or serviced while parked upon or overhanging any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way. 
(7)  An automobile service station located on a lot having an area of 14,000 square feet shall include not more than eight gasoline pumps and two enclosed stalls for servicing, lubricating, greasing and/or one enclosed stall may be included with the provision of each additional 2,000 square feet of lot area. 
(8)  Where an automobile service station adjoins property located in any residential zone, a masonry wall five feet in height shall be erected and maintained between the station and required yard space, or if separated from the residential zone by an alley, then along the alley lot line. All masonry walls shall be protected by a fixed curb or barrier to prevent vehicles from contacting the wall. (See also section 90-39.) 
(9)  All exterior lighting, including illuminated signs, shall be erected and hooded or shielded so as to be deflected away from adjacent and neighboring property. 
(10)  No automobile service station or public garage shall be located nearer than 500 feet as measured from any point on the property line to any public or private school or playground. 
(11)  Outdoor storage or parking of vehicles other than private automobiles shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(12)  No fuel tank shall be filled at an automobile service station except through a hose connected to a pump of a type approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. 
(13)  No gasoline or inflammable liquid shall be kept or conveyed in open receptacles or in glass bottles or other breakable containers on the premises of an automobile service station, except in glass bottles of not more than eight-ounce capacity used for sample purposes, and shall not be used for cleaning purposes on such premises. No gasoline pump shall be installed in any building. 
(14)  All combustible waste and rubbish, including crankcase drainings, shall be kept in metal receptacles fitted with a tight cover until removed from the premises. No gasoline, oil, grease or inflammable liquid shall be allowed to flow into or be placed in the sewer system. Oil and grease shall not be allowed to accumulate on the floor. Sawdust shall not be kept in any automobile service station or place of storage therein, and sawdust or other combustible material shall not be used to absorb oil, grease or gasoline. 
(15)  All automobile service station proprietors and attendants upon being notified by the building inspector of the presence of gasoline or volatile liquids in sewers shall cooperate in ascertaining the reason therefor. There shall be constantly maintained in good working order at least one, 21/2 gallons fully charged, portable foam type fire extinguisher at each automobile service station. 
(Code 1980, § 5.45) 
Sec. 90-28. - Occupancy; garage apartments, basement apartments, mobile home dwellings, accessory buildings used for residential purposes. 
    No garage, basement, accessory building, temporary building or mobile home now existing or in the future erected or placed on a lot after the effective date of the zoning ordinance adopted February 20, 1967, shall be occupied or used for dwelling purposes. Expressly excepted from this regulation are living quarters for members of the family occupying the principal building located on the same lot and domestic servants employed by the family. 
(Code 1980, § 5.46) 
Sec. 90-29. - Building grades. 
(a)  Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to run away from the walls of the building. A sloping grade, beginning at the curb level as determined by the building inspector, shall be maintained and established from the center of the front lot line to the finished grade line at the front of the building. The rear and side yards shall be sloped to allow for the flow of surface water away from the building without creating a nuisance. However, this shall not prevent the grading of a yard space to provide sunken or terraced areas, provided proper means are constructed and maintained to prevent the runoff of surface water from creating a nuisance on the adjacent properties. 
(b)  When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the reference level shall be used in determining the grade around the new building, and the yard around the new building shall be graded in such a manner as to meet existing grades and not to permit runoff of surface water to flow onto the adjacent properties. 
(c)  Final grades shall be approved by the building inspector, who may require a certificate of grading and location of building within the city in accordance with the approved grading plan on file with the building department, which has been duly completed and certified by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor. 
(Code 1980, § 5.47) 
Sec. 90-30. - Buildings to be moved, placed on premises in city. 
    Any building or structure which has been wholly or partially erected on any premises shall not be moved to and be placed upon any premises in the city. 
(Code 1980, § 5.48) 
Sec. 90-31. - Excavations, holes. 
    The construction, maintenance or existence within the city of any unprotected, unbarricaded, open or dangerous excavations, holes, pits or wells, or of any excavations, holes or pits which constitute or are reasonably likely to constitute a danger or menace to public health, safety or welfare, is hereby prohibited; provided, however, this section shall not prevent any excavation under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter or the building code of the city, where such excavations are properly protected and warning signs posted in such manner as may be approved by the building department and, provided further, that this section shall not apply to streams, natural bodies of water or to ditches, streams, reservoirs or other major bodies of water created or existing by authority of the state, the county, the city or other governmental agency. 
(Code 1980, § 5.49) 
Sec. 90-32. - Excavation, removal and filling of land. 
    The use of land for the excavation, removal, filling or depositing of any type of earth material, topsoil, gravel, rock, garbage, rubbish, or other wastes or byproducts is not permitted in any zoning district except under a certificate from, and under the supervision of the building department in accordance with a topographic plan, approved by the city engineer, submitted by the feeholder owner of the property concerned. The topographic plan shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 50 feet equals one inch and shall show existing and proposed grades and topographic features and such other data as may from time to time be required by the city engineer. Such certificate may be issued in appropriate cases upon the filing with the application of a cash bond or surety bond by a surety company authorized to do business in the state running to the city in an amount as established by the city engineer which will be sufficient in amount to rehabilitate the property upon default of the operator of the excavating or filling operation, and to cover court costs and other reasonable expenses. This regulation does not apply to normal soil removal for basement or foundation work when a building permit has previously been duly issued by the building department. Costs of a permit to fill or excavate shall be established in accordance with section 90-71. 
(Code 1980, § 5.50) 
Sec. 90-33. - Restoring unsafe buildings. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the building inspector or the required compliance with his lawful order. 
(Code 1980, § 5.51) 
Sec. 90-34. - Construction begun prior to adoption of chapter. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction or designed use of any building upon which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this chapter, and upon which building actual construction has been diligently carried on, and provided further, that such building shall be completed within one year from the date of passage of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 5.52) 
Sec. 90-35. - Temporary use of premises as voting place. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
(Code 1980, § 5.53) 
Sec. 90-36. - Approval of plats. 
    No proposed plat of a new subdivision shall hereafter be approved by the city council unless the lots within such plat equal or exceed the minimum size and width requirements set forth in the various districts of this chapter, and unless such plat fully conforms with the statutes of the state and this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 5.54) 
Sec. 90-37. - Essential services. 
(a)  Essential services as defined in section 90-3 shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other provisions of this Code, it being the intention to exempt such essential services from the application of this chapter. 
(b)  The board of zoning appeals shall have the power to permit the erection and use of a building or an addition to an existing building, of a public service corporation or for public utility purposes, in any permitted district to a greater height or of larger area than the district requirement established in this chapter, and permit the location in any use district of a public utility building, structure or use, if the board shall find such use, height, area, building or structure reasonably necessary for the public convenience and service, provided such building, structure or use is designed, erected and landscaped to conform harmoniously with the general architecture and plan of such district. 
(Code 1980, § 5.55) 
Sec. 90-38. - Signs. 
    The erection, construction or alteration of all outdoor advertising structures, billboards, signs and other notices which advertise a business, commercial venture or name of a person or persons shall be approved by the building inspector as to compliance with all applicable city sign regulations and ordinances and all requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 5.56) 
Sec. 90-39. - Protective screening. 
    In order to provide adequate protective screening for residential areas adjacent or near nonresidential areas, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Adjacent residential property. Where a C-1, C-2, T, T-1, or T-2 use abuts directly upon a residentially zoned district, an ornamental masonry wall, approved by the building inspector, not less than four feet or more than six feet in height above the grade shall be constructed along the abutting property line; or a building constructed along the building setback line between the properties and the residential area, with an unpierced masonry wall, having a brick face or a facing of other material meeting the approval of the building inspector. 
When the building is constructed along the building setback line, the yard area required by article VII shall be landscaped and maintained by the owner of the C-1, C-2, T, T-1, or T-2 used properties. 
The planting plans for the required yard or greenbelt area shall be subject to the approval of the building inspector as to the suitability of planting materials and arrangements. The planting shall be so designed and arranged and shall be so maintained that within two years after it is planted it shall form a complete screening not less than four feet in height. 
Where vehicles or open air display exceed a height of five feet, the wall or screening shall be increased to a height of not to exceed 12 feet to completely screen the areas used for commercial purposes. 
Where a greenbelt is provided and it is not sufficiently and properly maintained, the city manager, after five days' notice sent by regular mail to the owner thereof as shown on the latest assessment rolls, may take whatever steps are necessary to suitably maintain a greenbelt area and charge all the costs plus a fee of $25.00 to the abutting business or commercial property owner responsible for the maintenance. 
(2)  Residential property across alley. Any C-1 or C-2 district on which a drive-in business, open air display, commercial parking lot or other uses are conducted shall be separated along its entire length from any adjacent residentially zoned district, located across a public alley of not less than 20 feet wide, by either a building housing a permitted use or by a solid ornamental masonry wall four to six feet in height above grade located, preferably, on the residential side of the public alley. Greater wall height may be required in accordance with subsection (1) above. 
(Code 1980, § 5.57; Ord. No. 408, § II, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-40. - Animals. 
    No livestock shall be kept or maintained in any zone, except that for each dwelling unit the occupant may keep for his personal use domestic pets so long as they are not kept or used for commercial or breeding purposes, subject to all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1980, § 5.58) 
Sec. 90-41. - Trash containers. 
    Outside trash containers shall be permitted in R-T, RO-1, C-1, C-2, T, T-1, and T-2 districts provided that they comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Adequate vehicular access shall be provided to such containers for truck pickup either via a public alley or vehicular access aisle which does not conflict with the use of off-street parking areas or entrances to or exits from principal buildings nearby. 
(2)  A solid ornamental screening wall or fence shall be provided around all sides of trash containers which shall be provided with a gate for access and be of such height as to completely screen the containers, the maximum height of which shall not exceed six feet. 
(3)  The trash containers, the screening wall or fence and the surrounding ground area shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance, free from rubbish, waste paper or other debris. This maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises on which the containers are placed. 
(4)  There shall be compliance with all city, county and state health ordinances and statutes. 
(Code 1980, § 5.59; Ord. No. 408, § III, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-42. - Drive-in facilities for banks, similar financial institutions. 
    Drive-in facilities for banks and similar financial institutions shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  A site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission in accordance with section 90-283. 
(2)  A site plan for the drive-in facility shall be submitted to the city planner, director of public safety and city engineer or traffic consultant for review and recommendation to the planning commission. The review will specifically address itself to the impact the drive-in facility would have on adjacent land uses and immediate traffic patterns. 
(3)  The drive-in facility shall, in the opinion of the planning commission, substantially conform to the architectural style and building material of the principal building to which it is attached. 
(4)  No more than two drive-in facilities in the principal building or an auxiliary building or more than three remote pneumatic tube installations shall be permitted for each bank or financial institution. 
(5)  Drive-in facilities shall be so planned and designed as to effectively separate patrons utilizing the drive-in facility and patrons seeking service inside the principal building. 
(6)  Each drive-in facility shall, in the opinion of the city engineer or traffic consultant, have adequate maneuvering space and a stacking space magazine for waiting cars at least 200 feet in length. 
(Code 1980, § 5.60; Ord. No. 353, § I, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 408, § IV, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-43. - Satellite dish antenna. 
    Placement of a satellite dish antenna in any zoning district in the city shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Permit required. Any satellite dish antenna which is to be constructed, placed or established in the open and not contained within a building in any zoning district shall be considered structures subject to the provisions and terms of this chapter and a permit for such installation shall be obtained from the building department prior to the installation of any satellite antenna. Antenna having a diameter of three feet or less and mounted on the roof of a building are exempted from the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Requirements for permit. 
a.  Applications for a permit to install a satellite dish antenna shall be submitted to the building department. The application shall include a site plan showing the proposed location of the installation; including building locations on the site and on any contiguous lot, a picture or sketch of all the elements of the antenna which would be exposed to view from adjacent properties and the dimensions of all buildings, size and exact location of the antenna, lot lines and setback lines as established in the zoning regulations. 
b.  There shall be compliance with the following design standards: 
1.  Maximum number per residential lot: one. 
2.  Maximum diameter of antenna dish: ten feet. 
3.  Maximum height: compliance with height limits of the zoning district wherein located, and as regulated under subsection (2)b.4 following. 
4.  Location: Location in only the rear yard space between rear lot line and rear building line of the principal building on the site. There shall also be compliance with required yard setbacks for the zoning district wherein located. Roof installation is permitted but only if antenna and supports are not visible from any part of public street right-of-way at a six-foot height of vision. 
5.  By placement of such antenna on the ground, area so occupied shall be considered in calculating compliance with lot coverage limits in this chapter. 
6.  Signs, as defined in chapter 58, attached to or painted on satellite dish antenna are prohibited. 
7.  The satellite dish antenna shall be designed so that both construction plans and final construction of the antenna meet the requirements of this section and the building code and afford safety to the public at time of high winds. Roof installation shall meet dead weight and wind loading and torque factors on roof structure strength. 
c.  The building department shall submit all applications for a permit to install a satellite dish antenna to the planning commission, together with recommendations concerning screening, landscaping, fencing or other matters having an impact on adjoining properties. The planning commission shall establish a date for a public hearing on the application and shall cause a notice of the hearing to be sent to the owners of property located within 300 feet of the lot or parcel upon which the installation is proposed pursuant to notice of hearing procedures at section 90-102. 
d.  The planning commission, after the public hearing where interested property owners shall have the opportunity to be heard, may grant the request, may deny the request (if it is found to be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood) or may grant the request subject to conditions. Such conditions may relate to the location, size, elevation, screening, landscaping, fencing or other matters having impact upon adjoining properties. A petitioner may appeal a determination of the planning commission to the board of zoning appeals. Upon approval of the application, the building department shall issue a permit for such installation. 
(3)  Prior nonconforming installation. A satellite dish antenna in existence on the effective date of Ordinance No. 230 shall be deemed to be nonconforming and shall not be moved or relocated without first securing a permit for installation as provided in this section; and the owner or person in possession of such satellite dish antenna shall either remove same or report same to building inspector not later than July 1, 1985. 
(Code 1980, § 5.61) 
Sec. 90-44. - Commercial antennas. 
(a)  Commercial radio, television, cable TV, cellular and other transmitting, receiving or relay antenna towers or poles housing one or more antennas are permitted in C-1, C-2, T, T-1, T-2 and P-1 districts and on property used or committed for other than residential or school purposes, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Application for a special use permit for placement of a commercial antenna in any district shall be made to the city planning commission in accordance with procedures established by the city administration. 
(c)  The city planning commission shall hold a public hearing with notice pursuant to section 4a of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.) as amended. 
(d)  In making its determination of whether or not to recommend approval of the application, the city planning commission shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the requested use is essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare. 
(2)  Whether the proposed antenna tower or pole is of such location, size and character as to be compatible with the orderly development of the zoning district in which it is situated, and shall not be detrimental to the orderly development, property values, environment or use of adjacent properties and/or zoning districts. 
(3)  In order to maximize the efficiency of the provision of telecommunication services, while also minimizing the impact of such facilities on the city, co-location, or the provision of more than one facility at a single location shall be encouraged by the city planning commission. In this regard the applicant may be required to provide information regarding the feasibility of co-location at proposed sites. Further the applicant may be required to provide a letter of intent to lease excess space on a facility and commit itself to: 
a.  Respond to any requests for information from another potential shared use applicant; 
b.  Negotiate in good faith and allow for leased shared use if an applicant demonstrates that it is technically practicable; and 
c.  Make no more than a reasonable charge for a shared use lease. 
(e)  If the city planning commission determines that the applicant has met the above criteria, it may recommend to the city council that the application be approved. 
(f)  The city council may grant the permit if it determines that the following standards have been met: 
(1)  A 40 percent fall zone shall be required for any antenna tower or pole. Fall zone percentage means the distance relative to the height of the tower or pole, as measured from surrounding grade to the uppermost element of the antenna, which the tower or pole must set back from all adjacent property lines. 
(2)  All transmission lines related to and serving any antenna tower or pole shall be placed underground. 
(3)  Antenna towers or poles may be on owned or leased premises, on top of or adjacent to existing buildings, steeples or other towers, subject to setback standards as measured from surrounding grade for freestanding towers and poles. 
(4)  Antenna towers, poles and related equipment shelter buildings shall be subject to site plan review as provided in this chapter. Equipment shelter buildings shall be constructed of face brick on all sides with gable roof. 
(5)  Equipment shelter buildings shall be considered as accessory buildings to the principal use (i.e., antenna tower or pole) and shall comply with building setback and height standards at section 90-25. 
(6)  Antenna towers shall not exceed 150 feet in height as measured from surrounding grade. 
(g)  A permit may include reasonable conditions for the protection of the health and safety of the public, including requiring periodic structural and safety inspections or reports. A permit may also require the hold to provide a cable television or telecommunications carrier with nondiscriminatory access to the antenna or pole if (1) there is sufficient capacity and (2) there is no safety or reliability reason to deny access under generally applicable engineering standards. Violation of any such reasonable condition shall be grounds for revocation of a permit by the city council after notice to the holder and an opportunity for hearing. 
(h)  On application for a permit, a fee shall be paid in accordance with a commercial antenna schedule established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(i)  Issuance, amendment or renewal of a permit shall not limit or impair the right of the city to acquire any property, right or interest by eminent domain proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 298, § 1, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 408, § V, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-45. - Play structures. 
(a)  No owner or tenant of any residential property within the city shall install or maintain play structures on any residential property owned or controlled by him or her within the city if such play structures do not conform to the regulations contained in this chapter. 
(b)  No play structure shall be installed or maintained within the residential areas of the city, which play structure exceeds 100 square feet of gross floor area as measured within the outside walls of the structure, or ten feet in height. Further, no play structure shall be installed or maintained within ten feet of any property line of the property where such equipment is installed or maintained. No play structure shall be installed or maintained in the front yard area of any residence. 
(c)  Any play structure having a roof and walls must also have a slab foundation and a rat wall. 
(Ord. No. 327, § III, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 350, § III, 11-1-04) 
Sec. 90-46. - Prohibition of marihuana establishments. 
(a)  Marihuana establishments, as authorized by and defined in the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (the "Act"), are prohibited in all zoning districts, and shall not be permitted as home occupations under section 90-3 of this chapter. 
(b)  No use that constitutes or purports to be a marihuana grower, marihuana safety compliance facility, marihuana processor, marihuana microbusiness, marihuana retailer, marihuana secure transporter or any other type of marihuana related business authorized by the Act, that was engaged in prior to the enactment of this section, shall be deemed to have been a legally established use under the provisions of the city zoning code; i.e., that use shall not be entitled to claim legal nonconforming status. 
(c)  This section does not superseded rights and obligations with respect to the transportation of marihuana by marihuana secure transporters through the city to the extent provided by the Act. 
(Ord. No. 436, § I, 12-17-18) 
Secs. 90-47-90-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 90-66. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the building department and the building inspector and his deputies. 
(Code 1980, § 5.181) 
Sec. 90-67. - Duties of building inspector. 
(a)  The building inspector shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the building inspector to approve any plans or issue a zoning compliance permit or a building permit for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them in conformity with this chapter. To this end, the building inspector shall require that every application for a zoning compliance permit for excavation, construction, moving or alteration or change in type of use or the type of occupancy be accompanied by written statements and plans or plats drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet, in duplicate, and showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the building inspector to ascertain whether the proposed work or use is in conformance with this chapter. 
(1)  The legal description, actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot. 
(2)  The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved, and of any buildings or other structures already on the lot. 
(3)  The existing and intended use of the lot and all such structures upon it, including in the residential areas the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
(4)  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(5)  Existing and proposed grades to an extent necessary to allow the building department and the city engineer to properly determine the results of the proposed work. 
(b)  If the proposed excavation, construction, moving or alteration, or use of land, as set forth in the application, are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector shall issue a zoning compliance permit. If any application for such permit is not approved, the building inspector shall state in writing on the application the cause for such disapproval. Issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The building inspector is, under no circumstances, permitted to grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, order or regulation, contained in this chapter to any person making application to excavate, construct, move, alter or use either buildings, structures or land within the city. 
(d)  The building inspector is, under no circumstances, permitted to make changes to this chapter nor to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out his duties as building inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 5.182) 
Sec. 90-68. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1)  Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence excavation for, or construction of any building structure, or moving of an existing building without first obtaining a building permit from the building inspector. No permit shall be issued for the construction, alteration or remodeling of any building or structure until an application has been submitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, showing that the construction proposed is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the building code. No plumbing, electrical, drainage or other permit shall be issued until the building inspector has determined that the plans and designated use indicate that the structure and premises, if constructed as planned and proposed, will conform to the provisions of this chapter. Alteration or repair of an existing building or structure shall include any changes in structural members, stairways, basic construction, type, kind or class of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress or any other changes affecting or regulated by the building code or this chapter, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid provisions. (See also definition of term "alteration" in section 90-3.) 
(2)  Permits for new use of land. A building permit shall also be obtained for the new use of land, whether presently vacant or a change in land use is proposed. 
(3)  Permits for new use of buildings or structures. A building permit shall also be obtained for any change in use of an existing building or structure to a different class or type. 
(4)  Special land use, site plan and planned unit development permits. Applications for permits for special land use approval, site plan review and planned unit developments shall be filed with the building inspector or with such other city official or body as the city manager may designate by administrative order. Approval of a special use or a site plan or a planned unit development shall not relieve an applicant of the need to obtain a building permit if a permit would otherwise be required by this section. Application and filing requirements for special land use approval are specified in section 90-75. 
(5)  Technical review. The building inspector or such other city official or body as the city manager shall designate, may require that community planners, engineers, architects or other experts review one or more submissions of an application, and report as to compliance or noncompliance with this ordinance and advise, if necessary, of procedures which will result in compliance. The applicant shall pay or reimburse the city for the costs of such review and advice in accordance with section 90-71. 
(Code 1980, § 5.183; Ord. No. 353, § II, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 90-69. - Certificates of occupancy. 
    It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any land, building or structure for which a building permit is required, and to use or permit to be used any building structure hereafter altered, extended, erected, repaired or moved, until the building inspector shall have issued a certificate of occupancy stating that the provisions of this chapter and the building code have been complied with. 
(1)  Certificate of validity. The certificate of occupancy as required for new construction of, or renovations to existing buildings and structures, in the building code, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this chapter. 
(2)  Certificates for existing nonresidential buildings. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing nonresidential building, structures or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if after inspection it is found that such buildings, structures or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
Where an existing nonresidential building has been occupied without the issuance of a proper certificate of occupancy, the building inspector shall, as soon as possible, issue a temporary certificate of occupancy which shall set forth all of the alterations and changes necessary to bring the structure or use to meet the requirements of this chapter and other provisions of this Code. Such temporary certificate of occupancy shall specify a date by which the building or use shall be made to conform to this chapter and other provisions of this Code. The date for bringing the structure or use into conformation with all the requirements of this Code shall not be more than six months later than the date of the temporary certificate of occupancy. 
Where the structure or use cannot be made to conform with all requirements of this Code, then the structure or use shall be vacated within the six-month period. This order may be subject to alteration or extension by the board of zoning appeals. 
(3)  Temporary certificates. Temporary certificates of occupancy may be issued for a part of a building or structure prior to the occupation of the entire building or structure, provided that such temporary certificate of occupancy shall not remain in force more than six months, nor more than five days after the building or structure is fully completed and ready for occupancy and, provided further, that such portions of the building or structure are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Records of certificates. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept in the office of the building inspector, and copies of such certificates of occupancy shall be furnished upon request to a person or persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(5)  Certificates for accessory buildings to dwelling. Accessory buildings or structures to dwellings shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy, but rather may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling, building or structure on the same lot when such accessory buildings or structures are completed at the same time as the principal use. 
(6)  Application for certificates. Certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or alteration of such building shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions and requirements of this chapter. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall be notified of such refusal and the cause thereof within ten days. 
(7)  Certificates for nonconforming buildings and uses. Reference is made to section 90-127. 
(Code 1980, § 5.184) 
Sec. 90-70. - Inspections; notice required; duties. 
    In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the building inspector will be notified as construction or alteration reaches the following stages: 
(1)  Prior to completion of the footings and prior to the erection of any foundations. 
(2)  Upon completion of all work authorized by the building permit. Until inspection is completed, no further work shall be accomplished. At each inspection, the building inspector shall insure that all work accomplished complies with the applicable provisions of this chapter. If he determines that any provision of this chapter has been violated, he shall immediately suspend the building permit, and such suspension shall remain in effect until correction of all violations shall have been approved by the building inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 5.185) 
Sec. 90-71. - Fees, recoverable costs; lien. 
    Fees for inspections; for review of applications for permits generally; for review of site plans; and applications for special land use approval or planned unit developments (PUDs); and for certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be collected by the city treasurer in advance of the review or issuance of the permits, certificates or approvals. The amount of the fees shall be established and revised by the city council from time to time, and shall include the cost of inspection and supervision for the enforcement of this chapter. All fees shall be paid to the general fund of the city. 
(1)  Every application for a special use permit or approval of a site plan or PUD shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application and filing fee established by the city council, plus a deposit for the estimated recoverable costs to be incurred by the city in processing the application, as shall be fixed from time to time by administrative order of the city manager. The owner of the property subject of the application and, if different, the applicant shall sign the application. Both shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the fee and the city's recoverable costs. By signing the application, the owner shall be deemed to have agreed to pay such fee and costs and to consent to the filing and foreclosure of a lien on the subject property to ensure collection of any unpaid fee and costs, plus the costs of collection. Any lien filed pursuant to this paragraph may be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 1-15 of this Code. 
(2)  "Recoverable costs" means the costs incurred by the city in processing an application for special use permit approval or approval of a site plan or PUD, and shall be deemed to consist at least of the following items of direct and indirect expenses: 
(a)  Legal publication (direct cost); 
(b)  Document preparation and review (hourly salary times a multiplier to be established from time to time by administrative order of the city manager at a level sufficient to recover 100 percent of the direct and indirect cost of such service); 
(c)  Copy reproduction (direct cost); 
(d)  Document recordation (direct cost); 
(e)  Professional and technical consultant services such as engineers, architects, and community planners (direct cost); 
(f)  Legal review, consultation, and advice (direct cost). 
(g)  Inspection fees (direct cost); 
(h)  Conduct of any planning commission hearings (direct cost), including recording secretarial services and court reporter, if required; 
(3)  At the request of an applicant for a special use permit, or for approval of a site plan or PUD, made before any engineering review, the building inspector will obtain a non-binding estimate of the city's consulting engineers' or community planners' fees. During the review and process, the applicant's deposit pursuant to paragraph (1) of this section will be adjusted upward or downward, as warranted, to accurately reflect the actual costs incurred by the city in processing the permit. The city shall give the applicant timely notice of any additions required to maintain a reasonable deposit balance. The city shall also notify an applicant when the processing costs surpass $5,000.00, and shall thereafter notify the applicant when such costs surpass each $500.00 increment greater than $5,000.00. The failure of the city to notify any applicant shall not relieve the applicant of the duty to pay all such costs and shall not prevent the city from assessing and collecting all its recoverable costs. 
(4)  No application for special use permit or for approval of a site plan or PUD shall be considered complete until all fees, deposits and costs due pursuant to this section have been paid. Every permit and approval issued pursuant to this Code, whether or not expressly so stated, shall be deemed to be conditioned on payment of fees and deposits as required by this section. The failure to fully pay any such amount when due shall be grounds for refusing to process an application and for denying or revoking any permit or approval sought or issued with respect to the land or development to which the unpaid fee or deposit relates. 
(5)  The provisions of this section 90-71 may be waived or modified by the city council with respect to any application filed by any public body or agency, or by any charitable or eleemosynary organization. 
(Code 1980, § 5.186; Ord. No. 353, § II, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 90-72. - Amendments. 
    The city council may amend, supplement or change the regulations of the district boundaries of this chapter as established in this chapter, subsequently pursuant to the authority and procedure set forth in Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended. Any applicant desiring to have any change made in this chapter shall file a petition for such change and shall pay a fee to the city treasurer at the time of filing. The amount of such fee shall be established by the city council from time to time and shall cover the publication and other administrative costs of the requested change. 
(Ord. No. 273, § 1(5.187), 12-16-91) 
Sec. 90-73. - Performance bonds. 
    Where in this chapter there is delegated to the city council or the board of zoning appeals the function of establishing certain physical site improvements as a contingency to securing a zoning amendment, special approval or variance, the building inspector shall, to ensure strict compliance with any regulation contained in this chapter or required as a condition of the issuance of a permit, require the permittee to furnish a performance or surety bond, or cash bond at the discretion of the board of zoning appeals, executed by a reputable surety company authorized to do business in the state in an amount determined by the city council or the board of zoning appeals to be reasonably necessary to insure compliance hereunder; provided, however, that in fixing the amount of such performance or surety bond, the city council or the board of zoning appeals shall take into account the size and scope of the proposed improvement project, current prevailing cost of rehabilitating the premises upon default of the operator, estimated expenses to compel operator to comply to court judgment, and such other factors and conditions as might be relevant in determining the sum reasonable in the light of all facts and circumstances surrounding the application. 
(Code 1980, § 5.188) 
Sec. 90-74. - Site plan review. 
(a)  Purpose. The site plan review process is established for the following purposes: 
(1)  A purpose of site plan review is to provide a framework for consultation and cooperation between land owners and developers and the city in order to accomplish the owner's and developer's land use objectives in harmony with surrounding existing and planned land. 
(2)  This section establishes procedures to ensure that development proposals are in compliance with this ordinance and other applicable city, county, state and federal regulations. 
(b)  Overview of procedures. 
(1)  Pre-site plan review provides the landowner or developer and city the opportunity to discuss a proposed development prior to planning commission review to determine the projects feasibility and potential problems. 
(2)  Planning commission review is required to determine the compliance of the site plan with the zoning ordinance and other applicable regulations, its adherence with sound site planning and design principles, and conformance with the criteria for approval of site plans outlined in elsewhere in this chapter. 
(3)  Variances may be required for site plan approval if the site plan does not conform to specific requirements of the zoning ordinance. The zoning board of appeals hears requests for variances under the provisions of article III. 
(4)  Administrative review is conducted by the city manager or his or her designated representative for site plans involving minor modifications. 
(c)  General rules. 
(1)  In each zoning district, except for single family residential uses in the single family residential districts, no building shall be erected, moved, relocated, converted or structurally altered and no change or addition of use, expansion or reduction of off-street parking, exterior modification, or filling, excavation or grading shall be undertaken until a site plan has been submitted for review and approval, as specified in this section. A structural alteration shall be defined as one that changes the location of the exterior walls or the area of the building. Filling, grading or excavation, which causes more than five cubic yards of earth material to be disturbed, shall require site plan approval. Condominium development in any district requires site plan approval. 
(2)  Planning commission review shall be required for all site plans that involve a request for a variance, a special land-use request, for proposals that involve discretionary decisions, for proposals that involve a nonconforming use, and for proposals which involve a site that is not in compliance with a previously-approved site plan. 
(d)  Pre-site plan review. Pre-site plan review shall be required for all site plans except those determined by the city manager or his designated representative to be generally minor in scope, complete and in compliance with zoning regulations, free of any impact on surrounding property, and not requiring a discretionary decision by the planning commission. In making these determinations, the director may seek the advice of the city planner or others. 
(e)  Changes exempt from review and permits. Site plan review and a building permit shall generally not be required for painting, re-shingling, window replacement that does not involve structural or dimensional changes, replacement of existing diseased or dead landscaping, pot hole repair, parking lot re-striping, installation of a dumpster screen in accordance with this section, or other ordinary maintenance activities. 
(f)  Criteria for approval of site plans The following criteria shall be used by the planning commission as a basis upon which site plans will be reviewed and approved. The planning commission shall adhere to sound planning and design principles, yet may allow for design flexibility in the administration of the following standards: 
(1)  All elements of the site shall be harmoniously and efficiently designed in relation to the topography, size, and type of land, and the character of the adjacent properties and the proposed use. The site will be developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding properties for uses permitted on such property. 
(2)  The site plan shall comply with the district requirements for minimum floor space, height of building, lot size, open space, density and all other requirements as set forth in the schedule of regulations unless otherwise provided in this section. 
(3)  The existing natural landscape shall be preserved in its natural state as much as possible, by minimizing tree and soil removal and by topographic modifications that result in maximum harmony with adjacent properties. 
(4)  There shall be reasonable visual and sound privacy. Fences, walls, barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and enhancement of property and the safety and privacy of occupants and users. 
(5)  All buildings or groups of buildings shall be so arranged as to permit convenient and direct emergency vehicle access. 
(6)  Where possible and practical, drainage design shall recognize existing natural drainage patterns. 
(7)  There shall be a pedestrian circulation system that is insulated as completely as possible from the vehicular circulation system. In order to insure public safety, pedestrian underpasses or overpasses may be required in the vicinity of schools, playgrounds, local shopping facilities, and other uses that generate considerable amounts of pedestrian movement. 
(8)  The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall respect the pattern of existing or planned streets or pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the vicinity of the site. Streets and drives that are a part of an existing or planned street system serving adjacent developments shall be of an appropriate width to the volume of traffic they are planned to carry and shall have a dedicated right-of-way equal to that specified in a city recognized source of reference. In order to insure public safety and promote efficient traffic flow and turning movements, the applicant may be required to limit street access points or construct a marginal access road. 
(9)  Appropriate measures shall be taken to insure that the removal of surface waters will not adversely affect adjoining properties or the capacity of the public or natural storm drainage system. Provisions shall be made for a feasible storm drainage system, the construction of storm-water facilities, and the prevention of erosion and dust. Surface water on all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it will not obstruct the flow of vehicles or pedestrian traffic and will not create nuisance ponding in paved areas. Final grades may be required to conform to existing and future grades of adjacent properties. Grading and drainage plans shall be subject to review by the city engineer. 
(10)  Off-street parking, loading and unloading areas and outside refuse storage areas, or other storage areas that face or are visible from adjacent homes, or from public thoroughfares, shall be screened by walls or landscaping of effective height. Dumpsters shall have gates. 
(11)  Exterior lighting shall be so arranged and limited in intensity and height or adequately shielded, so that it is deflected away from adjoining properties and so that it does not impede vision of drivers along adjacent streets. 
(12)  Adequate services and utilities including sanitary sewers, and improvements shall be available or provided, located and constructed with sufficient capacity and durability to properly serve the development. 
(13)  Any use permitted in any zoning district must also comply with all applicable federal, state, county and city health and pollution laws and regulations with respect to noise, smoke and particulate matter, vibration, noxious and odorous matter, glare and heat, fire and explosive hazards, gases, electromagnetic radiation and drifting and airborne matter, toxic and hazardous materials, erosion control, flood plains, and requirements of the state fire marshall. 
(14)  An objective of site plan review shall be to protect and to promote public health, safety and general welfare by requiring the screening, buffering and landscaping of sites and parking lots which will serve to reduce wind and air turbulence, heat and noise, and the glare of automobile lights; to preserve underground water reservoirs and return precipitation to the ground water strata; to act as a natural drainage system and solve storm water drainage problems; to reduce the level of carbon dioxide and return oxygen to the atmosphere; to prevent soil erosion; to provide shade; to conserve and stabilize property values; to relieve the stark character of parking lots; to conserve energy, provide visual and sound privacy and to otherwise facilitate the preservation and creation of a healthful, convenient, attractive and harmonious community. 
(15)  It is an objective of site plan review to improve the quality of existing developments as they are expanded, contracted, redeveloped or changed in keeping with sound site development standards of the city. 
(16)  A major objective shall be to retain, enhance and protect the quality, value and privacy of single-family land uses. 
(17)  All development phases shall be designed in logical sequence to insure that each phase will independently function in a safe, convenient and efficient manner without being dependent upon improvements of a subsequent development potential of lands. 
(18)  All sites shall be designed to comply with state and local barrier-free requirements and to reasonably accommodate the handicapped and elderly. 
(19)  All site features, including circulation, parking, building orientation, landscaping, lighting, utilities, common facilities and open space shall be coordinated with adjacent properties. 
(20)  All designs shall recognize and follow any design themes adopted by the city. 
(g)  Pre-site plan review committee. 
(1)  Membership. Membership on the pre-site plan review committee may vary depending on the nature of the proposal being reviewed at a particular committee meeting, but shall generally consist of the members listed below. The city manager shall determine the specific composition for each proposal. Attendance by each member or class of members is not required, and a majority of members need not be present for the Committee to conduct a review of a development proposal. 
i.  The city manager or his or her designated representative or successor. 
ii.  The city planner and city engineer. 
iii.  One to three representatives of the planning commission. 
iv.  Other city staff or consultants who the city manager or his designated representative determines are needed to properly evaluate a proposal. 
(2)  Meetings. Meetings of the pre-site plan review committee shall be scheduled and held as needed by the city manager or his designated representative. The city manager or his designated representative shall insure that all members of the committee are notified of meetings. 
(3)  Responsibilities. The committee may, in an advisory capacity: 
i.  Review and comment on site plan proposals; 
ii.  Provide guidance to land developers, particularly regarding zoning ordinance and other applicable regulations and planning and development objectives of the city; 
iii.  Review other plans or proposals referred to it by the planning commission or city manager or his designated representative; and 
iv.  Identify when a site plan or other development proposal is substantially complete. 
(4)  Effect of committee's review. The pre-site plan review committee's review shall not substitute for or be construed in any way as a decision or opinion of the planning commission regarding the site plan. 
(5)  Placement of site plan on planning commission's agenda. The city manager or his representative shall prepare the agenda for the planning commission's regular meeting. The manager may seek assistance from the planning commission chairperson and the city planner. 
(h)  Application for review by pre-site plan review committee. 
(1)  An applicant shall submit the following prior to review by the pre-site plan review committee: 
i.  A completed application form. 
ii.  The fee established by the city council. 
iii.  Any required deposit for costs. 
iv.  Not less than nine individually folded copies of the site plan and supporting documentation, prepared in sufficient detail to indicate the layout of the proposed development and to enable determination of compliance with the zoning ordinance. 
An applicant may submit plans and documentation that are less than complete for the purposes of obtaining guidance during the plan preparation process. The pre-site plan review committee can only comment on the plans that have been submitted, so the committee's comments are subject to revision when completed plans and documentation are submitted. 
(2)  The city manager or his representative shall review the plans and supporting documentation to determine if sufficient information has been provided to determine the nature and scope of the proposal and compliance with zoning regulations. 
(3)  If the city manager or his representative determines the materials are sufficient, he shall schedule a meeting of the pre-site plan review committee as soon as is convenient. 
(i)  Planning commission review. Where a site plan requires review by the planning commission, the applicant shall comply with the following procedures and requirements: 
(j)  Application for planning commission review. 
(1)  An applicant shall submit the following in order to be entitled to review by the planning commission: 
i.  Not less than 16 individual folded copies of the detailed site plan and supporting documentation. 
ii.  A completed application form (if one has not been submitted previously for pre-site plan review). 
iii.  Any required deposit for costs. 
iv.  The fee established by the city council. 
(2)  The city manager or his representative shall examine the site plan to determine that it contains all the required information as specified in this section. 
(3)  If the site plan has been placed on the planning commission agenda as a result of pre-site plan review committee action, then the city manager or his representative shall determine if the plan submitted for planning commission review is substantially similar to the plan reviewed by the committee. If the plan is not substantially similar, or is incomplete, the city manager or his representative shall return it to the applicant with a written explanation of the plan's deficiencies. 
(k)  Required information. All plans must conform to the detailed requirements for site plans in the specific zoning district prior to acceptance for planning commission review. 
(l)  Distribution of plans for review. The city manager or his representative shall review the site plans and shall secure comments from the departments of public works and public safety, the city engineer and the city planner, and shall forward the site plans along with written comments to the planning commission for review. The planning commission shall review the plans and may solicit further comments from the review authorities. The planning commission has the authority to take action on a site plan at the first meeting that it appears on the planning commission agenda. 
(m)  Planning commission action. The planning commission shall review the site plan proposal together with any public hearing findings and any requested reports and recommendations from the city staff, city planner, city engineer and other reviewing agencies. The planning commission shall then approve, approve with conditions, deny, or table the site plan as follows: 
(1)  Approval. Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance with the subsection 90-74(f) standards and requirements of this section, including the criteria in subsection 90-74(f), and other applicable ordinances and laws, the planning commission shall approve the plan. 
(2)  Approval subject to conditions. Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance except for certain modifications or other conditions, the planning commission may approve the site plan subject to conditions. The modifications or other conditions for approval shall be identified and the applicant shall be given the opportunity to correct the site plan. The conditions may include the need to obtain variances or obtain approvals from other agencies. If a site plan has been approved subject to conditions, the applicant shall be required to re-submit a revised site plan with a revision date, and with all conditions addressed on the plan. 
(3)  Denial. Upon determination that a site plan does not comply with the standards and regulations set forth in this section or elsewhere in this section, or requires extensive revision in order to comply with said standards and regulations, the planning commission shall deny the site plan. 
(4)  Tabling. Upon determination that a site plan is not ready for approval or denial, or upon request by the applicant, the planning commission may table consideration of a site plan until a later meeting. 
(n)  Record of action. Each action taken with reference to site plan review and approval shall be recorded in minutes of the planning commission. A building permit shall not be issued until five copies of the final site plan which addresses all conditions of approval and includes a revision date and notation of all variances, has been signed by the planning commission chairperson or the city manager or his representative. 
(o)  Administrative review for site plans involving minor modifications. If a site plan involves only minor modifications, the plan is subject to administrative review instead of planning commission review. All minor modifications must be completed in accordance with all other applicable regulations and specifications. 
(p)  Minor modifications. For the purpose of this section, "minor modifications" means proposed alterations to an existing building or site that will not result in expansion or substantially affect the character or intensity of the use, vehicular or pedestrian traffic circulation, drainage patterns, the demand for public services or the vulnerability to hazards. Examples of minor modifications include: 
(1)  Additions to the landscape plan or landscape materials, relocation of plant material because of road right-of-way restrictions or to avoid conflict with utilities, substitution of comparable species instead of the approved species, and installation of street trees consistent with the species and location standards specified by the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(2)  Relocation of a trash receptacle or installation of screening around an existing dumpster, provided that the dumpster is in compliance with the required setbacks. 
(3)  Alterations to the internal parking layout of an off-street lot or installation of paving and curbing improvements on legally existing lots, provided that: 
i.  The total number of spaces shall not be reduced or increased. 
ii.  New parking lots shall not be created without complete site plan review. 
iii.  Nonconforming lots shall be brought into compliance with current curbing, drainage, landscaping and brick paver installation. 
iv.  Paving and drainage projects shall require review by the city engineer. 
v.  The paving shall not extend beyond the minimum necessary to comply with parking dimension requirements. 
(4)  Construction of sidewalks, whether on private property or within the road right-of-way. 
(5)  Installation of street and parking lot lighting, provided that lighting fixtures installed in the road right-of-way shall comply with the design and installation standards specified by the city. 
(6)  Minor alterations to an existing building facade to add or change awnings, cornices, windows, doors, color, or similar architectural features. 
(7)  Minor building alterations designed to improve accessibility to a building consistent with the state barrier-free design regulations and/or the Americans with Disabilities Act or to otherwise enhance public safety and convenience. 
(8)  Installation of concrete curbing and drainage adjacent to public streets. 
(9)  Burial of existing above ground utility lines. 
(q)  Classification as a minor modifications plan. The city manager or his designated representative shall determine if the proposed modifications on a site plan are minor in accordance with these guidelines. If the city manager or his designated representative does not deem the modifications minor, then the plan shall be submitted to the pre-site plan review committee. If the pre-site plan review committee concurs with the manager's determination that the modifications are not minor, then normal review involving the planning commission shall be required. However, the pre-site plan review committee may deem that the modifications are minor in which case the plan shall be resubmitted to the city manager or his designated representative for review and action as minor modifications. 
(r)  Application requirements and procedures for administrative review. If the proposed modifications are determined to be minor, then a sketch plan and application shall be submitted. The sketch plan must include the following minimum information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Title block. 
(3)  Scale. 
(4)  Northpoint. 
(5)  Dates of submission and revisions (month, date, year). 
(6)  The seal of one of the following professionals registered in the State of Michigan: Architect, civil engineer, landscape architect, or professional community planner. The architectural plan of all buildings shall be prepared by and bear the seal of an architect. 
(7)  Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the site. 
(8)  Detailed plans and specifications describing the proposed improvements on the site. 
Other information required for site plan review is contained in the site plan application available at city offices. The city manager or his representative may request any additional information deemed necessary to determine compliance with the city ordinances. The manager or representative may waive any application requirement, which he determines is not needed to determine compliance. 
(s)  City manager-Review. The city manager or his representative shall review each site plan that has been submitted for administrative review, together with any reports and recommendations submitted by review agencies and professionals. The city manager or his designated representative may request that review agencies or professionals, including the departments of public works and public safety, the city engineer and the city planner review the application or only the proposed alterations, rather than review the entire building or site layout. 
(t)  City manager-Action. The city manager or his representative shall make a final determination based on the requirements and standards in this section. The city manager or his representative is authorized to grant approval, approval with revisions, or denial of the site plan, in accordance with the standards set forth herein. The city manager or his representative shall notify the planning commission in writing within 30 days after making a decision. If the plan is approved, the applicant shall submit five copies of the approved plan, which shall address all conditions of approval, include a revision date, and identify all variances. 
(u)  Construction pursuant to an approved plan. When an applicant receives site plan approval, the applicant shall develop the site in complete conformity with the approved site plan. Complete construction plans, including a landscape plan prepared by a registered landscape architect for all landscaped areas, shall be submitted for review by the city manager or his representative. Upon finding by the city manager or his representative that the construction plans meet the requirements of site plan approval and other applicable ordinances of the city, he shall authorize issuance of a building permit. 
(v)  Period of validity, extension of site plan approval. Site plan approval shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. If no building permit is obtained within one year of site plan approval or if no work is commenced within six months after the issuance of a building permit, the site plan approval shall expire and be of no force or effect, unless extended by the planning commission. 
(w)  Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the building inspector if construction is not substantially consistent with the approved site plan. The building inspector may approve minor variations. If the planning commission originally approved the site plan, the building inspector shall report such minor variations to the planning commission within 30 days after issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 354, § I, 5-9-05; Ord. No. 357, § II, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 90-75. - Special land use review. 
(a)  Purpose. The types of uses requiring special approval shall be deemed to be permitted uses in their respective districts, subject, as to each specific use, to satisfaction of the procedures, requirements and standards set forth in this section. Each specific use for which a permit is sought shall be considered as an individual case and shall conform to the detailed application of the following procedures and standards in a manner appropriate to the particular circumstances of such use. Each use as listed in any district requiring special approval for a permit shall be of such location, size and character that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in which it is proposed and will not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent districts and uses. 
(b)  Public hearings. Upon receiving a substantially complete application for special approval, the building inspector shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission. Notification of the public hearing shall be published and given as provided by law. 
On the initiative of the applicant, or on determination by the planning commission, the applicant shall post a public hearing notice on the roadway(s) adjacent to the property, which is subject to the special land use request. The notice shall be a readable sign, shall be posted not less than ten days before the scheduled hearing date, and shall be removed within ten days after completion of the hearing. The face of the sign shall be at least 36 inches in height and 48 inches in length. The sign shall contain the zoning action requested, date, time, and place where the hearing shall be held, a statement that further information can be obtained from the applicant and the building inspector of the City of Grosse Pointe, and the phone number of the city and applicant. The sign shall have a white background with 1.5 inch high black block letters, except that the words "PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE" shall be three-inch high red capital block letters. The sign shall meet any other requirements of the city for temporary signs. 
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING HEARING FOR: Fill in current Zoning and action requested) HEARING LOCATION: Grosse Pointe City Council Chambers DATE: (Fill in hearing date) TIME: (Fill in hearing time) PUBLIC ATTENDANCE AND COMMENTS INVITED For details call: (Fill in applicant's name and phone number) City of Grosse Pointe 
(313) 885-5800  
(c)  Procedure of notice. One notice of a public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; said notice shall be posted in the city offices, and shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of the property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed, within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet. The notice shall be given not less than five and not more than 15 days before the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. The notice shall: 
(1)  Describe the nature of the special land use request. 
(2)  Indicate the property which is the subject of the special land use request. 
(3)  State when and where the special land use request will be considered. 
(4)  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(d)  Planning commission hearing, review and approval. Special land use approval shall not be granted until a public hearing has been held by the planning commission, in accordance with the procedures and notice described herein above. The planning commission shall deny, approve, or approve with conditions, requests for special land use approval. The decision on a special land use shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to the special land use under consideration. The decision shall specify the basis for the decision, and any conditions imposed. 
(e)  Site plan review and information required. For all special approval uses, a site plan shall be required and submitted in accordance with section 90-74 of this article. Approval shall run with the land and shall not be issued for specified periods, unless the use is temporary or time-related in nature. 
(f)  Performance guarantees. Performance guarantees may be required by the planning commission to insure compliance with special approval conditions. 
(g)  Standards. In addition to any specific site plan standards set forth elsewhere in this section which the city shall apply to the use, the following standards shall serve the planning commission as the basis for decisions involving special land uses and other discretionary decisions contained in this section. Each proposed use or activity shall: 
(1)  In location, size and intensity of the principal and accessory operations, be compatible with adjacent uses and zoning of land. 
(2)  Be consistent with and promote the intent and purpose of this section. 
(3)  Be compatible with the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy. 
(4)  Be consistent with existing and future capabilities of municipal services and facilities affected by the proposed use. 
(5)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare as well as the social and economic well being of those who will use the land use or activity, residents, businesses and landowners immediately adjacent, and the city as the whole. 
(6)  Promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. 
(7)  Not be in conflict with convenient, safe and normal neighborhood vehicular and pedestrian traffic routes, flows, intersections, and general character and intensity of neighborhood development. 
(8)  Be of such a design and impact that the use, its location and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of walls, fences and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site shall not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof. 
(9)  In the nature, location, size and site layout and function of the use, be a harmonious part of the district in which it is situated taking into account, among other things, prevailing shopping habits, convenience of access by prospective patrons, the physical and economic relationship of one type of use to another and characteristic groupings of uses of said district. 
(10)  In the location, size, intensity of the use and site layout, be such that operations will not be objectionable to nearby dwellings or uses, by reason of noise, fumes, glare, flash of lights, or other similar externalities. 
(h)  Record. All conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the planning commission and the applicant. The city shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. 
(Ord. No. 354, § I, 5-9-05) 
Sec. 90-76. - Planned unit development review and approval procedures. 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of this section is to provide, through the use of the planned unit development (PUD) concept, an added degree of flexibility in the density, placement, bulk and interrelation of buildings and uses on major redevelopment sites within the city, and the implementation of new design concepts so as to encourage a more efficient, innovative, and compatible use of land through the use of a unified, flexible, planning approach, while at the same time maintaining adequate amounts of light, air, access and required open space and facilitating the economical provisions of public services and utilities. To further this intent, the respective district regulations may be modified by the city, as part of a PUD, after recommendation of the city planning commission and as provided for in this section. The general boundaries of any PUD approved by the city shall be indicated on the zoning map as information for zoning purposes. 
(b)  Qualifying conditions. The following provisions shall apply to all planned unit developments: 
(1)  The planned unit development site shall be under the control of one owner or group of owners and shall be capable of being planned and developed as one integral unit. 
(2)  A PUD may only be approved in conjunction with either an approved overall PUD concept plan or an approved PUD site plan. 
(3)  An approved PUD shall function as an overlay district, with the underlying zoning district remaining in effect. 
(4)  A PUD may be approved in any district within the area bounded by Waterloo Avenue, Cadieux Road, St. Paul Avenue and the rear property line of the homes on the westerly side of Neff Road. 
(5)  The uses contained in a PUD with multiple uses must be complementary in nature. 
(6)  A PUD shall achieve a higher quality development than is otherwise possible with the regulations for the underlying zoning district. 
(7)  A PUD shall result in a recognizable and substantial benefit to ultimate users of the project and to the community. The benefit to the community must be proportionate to any modifications of the development standards being requested. Such benefits may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Provide a complementary variety of housing types and/or a complementary mixed-use plan of residential and commercial uses that is harmonious with adjacent development. 
b.  Provide a civic facility or other public improvement. 
c.  Alleviate traffic congestion. 
d.  Provide for the appropriate redevelopment or re-use of sites. 
e.  A PUD shall further certain other public objectives as identified in the city master plan. 
(c)  PUD review process. The following procedure shall be followed when applying for planned unit development (PUD) approval: 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application for approval of a PUD, the applicant shall confer in a pre-application conference with the city manager or his/her designee, building inspector, and the city planner to obtain information and guidance regarding land development regulations, the city's master plan and the application process. At the pre-application conference the applicant shall submit a concept plan for the proposed PUD, containing both maps and a written statement. The plan should include enough of the surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the PUD to adjoining uses, both existing and proposed. The maps, which are a part of the preliminary sketch plan, may be in general schematic form but must contain enough information to obtain feedback from city officials and consultants regarding the suitability of utilizing a PUD approach to the development of the subject property. 
(2)  Planning commission review of PUD. Upon completion of the pre-application conference stage, a PUD application meeting the submission requirements of section 90-76 and incorporating the preliminary site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review. 
(3)  Planning commission hearing. A public hearing on the PUD shall be held by the planning commission, pursuant to the notification requirements outlined in section 90-77 herein. 
(4)  Planning commission decision. Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall make a decision on the PUD application. Based upon the qualifying conditions, and, to the extent they are applicable to review of the PUD application, the standards in project design standards, the planning commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions the proposed PUD. The commission shall prepare a report stating its conclusions on the request for a PUD, the basis for its decision, the decision, and any conditions relating to an affirmative decision. 
(5)  PUD site plan review. A complete site plan shall be submitted for review pursuant to section 90-302, site plan review, for each phase(s) of an approved PUD plan. 
(d)  PUD application submittal requirements. 
(1)  PUD application. The PUD application shall include all the following information, unless the city determines that some of the required information is not reasonably necessary for the consideration of the planned unit development: 
a.  Application form and required fee. 
b.  A narrative indicating the period of time within which it is contemplated the project will be completed. 
c.  A concept plan showing a layout of the uses and structures in the PUD and their locations. 
d.  Written verification of access easements or agreements, if applicable. 
e.  A note on each plan sheet stating, "Not to be used as construction drawings." 
f.  Information pursuant to subsection 90-76(b), and any additional graphics or written materials reasonably requested by the planning commission to assist in determining the impacts of the proposed site plan, including, but not limited to, economic or market studies; impact on public primary and secondary schools and utilities; traffic impacts; impact on significant natural, historical, and architectural features and drainage; impact on the general area and adjacent property; and estimated construction cost. 
g.  Additional information that may be reasonably necessary for a full and complete consideration of the proposed PUD and its impact on the immediately surrounding area and the city as a whole. 
h.  Draft PUD agreement between the city and the applicant, which shall include, among other items, a provision as to such revisions to the site plan that may be approved administratively by the planning commission, any specific terms and conditions relating to an approved PUD including specific terms relating to the administration of the project. 
i.  The application for PUD review shall include a community impact statement. The statement shall be derived from a study of the city based on information from the following community elements: 
i.  Planning/zoning issues, including conformance with the master plan, zoning ordinance, and other applicable city codes and policies; 
ii.  Land development issues, including topographic, soil conditions, and site safety concerns; 
iii.  Private utilities consumption, including electrical needs and natural gas utilization; 
iv.  Noise level conditions; 
v.  Air quality conditions; 
vi.  Environmental design and historic values including visual quality and historic resources; 
vii.  Community facilities and services, including refuse collection, sanitary and storm sewer, and water supply; 
viii.  Public safety needs, including police, fire and emergency medical services; 
ix.  Open space landscaping and recreation, including cultural elements; 
x.  Traffic impact study. 
(e)  Site plan review. For the total PUD or for each portion of the PUD, if staging of development is planned, a site plan review is required in accordance with section 90-302 prior to the issuance of building permits. The site plan submittal shall include the following: 
(1)  Building footprints, setbacks, floor plans and elevations showing height and materials for all proposed structures; typical layout for condominium projects. 
(2)  Proposed locations of utility services (with sizes), noting which will remain and which are to be removed, including storm drainage, sanitary/storm sewer, fire hydrants, and any public or private easements. 
(3)  General description and location of storm water management system including pre- and post-site development run-off calculations used for determination of storm water management. 
(4)  A landscape plan indicating proposed plant locations with common plant name, number, and size at installation. Berms, retaining walls or fences shall be shown with elevations from the surrounding average grade. 
(5)  A site grading plan with existing and proposed topography at a minimum of two-foot contour intervals and with topography extending a minimum of 50 feet beyond the site in all directions and further where required to indicate storm water run-off into an approved drain or detention/retention pond. 
(6)  Locations of significant natural, historical, and architectural features, including landmark trees, that will be designated "to remain," and/or location and acreage of areas "not to be disturbed;" noting protection method such as a fence, barrier or police line installed prior to site preparation. 
(7)  Location and method of screening for all refuse storage stations/receptacles. 
(8)  Location and dimensions of parking spaces, loading/unloading areas and calculations to meet the parking requirements of this ordinance. 
(9)  Details of exterior lighting including locations, height, and method of shielding. 
(10)  Locations of all signs including: 
a.  Location, type, height and method of lighting for identification signs; 
b.  Location and type of any directional or regulatory/traffic control signs, with details for any sign not conforming to the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(11)  Details of site circulation and access design, including: 
a.  Indication of street pavement widths and pavement type; 
b.  Street horizontal and vertical dimensions, including curve radii; 
c.  Dimensions of access points, including deceleration or passing lanes, distance from adjacent driveways or intersection streets, including those across a street; 
d.  Identification of width and material to be used for pedestrian paths. 
(12)  A note on each plan sheet stating, "Not to be used as construction drawings." 
(f)  Regulatory flexibility. The planning commission, either during the PUD review stage, or after site plan review, may increase, decrease, waive, or otherwise modify the current standards within the zoning ordinance including, but not limited to; use, density, intensity, setbacks, building heights, parking, design standards, project design standards in subsection 90-76(g), project design standards, and landscape standards provided the modification is found to improve the quality of development above and beyond what could be developed under the underlying zoning, or results in a higher level of public benefit, and to achieve the purpose of this section. 
(g)  Project design standards. The following standards are intended as guidelines and may be modified by the city under the provisions of subsection 90-76(f), regulatory flexibility. 
(1)  The planning commission shall use any applicable standards for approval contained in city ordinances related to land use and any adopted development guidelines, as well as the standards contained in Public Act 110 of 2006, (MCL 125.3101 et seq.) as amended, which are not inconsistent with the approved PUD agreement, in reviewing and approving site plan. 
(2)  Density. The planning commission, considering the requirements of the affected districts, shall determine appropriate density, lot sizes and developmental provisions. The city may permit proportionate increases in density or intensity for projects that demonstrate a higher level of public benefit to the city. 
(3)  Open spaces and recreation areas. At least 20 percent of the total PUD acreage shall be in open space and recreation area, including plazas. This provision may be modified by the planning commission provided the overall project will further a certain public objective such as, public improvements, public gathering places, or other items included in subsection 90-76(b) or in the city master plan, which could not be otherwise achieved under conventional zoning, or if provided for in the PUD agreement. 
(4)  The uses proposed will have a beneficial effect, in terms of public health, safety, welfare, or convenience, on present and future potential surrounding land uses. The uses proposed will not adversely affect the public utility and circulation system, surrounding properties, or the environment. The public benefit shall be one that could not be achieved under the regulations of the underlying district alone, or that of any other single zoning district. 
(5)  The number and dimensions of off-street parking spaces shall be sufficient to meet the minimum required by the zoning ordinance. However, if the parking needs of the development can be met by a modification of such requirements, or where warranted by overlapping or shared parking arrangements, or where parking spaces can simultaneously accommodate more than one use; the planning commission may adjust the required number of parking spaces. The planning commission may also allow portions of required parking spaces to be banked as open space until determined either by the owner or the city that such spaces should be improved. 
(6)  All streets and parking areas within the planned unit development shall meet the minimum construction and other requirements of city ordinances, unless modified by the planning commission. 
(7)  Existing landscaping shall be preserved and/or improved or additional landscaping be provided to ensure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered, where buffering is appropriate, from one another and from surrounding public and private property. The quality and/or quantity of landscaping materials shall exceed the minimums otherwise required by the zoning ordinance. 
(8)  Public water and sewer facilities shall be available or shall be provided for by the developer as part of the site development. 
(9)  Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well-defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and into the site shall be provided. 
(10)  Drives, streets and other elements within the property shall be designed to promote safe and efficient traffic operations within the site and at its access points. 
(11)  The uses proposed shall be consistent with the city's master plan or the approved PUD concept plan. 
(h)  Effect of planning commission approval. 
(1)  When approved, the PUD with all conditions imposed, if any, shall constitute the land use authorization for the property, and all improvement and use shall be in conformity with such authorization. Notice of adoption of the final PUD plan and conditions shall be recorded by the applicant at the Wayne County Register of Deeds. 
(2)  The planning commission may cause to have legal documents, covenants or contracts prepared which are not inconsistent with the PUD agreement, and may require the execution thereof by the applicant, which documents involve the city and are required as a result of the conditions contained in the PUD agreement or the site plan approvals in a PUD area. 
(3)  The building inspector shall review all building permits for an approved PUD project for compliance with the terms of the approved PUD agreement, and any other applicable codes and ordinances. 
(4)  The building inspector or their designee shall inspect the development at each stage to ensure reasonable compliance with the conditions of the approved PUD or approved site plans, as applicable. 
(i)  Revocation or changes. The planning commission, upon a breach of the PUD agreement may revoke a PUD or any portion thereof. Revocation of any portion of a PUD reverts that portion of the PUD to the status and requirements of the original zoned district, without benefit of the PUD provisions. Proposed changes in a PUD, other than those considered a part of site plan review for all or a portion of the PUD, must be processed in the same manner as the original PUD procedure. 
(j)  (1)  The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official charged with enforcement of this section. 
(2)  Any violation or deviation from an approved site plan or written conditions, except as authorized in this ordinance, shall be considered a violation of section 90-76 and treated as a violation of this ordinance. Furthermore, any such deviation may be grounds to invalidate the PUD designation. 
(3)  The cost of enforcing or remediating violations of the approved PUD site plan or agreement shall be borne by the developer or its successor in ownership. 
(Ord. No. 347, § I, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 357, § II, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 359, § I, 3-20-06; Ord. No. 370, §§ III, IV, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-77. - Notice requirements. 
    Where public notice is required by the zoning code before a public hearing or discretionary decision, a notice shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Grosse Pointe not less than 15 days prior to the public hearing scheduled. 
(2)  Notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of all property for which approval is being considered, to the owners of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four such units or spatial areas, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. This notice shall be sent not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing scheduled. 
(3)  The notice shall contain: 
a.  A description of the nature of the request to be heard. 
b.  A description of the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. 
c.  A statement of when and where the request will be considered. 
d.  An indication of when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
If the nature of the proposed amendment is to rezone an individual property or several adjacent properties, then notice shall be provided as described as above, with the exception that, if 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, then notice is not required for the owners of those properties or the owners or occupants of property within 300 feet, nor is it necessary for the notice to list the addresses of the individual properties. 
(Ord. No. 370, § V, 10-16-06) 
Secs. 90-78-90-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 

Sec. 90-96. - Creation. 
    It is hereby established that the city council shall act as a zoning board of appeals, which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Section 601 of P.A. 110 of 2006 (MCL 125.3601 et seq.), as amended, in such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
(Code 1980, § 5.191; Ord. No. 370, § VI, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-97. - Officers. 
    The chairman and vice-chairman of the zoning board of appeals shall be elected annually by the members of the board. 
(Code 1980, § 5.192; Ord. No. 370, § VII, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-98. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman or, in his absence, the vice-chairman, and at such times as the board may determine. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member on each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its findings, proceedings at hearings and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be a public record. The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, and compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
(Code 1980, § 5.193; Ord. No. 370, § VIII, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-99. - Appeals; review. 
(a)  An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of appeals by any person or by any officer, board, department, or bureau affected by a decision of the building inspector. Such appeals shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the zoning board of appeals by general rule by filing with the building inspector and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the building inspector certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of record. 
(c)  The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. 
(Code 1980, § 5.194; Ord. No. 370, § IX, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-100. - Fees for appeals. 
    A fee shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time the notice of appeal is filed, unless payment of fees is waived by the general rule adopted by the zoning board of appeals. The amount of the fee shall be established by the city council from time to time and shall cover the administrative cost of processing the application. 
(Ord. No. 273 § 1(5.195), 12-16-91; Ord. No. 370, § X, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-101. - Powers concerning variances. 
    The zoning board of appeals, as created in the article, is a body of limited powers. The board shall have the following specific powers and duties: 
(1)  Purpose. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error of law in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement of this chapter, and to hear and decide appeals where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
(2)  Authorization. In hearing and deciding appeals, the board shall have the authority to grant such variances from this chapter as may be in harmony with its general purpose and intent, so that the function of this chapter be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done, including the following: 
a.  Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. Interpret the provisions of the chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the zoning map fixing the use districts, accompanying and made part of this chapter, where street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid. In cases of any question as to the locations of any boundary line between zoning districts, the board shall interpret the zoning map. 
b.  Height, yard spaces and area requirements. Permit such modification of the height, yard space and area requirements as may be necessary to secure appropriate improvement of a lot which is of such shape or so located with relation to surrounding development or physical characteristics that it cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without such modification. 
c.  Additions to buildings. Permit modifications of zoning requirements for additions or enlargements to existing buildings provided that all requirements for the particular use in the zoning district where such use is first permitted cannot be met without extreme physical hardship owing to the shape of the lot, adjacent land uses or topography. 
d.  Off-street parking and loading requirements. Permit the modification of the off-street automobile parking space or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modifications will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements. 
e.  Off-street parking lot development requirements. Permit a variation, modification or exception in the required regulations, specified in section 90-159, if, after investigation by the board, it is found that such variation, modification or exception is necessary because of peculiar existing conditions and that such variation, modification or exception will not be inconsistent with the purpose and spirit of this chapter. 
f.  Greenbelt and wall screening requirements. Permit the modification or waiver of greenbelt and/or wall screening requirements as specified in section 90-39 where such screening would serve no good purpose, where other methods of screening would be suitable, or where it is necessary to provide entrances to and exits from required off-street parking and loading areas. 
g.  Temporary buildings. Permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed six months. 
h.  Public utilities. Permit the erection and use of a building, or an addition to an existing building, of a public service corporation to be used for public utility purposes, in any permitted district to a greater height or of larger area than the district requirements established in this chapter, and permit the location in any use district of a public utility building structure, or use, provided the board of zoning appeals shall find such use, height, area, building or structure reasonably necessary for the public convenience and service, and provided further, that such building, structure, or use is designed, erected and landscaped to conform harmoniously with the general architecture and plan of such a district. 
i.  Community garage. Permit a community garage in any district or a public garage in an R-T district provided that any such garage shall not be located within 50 feet of any street lot line, and provided further that no such use shall be permitted unless there are on file with the board the written consents of the owners of 80 percent by frontage of all lots lying within 150 feet of any point on the lot for which such use is proposed. Any lot which lies more than 50 percent by area within such radius shall be deemed to lie wholly within for the purpose of computing the frontage specified in this section. In computing the percentage of consents required under this provision, the frontage of lots already used for public garages shall be counted as consenting. 
j.  Performance bonds. Establish performance bonds to insure compliance of any requirement which may be deemed necessary for approving any variance. (See section 90-73.) 
k.  Generally. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in complying with the provisions of this chapter, the board of zoning appeals may in specific cases adjust any such condition in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and general welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. 
(3)  Application. The concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building inspector in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is authorized by this chapter to render a decision. The power or authority to alter or change this chapter or the zoning map is reserved to the city council in the manner provided by law. 
(4)  Standards. In consideration of all appeals and all proposed variations to this chapter, the board shall, before making any variations from the chapter in a specific case, first determine that the proposed variations involve exceptional circumstances not found in other areas of the same district; will not in any other respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city; and in addition meets the following general standards: 
a.  The proposed use will be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the surrounding neighborhood. 
b.  The proposed use will be of a nature that will make vehicular and pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is normal for the district involved, taking into consideration vehicular turning movements in relation to routes of traffic flow, proximity and relationship to intersections, adequacy of sight distances, location and access of off-street parking and provisions for pedestrian traffic, with particular attention to minimizing child vehicle contacts in residential districts. 
c.  The location, size, intensity, site layout and periods of operation of any such proposed use will be designed to eliminate any possible nuisance emanating therefrom which might be noxious to the occupants of any other nearby permitted uses, whether by reason of dust, noise, fumes, vibration, smoke or lights. 
d.  The location and height of buildings or structures and the location, nature and height of walls and fences will be such that the proposed use will not interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their value. 
(5)  Conditions . The zoning board of appeals, in acting on any appeal in connection with a request or waiver may attach any conditions to it's approval which it finds necessary to accomplish the reasonable application of the foregoing standards. 
In exercising the above powers, the board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building inspector from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Code 1980, § 5.196; Ord. No. 370, §§ XI, XII, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-102. - Notice of hearing. 
    The zoning board of appeals in conducting any public hearing shall comply with the noticing requirements outlined in section 90-77 herein. 
(Code 1980, § 5.197; Ord. No. 370, § XIII, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-103. - Approval period. 
    No order of the zoning board of appeals permitting the erection or alteration of a building shall be valid for a period longer than three months unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that where the use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, the order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for the erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and the erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the permit within 12 months after the order of the board. The board may, upon application in writing stating the reasons therefor, extend either the three-month or 12-month period for an additional three-month period. 
(Code 1980, § 5.198; Ord. No. 370, § XIV, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-104. - Appeal to the circuit court. 
    The decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be final. However, a person having an interest affected by the decision may appeal to the Circuit Court within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 370, § XV, 10-16-06) 
Secs. 90-105-90-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONCONFORMING USES AND BUILDINGS 

Sec. 90-126. - Legality. 
    Any lawful use of the land or buildings existing at the date of passage of this chapter or amendment thereto and located in a district in which it would not be permitted as a new use under the regulations of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nonconforming use and any building which does not meet the provisions of this chapter, as to setbacks, height, off-street parking, or other requirement is hereby declared to be a nonconforming building, and such uses and buildings shall not be considered in violation of this chapter; provided, however, that all nonconforming uses and buildings shall be subject to, and the owner shall comply with, the regulations in this article. 
(Code 1980, § 5.71) 
Sec. 90-127. - Certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Should the city become aware of a nonconforming use, the owner of the nonconforming use shall be notified by the building inspector of the provisions of this section, and that his property constitutes a nonconforming use. Within 30 days after receipt of the notice, the owner shall apply for and be issued a certificate of occupancy for the nonconforming use. The application of such certificate shall designate the location, nature and extent of the nonconforming use and such other details as may be necessary for the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If the owner of a nonconforming use fails to apply for a certificate of occupancy within 30 days after receipt of the foregoing notice, the use ceases to be nonconforming and is hereby declared to be in violation of this chapter. The building inspector and the city attorney shall take appropriate action to enjoin such violation. 
(b)  If the building inspector shall find, upon reviewing the application for a certificate of occupancy, that the existing use is illegal or in violation of any other ordinance or law or if he finds that the building for which the certificate is requested has been constructed or altered for the existing use or any other use without full compliance with the building code or the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of construction or alteration, he shall not issue the certificate of occupancy but shall declare such use to be in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector for a nonconforming use shall state that the use may be continued indefinitely, or for those uses listed in section 90-128, that the use must be discontinued. 
(Code 1980, § 5.72) 
Sec. 90-128. - Nonconforming use of land; continuation of use. 
    The nonconforming use of land, where no building or structure is involved, which exists when this chapter becomes effective or amendments thereto, may be continued provided that: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either on the same or adjoining property. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use. 
(3)  If such nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof is discontinued or changed for a period of more than 30 days, any future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Any sign, billboard, commercial advertising structure or similar object which lawfully existed and was maintained at the time this chapter became effective may be continued although such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that all such nonconforming signs, billboards, commercial outdoor advertising structures and objects, and their supporting members located in R-1A, R-1B, R-2 and R-T districts shall be completely removed from the premises within five years of the passage of this chapter or amendments applicable to the property in question. 
(Code 1980, § 5.73) 
Sec. 90-129. - Change of nonconforming use. 
    A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or greater restriction provided no structural changes are made in the building and provided that the board of zoning appeals shall determine that the proposed new use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the particular neighborhood than the existing nonconforming use. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, or to a use permitted in a district of greater restriction, it shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use. For the purpose of this chapter, the E-R district shall be considered the most restrictive district, followed in turn by the R-1A, R-1B, R-T, RO-1, C-1, and C-2 districts. 
(Code 1980, § 5.74; Ord. No. 358, § III, 12-12-05) 
Sec. 90-130. - Extension prohibited for nonconforming use in building. 
    A nonconforming use may not be expanded or extended throughout other portions of a building. If such nonconforming use or portion thereof is discontinued or changed to a conforming use, any future use of the building or portion thereof shall be in conformity to the regulations of the district in which the building is located. 
(Code 1980, § 5.75) 
Sec. 90-131. - Moving of nonconforming building. 
    No building in which a nonconforming use exists may be moved to any other part of a parcel of land upon which same was located at the time of the adoption of this chapter. No nonconforming building shall be moved for any reason unless it shall then conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located after the moving. 
(Code 1980, § 5.76) 
Sec. 90-132. - Nonconforming structures; alterations. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity except to make it comply with the requirements of health and safety laws or ordinances, provided that the cost of such work shall not exceed 50 percent of the state equalized valuation of such structure at the time such work is done. All alterations made to a nonconforming structure shall be in compliance with all requirements of this chapter and other codes and ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the requirements in subsection (1), an alteration or enlargement would not be considered nonconforming solely by following an existing side yard setback of the existing structure, if it does not extend further than 50 percent of the depth of the existing structure into the required rear yard of the lot, but not to exceed 35 feet. 
(Code 1980, § 5.77; Ord. No. 302, § 1, 6-16-97) 
Sec. 90-133. - Restoration. 
    Any nonconforming use or nonconforming building which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or by public enemy to the extent of 50 percent or more of its state equalized valuation, exclusive of the foundation at the time such damage occurred, shall thereafter be made to conform with the provisions of this chapter. Where such destruction or damage has occurred, removal of the nonconforming use of a building also shall eliminate the nonconforming use status of the land on which the building is located. If such damage is less than 50 percent of its state equalized valuation before the damage occurred, exclusive of the foundation, such structure may be restored to the same nonconforming use or nonconforming building as existed before such damage, provided that such restoration shall be subject to the approval of the board of zoning appeals. The restoration shall be commenced within one year of the date of the partial destruction and shall be diligently carried on to completion. 
(Code 1980, § 5.78) 
Sec. 90-134. - Discontinuance or abandonment of nonconforming use of building. 
    Any nonconforming use of a building which has become vacant or remains unoccupied owing to abandonment or discontinuance for a period of six months shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this chapter. See also section 90-128 for nonconforming use of land. 
(Code 1980, § 5.79) 
Sec. 90-135. - Record of nonconforming uses. 
    The building inspector shall prepare a record of all known nonconforming uses of buildings and of land, including tents and mobile homes, existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment thereto. Such record shall contain the names and addresses of the owners of record of such nonconforming use and of any occupant, other than the owner, the legal description of the land, and the nature and extent of use. Such list shall be available at all times in the office of the building inspector. 
(Code 1980, § 5.80) 
Sec. 90-136. - Removal. 
    The city council may acquire by purchase, condemnation or otherwise private property as does not conform in use or structure to the regulations and restrictions of the various districts defined in this chapter; and cause the removal of such use or structure. The city council may, in its discretion, provide that the cost and expenses of such acquisitions and of the removal of the nonconformity, less the probable resale price, be assessed to a benefit district. In assessing such costs and expenses, the city council shall also establish the assessment district, the properties to be assessed and a basis or formula for the distribution of the amount to be assessed against the benefitted properties. 
(Code 1980, § 5.81) 
Secs. 90-137-90-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-156. - Parking requirements. 
    In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings erected, altered or extended after the effective date of this chapter shall be provided as prescribed below. For required parking areas or loading zone areas, a plan shall be submitted showing the areas set aside for parking or loading zone with a legal description of such lands and a statement signed by the legal owners of the property that such lands are irrevocably set aside and maintained for the parking of automobiles or a loading zone for the purpose required, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this chapter. Such plan shall be on a form to be furnished by the building inspector which shall include a certificate by the building inspector that the parking areas or loading zone requirements of this chapter have been met as of this date. The form shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office during the life of the required use. 
(1)  [Intentionally omitted.] 
(2)  Fractional requirements. When units or measurements determining number of required parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
(3)  Loading space limitations. Loading space as required in section 90-158 shall not be construed as supplying off-street parking space. 
(4)  Location of parking space for one- and two-family dwellings. An off-street parking facility required for a one- or two-family dwelling shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building it is intended to serve, and shall consist of an enclosed garage not less than of 20 feet wide by 20 feet deep for a one-family, or of not less than 40 feet wide by 20 feet deep for a two-family dwelling. The garage shall be served by a paved driveway from the garage to the access street or alley. Garages required for one- and two-family dwellings shall be subject to the provisions for accessory buildings contained in section 90-25, and the specific district requirements for accessory buildings in the district in which the dwelling is located. Carports are specifically prohibited. 
(5)  Location of parking space for other land uses. The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or within 300 feet of the permitted use requiring such off-street parking, such distance to be measured along lines of public access to the property between the nearest point of the parking facility and the building to be served. 
Where required parking facilities are provided on land other than the site on which the land or building served by such facilities is located, such other land shall be and remain in the same ownership and control as the site occupied by the building or use to which the parking facilities are accessory. No site plan or use or occupancy permit may be approved where that relationship does not exist unless the city council, after reviewing the plans and conducting an open hearing, finds that (a) common ownership and possession or extended occupancy of both sites are reasonably certain to continue, (b) the off-site parking facilities will be maintained by or with the principal site and (c) issuance of a use or occupancy permit is in the public interest. 
(6)  Usable floor area. For the purpose of this section, usable floor area in the case of offices, merchandizing and service types of uses, and private nonprofit theatrical facilities shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be used by customers, patrons, clients, patients, owners, tenants and theatrical participants, less 20 percent thereof. 
(7)  Seating capacity or seats. As used in this article for parking requirements, shall mean that each 20 inches of seating facilities shall be counted as one seat, except that where specifications and plans filed with the building department specify a certain seating capacity for a particular building, such specified seating capacity shall be used as the basis for required parking space. 
(8)  Bed. Wherever the term "bed" is referred to, it shall mean such beds as are occupied by the patients or guests of the hospital or building in question, provided however, that bassinets and incubators shall not be counted as beds. 
(9)  Similar uses and requirements. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities for a use which is so mentioned, and to which the use is similar, shall apply. 
(10)  Existing off-street parking at effective date of chapter. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this chapter which serves an existing building or use shall not be reduced in size less than that required under the terms of this chapter. 
(11)  Collective provisions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses, provided such facilities collectively shall not be less than the sum requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with the table under section 90-157. 
(12)  General use conditions. Except when land is used as storage space in connection with the business of a repair or service garage, the time limits for parking in off-street parking areas shall prevail as specified under section 90-157(13); it being the purpose and intention of the foregoing that the requirements of maintaining vehicle storage or parking space is to provide for the public safety in keeping parked cars off the streets, but such requirement is not designed to or intended to provide, and it shall be unlawful to permit the storage or parking on such open land of wrecked or junked cars, trailers, mobile homes, travel homes, boats, boat trailers, or for creating a junkyard or nuisance in such area. 
(13)  Restriction of parking on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any private property or use the private property for vehicle storage, or use any portion of any private property as parking space, without the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of the property. 
(14)  Village parking district. The parking exempt area shown on the city's zoning map as of January 1, 2006, may be referred to as the village parking district or the parking district. To the extent of and subject to the conditions in this subsection (14), all nonresidential buildings and nonresidential uses existing within the parking district existing on November 1, 2009 shall be exempt from the requirements of this division: Provided that any then-existing accessory off-street parking or loading facilities located on a site shall not be reduced (or, if already than less, shall not be further reduced) below the requirements of this subsection (14). 
a.  Any structure or use which is established, expanded or changed after November 1, 2009 may be required to provide off-street parking facilities as specified in this section. When there is a change in use to a use that has the same or lesser parking impact as determined by the village parking model than the previous use, no additional parking shall be required. When there is a change to a use that has a greater parking impact than the previous use, the difference in required spaces between the previous and proposed use shall be provided, except as specified in this section. When an existing structure or use is enlarged or expanded, minimum off-street parking shall be provided for the area of such enlargement or expansion. 
b.  Any applicant for a building, use or occupancy permit in the parking district who is required to provide off-street parking because of a proposed change of use, expansion of an existing use or new construction may request a waiver of all or a portion of the village parking district parking requirement by making a payment to the city's special parking fund in accordance with then applicable fee schedule established by the city council. 
c.  Such payment shall be a condition of approval and shall be made to the city prior to the issuance of any permit. No refund of such payment shall be made for any reason including when there is a change or decrease in a use requiring less parking. 
d.  Funds derived from such payment shall be deposited by the city in a special parking fund which shall be used and expended exclusively for any or all of the following: Maintaining, planning, designing, acquiring, and/or developing off-street parking facilities that will service the businesses within the parking exempt area. 
e.  An application for waiver and permission to make such payment-in-lieu of providing off-street parking shall be made as part of an application to the building inspector or his designee for approval of the underlying permit. The decision as to whether, to what extent and on what additional conditions to grant the waiver shall be made by the city council after considering the current inventory and future needs for parking in or near the parking district, as well as the benefit to the private owners and to the public from parking which might subsequently be provided by the city. 
f.  Minimum parking requirements may be satisfied where buildings are located within a special assessment district or other district established by the city council for purposes of providing off-street parking facilities, provided that such parking facilities are completed and accepted by the city council. 
(Code 1980, § 5.91; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 350, § IV, 11-1-04; Ord. No. 389, §§ I, II, 10-19-09; Ord. No. 407, §§ IV, V, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-157. - Table of off-street parking requirements. 
    The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings as specified in section 90-156 shall be determined in accordance with the following table, and the space so required shall be stated in the application for a building permit, shall be irrevocably reserved for such use and/or shall comply with the initial part of this section, and shall be provided in the city. 
Use Required number of parking spaces Per each unit of measure 
as follows (1) Auditoriums or assembly halls 1 3 seats based upon maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly therein, plus 1 space for every 2 employees. (2) Automobile service stations 1 1 parking space for each employee plus 1 parking space for the owner and/or management, plus 2 parking spaces for each grease rack or stall for servicing automobiles or wash rack. (3) Banks, business or professional offices of lawyers, architects, engineers, or similar or allied professions 1 200 square feet of usable floor area. (4) Beauty parlor or barbershops 2 Each barbershop and/or beauty shop operator, plus 1 space for each employee. (5) Churches 1 3 seats, based on maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly therein. (6) Elderly housing, assisted 0.75 Per dwelling unit. (7) Elderly housing, independent 1.25 Per dwelling unit. (8) Establishments for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food or refreshments 1 100 square feet of usable floor area, plus 1 space for each 4 employees. (9) Exhibition halls, skating rinks, lodge halls and assembly halls without fixed seats 1 4 people within the maximum occupancy load as established by the fire marshal. (10) Furniture and appliance, household equipment repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician or similar trade; clothing and shoe repair, laundry, hardware stores, wholesale stores, and machinery sales 1 800 square feet of usable floor area, plus 1 space for the owner or management plus 1 space for each 2 employees. (11) Hospitals 1 Each patient bed, plus 1 additional space for every 5 employees employed during that 8-hour shift in which the greatest number of employees are on duty, plus 1 space for each 10 doctors on the hospital staff. (12) Hotels Rooms 1.26 Guest room. Restaurant/lounge 1 100 square feet of floor space. Conference center 3 100 square feet of floor space. (13) Libraries and museums 1 200 square feet of floor space. (14) Mortuary establishments, funeral homes 1 75 square feet of floor space in the slumber rooms, parlors and individual funeral service rooms. (15) Private clubs, dormitories used for sleeping and/or temporary living quarters 1 2 beds, plus 2 additional spaces for owner, management and/or service employees. (16) Professional offices of doctors and dentists 1 100 square feet of usable floor area. (17) Residential single- or two-family dwelling 2 Each dwelling unit. (18) Residential terrace dwelling or apartment house 2 or fewer bedrooms 1.5 Each dwelling unit. 3 or more bedrooms 2.0 Each dwelling unit. (19) Retail store, except as otherwise specified herein 1 150 square feet of usable floor space. (20) Sanitariums, convents, homes for the aged, convalescent homes, nursing homes and children's homes 1 3 beds. (21) Schools 1 2 teachers, employees, and administrators in addition to the requirements of the auditorium or assembly therein. (22) Service garages 1 2 of the maximum number of employees on duty at any one time, plus 1 parking space for each of the maximum number of salesmen on duty at any one time, plus 1 parking space each for the owners and/or management on duty at any one time, plus 2 parking spaces for each stall. (23) Private and nonprofit theatrical facilities 1 200 square feet of usable floor space.  
(Code 1980, § 5.92; Ord. No. 407, § VI, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-158. - Joint use. 
    Parking spaces already provided to meet off-street parking requirements for auditoriums and other places of public assembly, stores and office buildings lying within 500 feet of a church as measured along lines of public access, and that are not normally used between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sundays, and are made available for other parking may be used to meet not more than 75 percent of the off-street parking requirements of a church. 
(Code 1980, § 5.93) 
Sec. 90-159. - Off-street parking development regulations. 
    All lands and areas now or hereafter used for the parking of more than three vehicles shall be developed and constructed in accordance with the following general requirements; provided that lands now in use for parking purposes shall be improved to meet the following requirements. (See illustration, Table I, at the end of this section.) 
(1)  The construction of any parking lot shall be in accordance with the requirements of the building code, The Dimensions of Parking-Fourth Addition, or subsequent editions, and the provisions of this chapter and such construction shall be completed and approved by the building inspector and the city engineer before actual use of the property as a parking lot. Plans for the development of any parking lot must be submitted in triplicate to the building inspector, prepared at scale indicating existing and proposed grades, drainage, water mains and sewers, surfacing and base materials to be used and the general layout of the proposed parking lot. The plans are to be prepared in a presentable form by person or persons competent in such work. No land shall be used for parking purposes until approved by the building inspector; provided whenever the lot does not meet the specifications set forth in this chapter, the building inspector shall give notice to the property owner to repair the same within a specified time, and if such repairs are not made in accordance with such notice, he shall obtain the necessary court warrants and enforce the chapter and shall order the lot closed forthwith; and such land or lot shall not be used for parking until repairs are made and approved by the building inspector. 
(2)  All such parking lots, parking spaces, driveways, approaches or aprons shall be hard-surfaced with a pavement having an asphalt or concrete binder which shall be equivalent to or better than a double seal bituminous penetration surfacing on a gravel base, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate within or upon such area. No surface water from such parking area shall be permitted to drain into adjoining private property or across a public sidewalk. All plans must be approved by the city engineer. Such parking lots shall be continuously maintained with a hard, smooth, dustproof surface at all times. In the case of residential driveways and driveway approaches, alternative materials may be utilized. If materials other than asphalt or concrete binder pavement (e.g., brick pavers) are utilized for a driveway, or driveway approach, within a street right-of-way, those materials shall meet city engineering strength specifications for at least a six-inch depth concrete surface. If the city requires access to any utilities in the right-of-way area, the city will not be obligated to incur the costs of the approach surface replacement other than the normal costs for asphalt or concrete binder pavement (Refer also to section 66-39). 
(3)  Adequate lighting facilities shall be provided and so arranged as to reflect light away from any adjacent residential areas. When the parking lot is closed at night so that no vehicles may enter or leave, then no lighting need be maintained. No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means and electrical devices and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code and this Code. Illumination shall be white and indirect with the lighting source concealed. 
(4)  Side yards shall be maintained for a space of not less than ten feet between the side lot lines of adjoining residential lots and the parking area. The depth of the front yard or setback line from the street as established for houses in any block in any given residential area shall be continued and made applicable to parking space in such residential area and it shall be unlawful to use the space between such setback line and the sidewalk for the parking of motor vehicles; provided, however, that the barrier specified in subsection (5) of this section shall be located on the setback line as required in this section. 
(5)  Whenever the parking area adjoins residential property and/or a residential street or alley, an ornamental, uniformly colored solid masonry or brick wall not less than four feet or more than six feet in height shall be erected and maintained between the required yard space and the area to be used for parking. Dense shrubbery in lieu of a wall may be permitted by the building inspector. Location of the wall or dense shrubbery facing a residential street shall be determined with due regard to side yard and building setback requirements adjoining the commercial district as may be required in the particular residential zoning district. Bumper guards of a type described in subsection (6) of this section shall be provided to prevent vehicles striking the wall or shrubbery. 
(6)  In all cases where such parking lots abut public sidewalks, continuous concrete curbing, at least six inches high, shall be placed so that a motor vehicle cannot be driven or parked with any part thereof extending within two feet of a public sidewalk. In all cases where necessary for the protection of the public and the adjoining properties, streets and sidewalks, curbs as described above shall be installed. 
(7)  Adequate means of ingress and egress shall be provided and shown on plan submitted which must meet the approval of the director of public safety and the city engineer. No entrance or exit from any parking lot shall be nearer than 20 feet to any residentially zoned district. 
(8)  Where street setback lines are provided by ordinance or established through the adoption of a major street plan, such setback lines shall be maintained. 
(9)  All land between the boundaries of the parking lot and the barriers referred to in this section, as well as the surface of the parking area, shall be kept free from tall grass, weeds, rubbish, refuse and debris, and shall be landscaped to conform with the neighborhood. 
(10)  No repairs or service to vehicles and no display of vehicles for purpose of sale shall be carried on or permitted on the premises. 
(11)  No building or structures shall be hereafter built or permitted, except necessary buildings for attendants of not more than 50 square feet each in area and not more than 15 feet in height. 
(12)  Any sign erected or maintained on the premises shall comply with the requirements of chapter 58 of this Code, and any other city sign regulations. 
(13)  It shall be unlawful to park or store motor vehicles for continuous periods of more than 48 hours. 
(14)  A parking lot may not be used for the storage or parking of trailers, mobile homes, travel trailers, boats, boat trailers, junked or wrecked vehicles of any type, or used as a storage area for industrial equipment or material, or used as a dump for refuse of any description. 
(Code 1980, § 5.94; Ord. No. 300, § 2, 1-13-97; Ord. No. 357, § III, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 407, § VII, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-160. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for storage, goods display, department store, market, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets and alleys. Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be an area 12 feet by 50 feet, with a 15-foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule: 
Gross floor area 
(in square feet) Loading and unloading spaces required 
in terms of square feet of usable floor area       0-  2,000 none   2,000-  5,000 1 space   5,000- 20,000 1 space plus 1 space for each 5,000 square feet in excess of 5,000 square feet  20,000-100,000 4 spaces plus 1 space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,000 square feet 100,000-500,000 5 spaces plus 1 space for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 100,000 square feet Over 500,000 15 spaces plus 1 space for each 80,000 square feet in excess of 500,000 square feet  
No loading space shall be located closer than 50 feet from any residentially zoned district unless located within a completely enclosed building or enclosed on all sides facing a residential zoning district by a solid masonry wall or ornamental fence of a type approved by the board of zoning appeals not less than six feet in height. 
(Code 1980, § 5.95) 
Secs. 90-161-90-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING BETWEEN FRONT LOT LINE AND FRONT SETBACK LINE IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 90-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fence means any artificial partition, structure or gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure. 
    Front lot line means the same as defined under section 90-3. 
    Front setback line means the line formed at the outer surface of a building where the building wall meets the surface ground level, not to be construed to be the minimum required front yard setback established under section 90-351, and such line shall extend the width of such lot parallel to the front lot line. 
    Landscaping means the treatment of an area of land or part of site design with plant materials, earth, rocks and water for the purpose of enhancing property, screening or separating land uses, or lessening noise levels. 
    Motor vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street which is self-propelled by an internal combustion engine or electric motor or designed or intended to be drawn by a self-propelled vehicle. 
    Parking area means that portion of a lot located between the front lot line and the front setback line, and including semicircular drive but excluding driveway which is used for motor vehicle parking. 
(Code 1980, § 5.280) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-172. - General prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in possession of any motor vehicle or for any owner or tenant of any property zoned R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-T or RO-1 district located within the city to allow or to permit the parking of any motor vehicle in the area between the front lot line and the front setback line of any such lot except upon the parking area. 
(Code 1980, § 5.281) 
Sec. 90-173. - Parking area requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or occupant of any residential lot to allow the use of a parking area for motor vehicles which, including the driveway and garage apron, exceeds 30 percent in coverage of the area formed between the front lot line and the front setback line, as defined, for any lot. Such permitted parking area may consist of the driveway and garage apron, a semicircular drive and/or a separate parking area having up to a maximum of 360 square feet for a two-vehicle parking area, and 180 square feet for a one-vehicle parking area. Semicircular driveways shall not be permitted on lots of less than 60 feet in width, nor may more than two parking spaces be permitted separate from the driveway or garage apron. The semicircular driveways shall not exceed ten feet in width. The above allowance does not exempt a property owner from compliance with requirements of section 90-156(4) specifying an enclosed two-car garage on site for each dwelling unit in a R-1A, R-1B or R-2 district. 
(b)  Only private passenger automobiles with current year license plates and registration may be parked in any parking area, and further, such automobile may not be parked longer than 12 hours in any 24-hour period. The term "private passenger automobile" specifically does not include "junk automobiles or motor vehicles" as defined at section 90-6, and vans, motor homes, travel homes, campers, trailers, boats, boat trailers, trucks, including pickup trucks and other types of commercial, industrial, recreational or agricultural vehicles, trailers or buses. (See section 90-26.) 
(Code 1980, § 5.282) 
Sec. 90-174. - Site plan review and permit. 
    No parking area shall be constructed pursuant to this division until permit has been issued by building inspector. All parking areas and driveways proposed to be located between the front lot line and the front setback line shall be reviewed by the building inspector to permit a determination that all requirements of this Code are complied with and that environmental concerns are considered regarding surrounding properties. More specifically, all parking areas and driveways located in the area between the front lot line and the front setback line shall comply with general intent of the following submittal requirements and design and development standards: 
(1)  Application requirements. Drawings and plans shall be submitted at a scale sufficient to illustrate clearly the design for which approval is sought. Such plans shall show the following information: 
a.  Existing conditions, topography where appropriate, trees and other natural features, all structures and uses on the subject lot and the immediately adjacent lots, public street right-of-way, sidewalks, and any public and private easements and restrictions. 
b.  Proposed parking area, driveways, topographic changes, if any, landscaping and natural features retained, trees that are to be removed or to be retained, and sufficient other information to demonstrate the proposed development. 
c.  Architectural elevations of all structural improvements such as walls, fences, and railroad tie retaining features, and other ornamental or decorative landscape material to the parking area. 
(2)  In carrying out the purpose of this section, the building inspector shall consider the following standards in reviewing the plans, sketches and other documents in each case. These standards are intended to provide a frame of reference for the applicant in the development of the parking area site plan, as well as a method of review for the building inspector. These standards shall not be regarded as inflexible requirements, nor are they intended to discourage creativity, invention and innovation. To assure compliance with approved development plans a performance guarantee may be required by the building inspector pursuant to section 90-73. 
a.  Landscaping and screening. Landscaping shall be required for all new parking area development. Such landscaping shall be completed within six months after the issuance of the permit unless an extension of time, not to exceed six months, is authorized by the building inspector owing to seasonal weather conditions. Such landscaping shall thereafter be maintained with permanent plant materials in healthy condition to enhance and complement the parking area on the site and to provide a screen to abutting properties. Existing landscape shall be preserved as practicable by minimizing tree and soil removal and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas. 
Fences (opaque or of an open post and rail type), hedges and ornamental masonry walls used to screen parking areas shall not exceed three feet in height, nor be located closer than three feet from any public sidewalk. The intent of this landscaping and fencing is to create a suitable yearround, attractive screen of the parking area from view from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties. 
b.  Driveways, parking areas; circulation and surfacing. For vehicular circulation and parking areas, consideration shall be given to location and number of curb cuts and access points, and arrangement of parking areas that are safe and convenient and, insofar as practicable, do not detract from the design of the building on the lot and the neighboring properties. All driveways and parking areas shall be either hard-surfaced with a pavement having an asphalt or concrete binder as provided in section 90-159(2), or be provided with brick or other paving stone material set in concrete or compacted sand base. 
c.  Surface water drainage. Special attention shall be given to proper site drainage so that removal of surface waters will not adversely affect neighboring properties or the public stormwater drainage system. 
(Code 1980, § 5.283) 
Sec. 90-175. - Appeals and reviews. 
    Appeals and reviews under this division may be taken to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1980, § 5.284) 
Secs. 90-176-90-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-196-90-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - E-R ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 358, § IV, adopted December 12, 2005, amended division 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 2, §§ 90-206-90-208, pertained to R-1A single-family residential district, and derived from §§ 5.101-5.103 of the 1980 Code; Ord. No. 298, § 1, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 303, § 1, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 309, § 1, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 350, § V, 11-1-04. 

Sec. 90-206. - Statement of purpose. 
    The E-R estate residential district is established exclusively for single-family residential and municipal uses. This district is tailored to certain residential estate areas having characteristics of planned residential developments, larger lot sizes, and a relationship to the lake. The specific intent of this district is: 
(1)  To encourage the construction and continued use of the land for single-family dwellings. 
(2)  To encourage the continued use and improvement of significant accessory structures such as garages, coach houses, pool houses, etc. of the existing homes and accessory structures. 
(3)  To provide special zoning provisions that reflects the unique characteristics and architectural heritage of the existing homes of the city. 
(4)  To preserve the estates of Gross Pointe by discouraging the subdivision of existing lots. 
(5)  To prohibit business, commercial, or industrial use of the land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the development and maintenance of single-family dwellings. 
(6)  To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  To discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve those residences. 
(8)  To discourage any use which because of its character or size would create requirements or costs for public services such as fire and police protection, water supply, and sewerage, substantially in excess of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for single-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05) 
Sec. 90-207. - Permitted uses. 
    In the E-R district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Municipal buildings and uses pursuant to plans being reviewed and approved by the planning commission and subject to the review standards set forth in sections 90-74 and 90-75. 
(3)  Municipal parks, municipal recreation areas, and municipal community centers pursuant to plans being reviewed and approved by the planning commission and subject to the review standards set forth in sections 90-74 and 90-75. 
(4)  Home occupations as limited and defined in section 90-3. 
(5)  Temporary buildings for use incidental to the construction work as approved by the board of zoning appeals for a period not to exceed six months, subject to renewal, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. 
(6)  Commercial antennas only as permitted in section 90-44 and subject to those provisions. 
(7)  Wireless communication facilities only as permitted in section 90-44 and subject to those provisions. 
(8)  State licensed residential facilities, except for adult foster care facilities for care and treatment of persons released from or assigned to adult correctional facilities. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 370, § XVI, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-208. - Accessory uses and structures. 
(1)  Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses, when located on the same lot and not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation. Subject to the following provisions: 
a.  One private detached garage for each residential lot in which there are housed not more than one commercial vehicle not larger than a regularly manufactured pickup or panel truck of three-quarter-ton capacity which shall be housed within a garage and provided the commercial vehicle is owned and operated by a member of the family who resides in the living unit. (Refer also to section 90-28(8)). 
b.  All accessory buildings shall conform and be located as required in section 90-25. 
c.  Private swimming pools as defined in section 90-3. 
d.  Additional living quarters shall be considered an accessory use if used for household staff employed at subject property. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05) 
Sec. 90-209. - Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. 
    The area, height, bulk and placement requirements for the E-R district shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05) 
Secs. 90-210-90-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 358, § IV, adopted December 12, 2005, amended division 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 3, 90-221-90-223, pertained to R-1B single-family residential district, and derived from §§ 5.108-5.110 of the 1980 Code; Ord. No. 298, § 1, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 303, § 2, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 309, § 2, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 350, § VI, 11-1-04. 

Sec. 90-221. - Statement of purpose. 
    The R-1A, single-family residential district provides for a principal land use of single-family dwellings and related educational, cultural, and religious uses where found appropriate and harmonious with the residential environment. In promoting the general purpose of this chapter, the specific intent of the R-1A, single family residential district is: 
(1)  To encourage the construction and continued use of the land for single-family dwellings. 
(2)  To preserve the existing design of the district characterized by larger homes, lots, and open spaces by discouraging the division of existing lots. 
(3)  To prohibit business, commercial, or industrial use of the land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the development and maintenance of single-family dwellings. 
(4)  To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  To discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve those residences. 
(6)  To discourage any use which because of its character or size would create requirements or costs for public services such as fire and police protection, water supply, and sewerage, substantially in excess of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for single-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05) 
Sec. 90-222. - Permitted uses. 
    In the R-1A district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in, and subject to, the provisions of the E-R, estate residential district. 
(2)  Religious and other facilities normally incidental thereto, provided that the proposed site for a religious facility is not less than five acres, that there is adequate access to all off-street parking areas, and that there is no parking in the required front yard, that the site is adjacent to a major thoroughfare as defined in the city's comprehensive master plan, and subject to site plan review and approval from the planning commission and subject to the review standards set forth in sections 90-74 and 90-75. 
(3)  Public, parochial, and private elementary, junior, and senior high schools offering courses in general education and libraries, not operated for profit, and subject to site plan review and approval from the planning commission. 
(4)  Private non-profit theatrical facilities, subject to the following use, locational, and design standards: 
a.  Use must have direct access to and principal footage upon a thoroughfare or collector street as defined by the city's comprehensive development plan. 
b.  Minimum size of site shall be 20,000 square feet. 
c.  Maximum building size on site shall be 7,500 square feet. 
d.  Minimum yard spaces, maximum building height, and maximum lot coverage shall be as required in section 90-351 and section 90-352. 
e.  Only one non-illuminated identification sign not larger than 12 square feet in area is permitted on the premises. 
f.  No shows, theatrical productions, or other types of stage performances for the public, with or with out charge, shall be permitted. 
g.  Rehearsals or any other music-producing effects shall be limited to the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(5)  Commercial antennas only as permitted in section 90-44 and subject to those provisions. 
(6)  State licensed residential facilities, except for adult foster care facilities for care and treatment of persons released from or assigned to adult correctional facilities. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 370, § XVII, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-223. - Area, height, and bulk, and placement requirements. 
    The area, height, bulk, and placement requirements for the R-1A district shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05) 
Secs. 90-224-90-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-1B SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 358, § IV, adopted December 12, 2005, amended division 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 4, §§ 90-236-90-238, pertained to R-2 two-family residential district, and derived from §§ 5.115-5.117 of the 1980 Code; Ord. No. 298, § 1, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 303, § 3, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 350, § VII, 11-1-04. 

Sec. 90-236. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of the R-1B, single-family residential district is to establish a principal land use of single-family residential and to provide for the existing two-family dwellings within the city. The specific intent of this section is: 
(1)  To encourage the construction and continued use of the land for single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Provide for the varying lot sizes within this district to promote reinvestment and maintenance of the property. 
(3)  To preserve the balance between single-family and two-family housing stock by allowing only existing lots with two-family dwelling units to be rebuilt. 
(4)  Encourage the design and maintenance of two-family dwelling units to be consistent with the surrounding single-family homes. 
(5)  To prohibit business, commercial, industrial, or any other use of the land, which would substantially interfere with the development and maintenance of the existing residences. 
(6)  To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  To discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor or local streets, other than normal traffic to serve those residences. 
(8)  To discourage any use which because of its character or size would create requirements or costs for public services such as fire and police protection, water supply, and sewerage, substantially in excess of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for single-family or two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05) 
Sec. 90-237. - Permitted uses. 
    In the R-1B district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in, and subject to, and subject to the provisions of the R-1A, single-family residential district. 
(2)  State licensed residential facilities, except for adult foster care facilities for care and treatment of persons released from or assigned to adult correctional facilities. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 370, § XVIII, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-238. - Permitted uses after special land use review. 
(1)  Two-family dwellings, subject to the special land use review standards as stated in section 90-75 and subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The two-family dwellings must be an existing use on the subject property at the time of this Code amendment adoption. 
b.  Only one entrance per two-family dwelling unit shall be visible from each public right-of-way. 
c.  The structure must have the overall appearance of a single-family dwelling including but not limited to such items as: architectural design, roof design, garage and driveways. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05) 
Sec. 90-239. - Area, height, and bulk, and placement requirements. 
    The area, height, bulk, and placement requirements for the R-1B district shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05) 
Secs. 90-240-90-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-T TERRACE DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-251. - Statement of purpose. 
    The R-T terrace district is designed to permit residential use of land with terrace types of multiple dwellings and related uses. These areas would be located near major streets for good accessibility and be designed to complement adjacent single-family areas. Various types and sizes of residential accommodations for ownership or rental would thereby be provided to meet the needs of the different age and family groups in the community without over-taxing existing community facilities, utilities or services. 
(Code 1980, § 5.121) 
Sec. 90-252. - Permitted uses. 
    In the R-T district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the R-1A and R-1B districts, subject to all requirements for such uses in zoning districts where first permitted. 
(2)  Terrace dwellings and apartment houses. 
(3)  Hospitals and nursing homes, provided that the proposed site for a hospital or nursing home is not less than five acres, that there is adequate access to all required off-street parking areas, that there is no parking in the required front yard, that the site is adjacent to a major thoroughfare as defined on the city's comprehensive development plan, and that approval is secured from the city council. 
(4)  Semiprivate, nonprofit clubs. 
(5)  Signs, as regulated by chapter 58, and when located on the same lot pertaining to the use of the particular building or buildings, provided that they shall not overhang any public right-of-way; shall not be illuminated; shall not exceed six square feet in area; shall not project higher than four feet above the level of the ground; and shall not indicate any other information except the name or address of the building or management thereof. For community facility uses as enumerated in subsections (3) and (4), signs shall be in accordance with chapter 58. Signs for off-street parking areas, open or enclosed, are permitted providing they do not exceed two square feet in area and are not higher than seven feet above curb level. 
(6)  Community garages and carports serving the principal residential building, containing space for no more than two passenger vehicles for each dwelling unit in the principal building on the lot, and having common and unpierced dividing walls between every two contiguous private garages or carports. Further, there shall be compliance with standards at section 90-25(8). 
(7)  Private swimming pools (as regulated by section 14-176 et seq.) designed and operated only for occupants of the principal building and their personal guests. 
(8)  Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of article V. 
(9)  Commercial antennas only as permitted in section 90-44 and subject to those provisions. 
(10)  State licensed residential facilities, except for adult foster care facilities for care and treatment of persons released from or assigned to adult correctional facilities. 
(Code 1980, § 5.122; Ord. No. 298, § 1, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 303, § 4, 6-16-97; Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 370, § XIX, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 90-253. - Specifically prohibited uses. 
    In order to clarify the type of permitted uses in a R-T district, the following uses, among others, are specifically prohibited: 
(1)  Rental offices, as accessory to a terrace dwelling unit project or an apartment house project. 
(2)  Tourist home, lodginghouse, or boardinghouse. 
(3)  Motel, hotel or mobile home park. 
(4)  A residential structure for a home for children of other than those residing therein, or for the aged, indigent or physically handicapped; or a rest or convalescent home. 
(Code 1980, § 5.123) 
Sec. 90-254. - Site plan review. 
    For all uses permitted in a R-T district, a site plan must be submitted to the city council showing all buildings, parking areas and landscaping at a scale sufficient to permit study of all elements of the plan. Typical elevations and floor plans of the building must also be provided. If the plans meet the required standards and design and indicate no adverse effects which in the opinion of the city council cause injury to adjoining property or the city as a whole, the city council may approve or disapprove the plan and shall determine whether required standards have been met. Plans so approved shall regulate the development on the premises unless modified in the same manner as the plans were originally approved. 
(Code 1980, § 5.124) 
Sec. 90-255. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
    The area, height, bulk and placement requirements for the R-T district shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 5.125) 
Secs. 90-256-90-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RO-1 RESTRICTED OFFICE DISTRICT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 348, § I, adopted May 17, 2004, amended Ch. 90, Art. 6, Div. 6 in its entirety. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 5.129-5.134 of the 1980 Code. 

Sec. 90-266. - Statement of purpose. 
    The RO-1 restricted office district is intended to permit those office and restricted business uses which will provide opportunities for local employment close to residential areas, thus reducing travel to and from work; and which will provide clean, modern office buildings in landscaped settings; which will provide, adjacent to residential areas appropriate districts for uses which do not generate large volumes of traffic, traffic congestion and parking problems; and which will promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with the comprehensive development plan. 
(Ord. No. 348, § I, 5-17-04) 
Sec. 90-267. - Permitted uses. 
    In the RO-1 district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Uses resulting from any of the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, banking, clerical, stenographic and drafting. 
The above uses shall not be construed to eliminate offices of recognized manufacturers' agents, provided that no display will be in an exterior show window, and the total area devoted to display including both the objects displayed and the floor space set aside for persons observing the displayed objects, shall not exceed 15 percent of the usable floor area of the establishment using the display of an actual product for sale as a sales procedure; provided that there shall be no outdoor storage of goods or material, irrespective of whether or not they are for sale, and provided further, that there shall be no warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, irrespective of whether or not they are for sale, and provided further, that there shall be no warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material beyond that normally incidental to the above permitted office type uses. 
(2)  Medical or dental centers, not including veterinarian hospital or any type of medical facility permitting overnight patients. 
(3)  Professional office of a medical doctor, osteopath, chiropractor, dentist, architect, lawyer, professional engineer, land surveyor or city planner. 
(4)  Publicly owned building and public utility offices, transformer stations and substations but not including storage yards. 
(5)  There shall be no accessory structures in a RO-1 district except that signs may be permitted, providing they pertain to a use conducted within the main building and shall be displayed flat against the side of the building and not project above the roof line. Such signs shall not have flashing illumination and shall not exceed 12 square feet in area for anyone building. One sign shall be permitted for each office or clinic use in a building; such sign shall not exceed ten square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 348, § I, 5-17-04) 
Sec. 90-268. - Permitted uses after special approval. 
    In the RO-1 restricted office district, the following special approval uses are permitted, subject to application design and location criteria, and to the approval of the city planning commission after public hearing and notice pursuant to the requirements of this section and to site plan review as provided under section 90-269: 
(1)  Barbershop or beauty shop, with the condition that the planning commission may modify the parking requirements provided the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that there is adequate parking available for the proposed use after considering; the intensity of the proposed use, the hours of operation of the proposed use and other uses within the same block, public parking available within the same block, available on-street parking, or shared parking arrangements with other uses within the same block. 
(2)  Uses similar to the principal permitted uses provided in section 90-267, permitted uses, after the planning commission has determined that such uses are in harmony with the character of the district and the purpose and intent of the master plan of the city. 
(3)  Dance studios, fitness centers, yoga studios, or similar uses as determined by the planning commission, with the condition that the planning commission may modify the parking requirements provided the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that there is adequate parking available for the proposed use after considering; the intensity of the proposed use, the hours of operation of the proposed use and other uses within the same block, public parking available within the same block, available on-street parking, or shared parking arrangements with other uses within the same block. 
(Ord. No. 348, § I, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 391, § I, 7-19-10; Ord. No. 434, § I, 7-18-18) 
Sec. 90-269. - Site plan approval. 
    For all uses permitted or permitted uses after special approval in the RO-1 district, a site plan must be submitted to the city council showing all buildings, parking areas and landscaping at a scale sufficient to permit study of all elements of the plan. Typical elevations and floor plans of the building must also be provided. If the plans meet the required standards and design indicates no adverse effects which in the opinion of the city council cause injury to adjoining property or the city as a whole, the city council shall determine whether the required standards have been met and then may approve or disapprove the plans. Plans so approved shall regulate the development on the premises unless modified in the same manner as the plans were originally approved. 
(Ord. No. 348, § I, 5-17-04) 
Sec. 90-270. - Off-street parking facilities. 
    In RO-1 districts, off-street parking facilities shall be provided as specified in article V of this chapter, with the further condition that no parking be permitted in the front yard, nor within five feet of any side or rear property zoned E-R, R-1A, R-1B or R-T, or which is adjacent to any property or lot used for residential purposes. (Refer to section 90-159 for off-street parking development regulations.) 
(Ord. No. 348, § I, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 358, § IV, 12-12-05) 
Sec. 90-271. - Landscaping. 
    Along any property line of an RO-1 district abutting a residentially zoned district a five-foot greenbelt shall be maintained. The greenbelt shall be sodded, planted and shrubbed to form a permanent screen which shall be maintained at a height of not less than four feet or more than seven feet. 
(Ord. No. 348, § I, 5-17-04) 
Sec. 90-272. - Architectural plans. 
    In RO-1 districts, all architectural plans for buildings shall be presented to the city council and receive its approval prior to submitting plans to the building inspector for approval and issuance of a building permit. It is intended that such buildings, when located adjacent to a residential area, shall take on the appearance of residential buildings in order to preserve the general character of the residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 348, § I, 5-17-04) 
Sec. 90-273. - Area, height, bulk and placement regulations. 
    The area, height, bulk and placement requirements for RO-1 districts shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 348, § I, 5-17-04) 
DIVISION 6A. - NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-274. - Statement of purpose. 
    The neighborhood commercial (NC) district is intended to maintain a mix of small scale, office, retail, residential and service uses while maintaining the unique physical characteristics of the district such as the generous private frontage area, protect the adjacent residential uses, and balance the demand for parking. 
    Further, it is designed and intended to: 
(1)  Maintain the existing character of the NC district by developing regulations that require parking to be located to the rear or sides of buildings. 
(2)  Balance the need to maintain a critical mass of buildings with the need for adequate parking by developing parking requirements that accurately reflect the demand for parking in this business district. 
(3)  Promote a compatible balance of neighborhood retail uses that conveniently serve the commercial needs of the surrounding neighborhood, office uses to maintain a viable commercial district and maximize the use of the existing parking supply. 
(4)  Encourage the shared use of private parking lots to maximize the use of the existing parking supply. 
(5)  Maintain the current boundaries of the NC district. 
(6)  Establish definitive screening requirements to protect the adjacent residential uses to the west including decorative fencing and landscaping. 
(7)  Enhance the appearance of the parking areas and public sidewalk areas. 
(Ord. No. 414, § I, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 90-275. - Permitted uses. 
    The following table lists the permitted, special approval, accessory, and not permitted uses allowed in the NC district: 
Use NC-4 Residential Residential P Limited to second floor or above Live/work unit S Lodging 1 Inn (up to 12 rooms) S Office 1 Professional P Medical/dental P Retail 1 Retail establishments P Restaurant (without drive through) P Antique and consignment shops P Art galleries P Bake shops, retail P Banks, savings and loan, credit union or other type of financial institutions. P Barbershop or beauty shop P Clothing or costume rental establishments P Fitness centers or dance studios P Furniture stores P Interior decorating establishments including bath and kitchen design, with a showroom. P Outdoor cafes P Civic Live theatre S Museum S Surface parking lot A Uses specifically prohibited Pawn shops Currency exchanges Payday loan stores Resale shops  
;adv=6; 1  Use over 5,000 square feet in area may be permitted subject to special use approval. 
(Ord. No. 414, § I, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 90-276. - Protective screening. 
(a)  Any surface parking visible from a public street must be screened from the street with a three-foot tall decorative wall constructed of brick or stone. The reviewing body including; planning commission, city manager, or his designee may allow alternative screening methods that are in keeping with the intent to protect adjacent roads and residential uses, the intent to provide consistent screening throughout the district, and that are compatible with the architecture of adjacent buildings. 
(b)  Residential uses or zoning shall be screened from adjacent parking lots with a decorative brick or stone wall a minimum of six feet in height. The reviewing body including planning commission, city manager, or his designee, may require an eight-foot decorative brick or stone wall to screen more intensive activities such as garbage collection or loading areas. 
(Ord. No. 414, § I, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 90-277. - Development standards. 
(a)  Private frontage. The private frontage is the area between the right-of-way and the principal building façade. Buildings must contain architectural elements consistent with one of the following four private frontages. Each frontage is designed to be consistent with some or all of the uses permitted in the NC district. 
Note that the following table includes specific dimensional requirements for each of the frontages. Unless otherwise noted, the dimensional requirements are in addition to any other dimensional requirement of this section: 
Frontage Type Where Permitted Dimensional Requirements Shopfront. A frontage where the building façade is located close to the predominant building line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. This frontage type is suitable for nonresidential uses on the first floor. Fisher 
St. Paul 
Maumee The building may be set back a maximum of 5 feet from the predominant building line.  
Shopfront Illustration: 

Frontage Type Where Permitted Dimensional Requirements Gallery. A frontage where the façade is aligned close to the predominant building line with an attached cantilevered shed or a lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. A gallery is appropriate for retail use. Fisher Road The gallery shall be 10 feet deep.  
Gallery Illustration: 

Frontage Type Where Permitted Dimensional Requirements Courtyard. A frontage where a portion of the building façade is close to the predominant building line with a portion set back. The courtyard may accommodate tree plantings or a vehicle drop-off area. This frontage is suitable for any building use. Fisher 
St. Paul 
Maumee The building may be set back a maximum of 5 feet from the predominant building line. 
The courtyard area shall be considered part of the front building façade for the purposes of determining compliance with front setback requirements.  
Courtyard Illustration: 

Frontage Type Where Permitted Dimensional Requirements Terrace. A frontage wherein the façade is setback from the front lot line by an elevated terrace or landscaped area. This frontage is suitable for any building use. Fisher 
St. Paul 
Maumee The building may be setback a maximum of 5 feet from the predominant building line.  
Terrace Illustration: 

(b)  Streetscape improvements. Property owners shall provide one street tree every 50 feet on center. Each street tree shall be located in a tree well with a grate. Details are available at the city. 
    Property owners shall provide decorative light fixtures (details available at the city) every 50 feet on center. 
    Required trees and lighting shall be located within five feet of the curb. 
(c)  Outdoor displays. Outdoor displays shall be permitted as an accessory use subject to the following standards: 
(1)  All outdoor display areas must be maintained and displayed in a neat, orderly and safe manner. 
(2)  Must maintain access to the business and may not be located on public property. 
(3)  The goods, merchandise or products offered for sale in an outdoor display area must be of such a nature that they are typically located within the principle use. 
(4)  Display fixtures shall be decorative in nature, constructed of high quality durable material, and compatible with the character of the principal building. 
(d)  Building design standards. All building façades visible from a public street, parking area, or adjacent residential district shall comply with section 90-305. 
(e)  Service areas. All service areas, including utility access, above ground equipment and dumpsters shall be located in side or rear yards and shall be screened from view from any street. 
(f)  Mechanical and utility equipment. Mechanical equipment, electrical and gas meter and service components, and similar utility devices (whether ground level, wall mounted, or roof mounted) shall be screened from view from the front property line. Exterior screening materials shall be the same as the predominant exterior materials of the principal building. 
(Ord. No. 414, § I, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 90-278. - Parking. 
    The parking requirements of section 90-157 parking and loading requirements may be reduced by ten percent to account for the availability of on-street parking. 
    In addition the city may allow an additional reduction of up to ten percent for those uses that can demonstrate that they have a shared parking arrangement or a mix of uses that do not have conflicting peak hour parking requirements. In order to be eligible for the ten percent parking reduction, the applicant shall provide a parking study. 
    Designated parking areas may encroach up to ten feet into the predominant front building setback. Property owners may receive credit for one parking space for each additional 200 square feet of landscaping or streetscape improvements located in front of a parking lot and within the first ten feet of the predominant front building setback. 
(Ord. No. 414, § I, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 90-279. - Area, height, bulk and placement regulations. 
    The area, height, bulk and placement requirements for the NC district shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 414, § I, 6-16-14) 
Sec. 90-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - C-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-281. - Statement of purpose. 
    The C-1 local business district as established in this division is intended to be that permitting retail business and service uses which are needed to serve the nearby residential areas. In order to promote such business development so far as is possible and appropriate in each area, uses are prohibited which would create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration, smoke, glare, heavy truck traffic, or late hours of operation. The intent of this district is also to encourage the concentration of local business areas to the mutual advantage of both the consumers and merchants and thereby promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations and avoid the continuance of encouraging marginal strip business development along major streets. 
(Code 1980, § 5.139) 
Sec. 90-282. - Permitted uses. 
    In the C-1 district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Automobile service stations subject to the requirements of section 90-25. 
(2)  Bake shops, providing that at least 75 percent of all baked goods produced on the premises are sold on the premises at retail and further provided that floor area used for bakery production shall be limited to 500 square feet per establishment. 
(3)  Bank, savings and loan or other type of financial institution. 
(4)  Barbershop. 
(5)  Beauty shop. 
(6)  Clothes pressing and repair. 
(7)  Custom dressmaking, millinery and tailoring. 
(8)  Institutions of a philanthropic or charitable nature. 
(9)  Laundry agency or dry cleaning agency, hand laundry except laundry and dry cleaning establishments with customer-operated equipment. 
(10)  Offices, either business, professional or governmental. 
(11)  Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations and gas regulator stations, subject to the approval of the board of zoning appeals. 
(12)  Repairs-electrical or other household appliances, locks, radios, television and the like, shoes, time pieces. 
(13)  Restaurants, except catering halls and banquet halls and those establishments having a drive-in facility. 
(14)  Shops or stores for the retail sale of art supplies, beverages, including package liquor outlets, confections, delicatessen, drugs, dry goods, flowers, food stuffs, including meats, gifts, hardware, household appliances, jewelry, leather goods, music, notions, paint, periodicals, radio, television and the like, sewing machines for households only, sports goods, stamps or coins, stationery, sundry, small household articles, tobacco or wearing apparel. 
(15)  Accessory structures, uses and signs customarily incidental to the above permitted uses in accordance with section 90-25, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Outdoor advertising signs, only when attached to the face of the building, and when pertaining to the sale, rental or use of the premises on which they are located or to goods sold or activities conducted thereon, provided that any such signs shall conform to the requirements of chapter 58. 
b.  Garages to be used exclusively for the storage of passenger motor vehicles and/or commercial vehicles of less than 11/2 ton capacity, which are to be used in connection with a business or other use permitted and located in a C-1 district. 
(16)  Off-street parking and loading, in accordance with the requirements of article V. 
(17)  Commercial antennas subject to provisions at section 90-44. 
(Code 1980, § 5.140; Ord. No. 298, § 1, 3-18-96) 
Sec. 90-283. - Site plan approval. 
    For all uses permitted in a C-1 district, a site plan must be submitted to the city council showing all buildings, parking areas and landscaping at a scale sufficient to permit study of all elements of the plan. Typical elevations and floor plans of the building must also be provided. If the plans meet the required standards and design and indicate no adverse effects which in the opinion of the city council cause injury to adjoining property or the city as a whole, the city council shall determine whether the required standards have been met and then may approve or disapprove the plans. Plans so approved shall regulate the development on the premises unless modified in the same manner as the plans were originally approved. 
(Code 1980, § 5.141) 
Sec. 90-284. - Protective screening. 
    Protective screening for C-1 districts adjacent to or near residential districts shall be in compliance with the regulations set forth in section 90-39. 
(Code 1980, § 5.142) 
Sec. 90-285. - Area, height, bulk and placement regulations. 
    The area, height, bulk and placement requirements for C-1 districts shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 5.143) 
Secs. 90-286-90-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - C-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-296. - Statement of purpose. 
    The C-2 central business district is designed and intended to promote the development of a pedestrian oriented and accessible, central commercial service district in which a variety of retail, commercial, office, civic and residential uses are permitted. Each use shall be complementary to the stated function and purpose of the district and shall not have adverse impact upon the viability of retail uses adjacent, street capacity and safety, utilities, and other city services. 
    The C-2 central business district is further designed and intended to: 
(1)  Maintain and enhance a viable mix of complimentary retail uses and discourage domination of the village by any single category of use. 
(2)  Preserve and enhance the village as a community asset that contributes positively to property values, community identity, and a sense of place. 
(3)  Serve as the central business district for the citizens of the community to shop in a safe and enjoyable environment. 
(4)  Create a retail oriented mix of businesses that encourages an active pedestrian environment and promotes both convenience and destination shopping activities. 
(5)  Encourage a lively social environment and economically viable downtown with a wide variety of uses in a pedestrian oriented unified setting, with shared parking. 
(6)  Extend greater opportunities for traditional community living, working, housing and recreation to citizens and residents of the city. 
(7)  Discourage the development of separate off-street parking facilities for each individual use, and encourage the development of off-street parking facilities designed to accommodate the needs of several individual uses with access from side streets only. 
(8)  Promote the creation of urban places such as plazas which are oriented to the pedestrian thereby promoting citizen security and social interaction. 
(9)  Promote developments where the physical, visual and spatial characteristics are established and reinforced through the consistent use of traditional urban design and architectural design elements. Such elements shall relate to the design characteristics of an individual structure or development based on usage of traditional early American and late 1800 to early 1900 architectural style influences, ranging from Colonial styles of Georgian and Williamsburg; Victorian styles of Italianate, Gothic and Queen Anne; and later Romanticized styles of Tudor and French Country, used in a harmonious manner, resulting in coherent overall development patterns and streetscape for the downtown as well as surrounding areas. 
(10)  Discourage commercial and business uses that create objectionable noise, glare or odors. 
(11)  Promote uses that support and compliment the retail focus of the village, such as office and residential uses, above the first floor. 
(12)  Preserve and promote opportunities for mid-size retail uses that will attract customers from local and regional markets to support other uses in the village. 
(Code 1980, § 5.148; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 389, § III, 10-19-09; Ord. No. 408, § VI, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-297. - Permitted uses. 
    In the C-2 district the following uses are permitted provided that the use occupies 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or less. The following uses are permitted because they are considered to generate and promote pedestrian activity at the street level creating a vibrant and viable downtown environment. 
(1)  Advertising signs subject to the requirements set forth in chapter 58. 
(2)  Antique and consignment shops. 
(3)  Art galleries. 
(4)  Bake shops, retail. 
(5)  Barbershop or beauty shop. 
(6)  Clothing or costume rental establishments. 
(7)  Department stores. 
(8)  Furniture stores. 
(9)  Interior decorating establishments with a showroom. 
(10)  Office supply store. 
(11)  Off-street parking and loading in accordance with article V, provided that no off-street parking, parking ingress or egress, or access lanes for parking or loading shall be permitted within 100 feet of the Kercheval Avenue right-of-way. 
(12)  Photographic establishments. 
(13)  Sit-down restaurants except those having a drive-in or drive-through facility. 
(14)  Generally recognized retail sales businesses, within an enclosed building, that supplies commodities on the premises for use or consumption off the premises, such as, but not limited to: Groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware. 
(15)  Dance studios, fitness centers, offices, either business professional, medical, or governmental, including stockbroker, real estate and insurance offices and travel agencies, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The use may be located in a basement or above the first floor. 
b.  For buildings more than 150 feet deep as measured from the building line running closest to and parallel to Kercheval, the use may be located on the first floor of a building with frontage on Cadieux, Notre Dame or St. Clair provided such use is no closer than 45 percent of the building depth to Kercheval or 70 feet, whichever is greater. 
c.  For buildings more than 150 feet deep as measured from the building line running closest to and parallel to Kercheval, the use may be located on the first floor of a building with frontage on Kercheval provided such use is no closer than 45 percent of the building depth to Kercheval or 70 feet, whichever is greater. 
d.  For buildings 150 feet deep or less as measured from the building line running closest to and parallel to Kercheval, the use may be located on the first floor of a building with frontage on Cadieux, Notre Dame or St. Clair provided the building is a minimum of 80 feet deep and such use occupy no more than the rear 40 percent of the building depth or 40 feet whichever is greater to Kercheval. 
e.  For buildings 150 feet deep or less as measured from the building line running closest to and parallel to Kercheval, the use may be located on the first floor of a building with frontage on Kercheval provided the building is a minimum of 80 feet deep and such use occupy no more than the rear 40 percent of the building depth or 40 feet whichever is greater to Kercheval. 
f.  Such use may not be located in buildings less than 80 feet deep. 
(16)  Outdoor cafés and outdoor eating areas subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Such eating areas shall be defined by planters, posts with ropes, or other decorative, removable enclosures. 
b.  The outdoor seating shall in no way impair the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby properties. 
c.  Outdoor seating shall be subject to applicable city, county and state requirements. 
d.  A site plan shall specify the plans for storage of tables, chairs, and equipment during the months when the outdoor seating is not in use. 
e.  The outdoor eating area shall be kept clean and void of litter at all times. 
f.  Outdoor eating areas shall not be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
g.  The capacity of the outdoor seating area shall be provided by the applicant and verified by the building official. 
h.  Additional signs associated with the outdoor eating area are prohibited. 
i.  Details regarding the hours and type of entertainment, music, speakers, or similar devices used in outdoor eating areas must be identified at the time of special use/site plan review. 
j.  Preparation of food and beverages shall be prohibited in any outdoor eating area. The sale and consumption of alcohol are governed by the Michigan Liquor Control Act and local ordinance. 
k.  In addition to the standards listed above, outdoor sidewalk cafés shall also be subject to the following standards: 
(i)  To allow for pedestrian circulation, a minimum of five feet of sidewalk along the curb and leading to the entrance to the establishment must be maintained free of tables and other encumbrances. If the sidewalk is not wide enough to allow for a five-foot wide clearance for circulation, the café should not be permitted. 
(ii)  Pedestrian circulation and access to store entrances should not be impaired. Thus, a boundary (maximum encroachment width and length) into the public sidewalk should be established, with an accessible aisle being maintained between this line and the curb, in accordance with the provisions of the National Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Michigan barrier-free requirements. 
(iii)  Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles, and other elements of street furniture should be compatible with the architectural character of the adjacent buildings. If table umbrellas will be used, they should complement building colors. 
(iv)  Liability issues for use of the public sidewalk should be addressed and reviewed by the city attorney. 
(17)  Residential uses subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Residential uses shall only be located on the second story of a building or above. 
b.  Residential uses shall be intergraded into the design of a larger mixed-use development. 
c.  No dwelling unit shall be located on the same floor as a business use (excluding a home occupation), and no floor may be utilized for business or office purpose which is located above a floor used for residential purposes. 
d.  Adequate provisions for off-street parking for any use above the second floor must be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city planning commission. 
(18)  Uses similar to the uses listed above as determined by the city manager, or his designee. Such determination shall be based on a finding of fact: 
a.  That the proposed use(s) will contribute to the viable mix of uses in the village; 
b.  Is compatible with the uses permitted in the village; and 
c.  Will not adversely impact the retail oriented environment of the village. 
(Code 1980, § 5.149; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-19-02; Ord. No. 374, §§ II, III, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 389, § III, 10-19-09; Ord. No. 408, § VII, 7-15-13; Ord. No. 410, § I, 9-5-13) 
Sec. 90-298. - Permitted uses after special approval. 
(a)  In the C-2 district the following special approval uses are permitted, subject to the approval of the city planning commission after public hearing and notice pursuant to the requirements of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, PA12 of 2008, as amended, and to site plan review as provided under section 90-302. The following uses are considered to be supporting and compatible with those uses listed in section 90-297 provided they comply with the general criteria identified in section 90-300. 
(1)  Uses permitted in section 90-297 that exceed 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Banks, savings and loan, credit union or other type of financial institutions. 
(3)  Buildings and facilities for furnishing utility services, including heat, light, water and power. 
(4)  Hotel subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Adequate parking, as determined by the city, for hotel guests and visitors shall be located in a parking structure connected to or designed as an integral part of the hotel. 
b.  Drop-off or pick-up areas shall be located in that portion of the building directly opposite of the Kercheval Avenue frontage. 
c.  The area located on the ground floor between the exterior wall of a building facing Kercheval Avenue or any intersecting side street and a line parallel to the exterior wall, setback 20 feet, with the exception of the hotel entrance, shall be occupied with a use permitted under section 90-297 or section 90-298 subject to all applicable conditions. Exceptions to this condition may be granted by the city planning commission provided the applicant can demonstrate that the proposal will be consistent with the intent of the C-2 district to provide a pedestrian oriented environment. 
(5)  [Intentionally omitted.] 
(6)  Permitted uses with gross floor area in excess of 5,000 square feet. 
(7)  Theaters. 
(b)  Also, the following temporary special uses are permitted in the C-2 district, subject to approval of the city planning commission after like notice and hearing: 
(1)  Use of existing, portable or other structures (including trailers and sheds) and use of yards, on a temporary basis, as (a) offices, (b) places to store materials or equipment or (c) similar support facilities, in connection with and incidental to the construction or development of a property within the C-2 district or a property within a P-1 or PUD district which adjoins the C-2 district, for a principal permissible use; 
(2)  Use of existing, portable or other structures (including trailers and non-conforming buildings), on a temporary basis, as (a) showrooms, (b) sales or marketing offices or (c) similar support facilities, in connection with and incidental to the construction or development of a property within the C-2 district or a property within a P-1 or PUD district which adjoins the C-2 district, for a principal permissible use; 
    Temporary special uses may be approved with respect to one property in the C-2 district together with, and incidental to, development of another property (not necessarily contiguous) owned, leased, or occupied by the applicant elsewhere within the C-2 district or the adjoining P-1, or PUD overlay district. 
(c)  The application for a temporary special use shall: 
(1)  Describe the nature and purpose of the proposed use, and how the temporary use and any structure will be removed from the site on expiration of the approved period. 
(2)  State whether the temporary use will in any way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the C-2 district. 
(3)  Be accompanied by (i) a site plan for review and approval which includes such items as, but not limited to: parking, signage, trash, noise, lighting, and typical elevations if applicable; and (ii) a description of any provisions for emergency vehicle access, off-street parking and loading, drainage and soil erosion. 
(4)  Demonstrate adequate provisions for or availability of off-street parking. 
(5)  Demonstrate that such temporary use shall not displace viable, existing retail business establishments as permitted in section 90-297. 
(d)  The planning commission shall consider whether the proposed temporary special use is consistent with the requirements of this section 90-298 and any applicable requirements of section 90-300, and whether the applicant has available, or has made provision for, adequate off-street parking. In approving any application, the commission may impose other conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(e)  Approval for a temporary special use may be granted for a period not exceeding 24 months; provided that the commission may authorize the building inspector to extend the approval for not more than six additional months if the continued use is incidental and necessary to the construction, sales or marketing of the principal property under construction or development. 
(f)  Performance bonds. To insure strict compliance with the conditions attached to the issuance of the permit for a temporary structure or use, the planning commission may require the applicant to furnish a performance bond in accordance with section 90-73 of this division (performance bonds) in an amount equal to the estimated cost of removing and disposing of the temporary structure or use ($1,000.00 minimum). The bond, less any sum applied under (G), shall be returned after the temporary structure has been removed from the premises and any temporary special use has been discontinued. 
(g)  Temporary buildings associated with construction shall not be erected unless a site plan has been approved. Such building shall be removed from the site before a final certificate of occupancy is issued for the primary building. Temporary structures other than temporary construction buildings shall be removed and temporary uses shall be discontinued within ten days after expiration of the permit or approval. If the applicant or other party in possession fails to effect such a timely removal, the building inspector may use the bond to effect the removal. 
(Code 1980, § 5.150; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 367, § I, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 374, § IV, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 389, § IV, 10-19-09; Ord. No. 408, § VIII, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-299. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 389, § V, adopted October 19, 2009, repealed § 90-299, which pertained to design and locational criteria for uses permitted after special approval and derived from Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 357, § IV, 8-15-05. 
Sec. 90-300. - General criteria for uses permitted after special approval in the C-2 district. 
    In addition to specific site plan standards, which the city planning commission may apply to the use, the following standards shall serve the city planning commission as the basis for decisions involving special land uses. Each proposed use or activity shall: 
(a)  In location, size and intensity of the principal and/or accessory operation, be compatible with adjacent uses and zoning of land; 
(b)  Be consistent with and promote the intent and purpose of this division. 
(c)  Be compatible with the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy; 
(d)  Be consistent with existing and future capabilities of public services and facilities affected by the proposed use; 
(e)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare as well as the social and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity, residents, businesses and landowners immediately adjacent and the city as the whole; 
(f)  Promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner; 
(g)  Not be in conflict with convenient, safe and normal neighborhood vehicular and pedestrian traffic routes, flows, intersections, and general character and intensity of neighborhood development; 
(h)  Be of such a design and impact that the location and height of buildings, the location, nature and height of walls, fences and the nature and extent of landscaping on the site shall not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or impair the value thereof; 
(i)  In the nature, location, size and site layout of the use, be a harmonious part of the district in which it is situated taking into account, among other things, prevailing shopping habits, convenience of access by prospective patrons, the physical and economic relationship of one type of use to another and characteristic groupings of uses of said district; 
(j)  In the location, size, intensity and site layout be such that operations will not be objectionable to nearby dwellings, by reason of noise, fumes, glare or flash of lights; 
(Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-301. - Rezoning area requirements. 
    No district shall be zoned as a C-2 district unless the zone shall contain several or all of the uses in section 90-297 and satisfies the objectives of section 90-296. Any expansion of the C-2 district must be consistent with the city's general development plan. 
(Code 1980, § 5.151; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-302. - Site plan review. 
    For all new construction, renovation consisting of exterior modifications, new use, or expansion of existing use in a C-2 district, a site plan must be submitted to the city planning commission showing all buildings, parking areas and landscaping at a scale sufficient to permit study of all elements of the plan. Typical elevations (with color renderings and a material board) and floor plans of the building must also be provided. A duly licensed or certified design professional must prepare plans. 
    A community impact statement must be completed with each application. The contents of the community impact statement are contained in the forms available at the city. If the plans meet the required standards and design and indicate no adverse effects which, in the opinion of the city planning commission, cause injury to adjoining property or the city as a whole, the city planning commission shall determine whether the required standards have been met and then may approve or disapprove the plans. Plans so approved shall regulate the development on the premises unless modified in the same manner as the plans were originally approved. 
(Code 1980, § 5.152; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-303. - Protective screening. 
    Protective screening for C-2 districts that directly abut residential districts shall be in compliance with the regulations set forth in section 90-39. In addition, any parking visible from a public street must be screened from the street with a continuous row of evergreen shrubs a minimum of 30 inches high at the time of planting, or a 30-inch decorative masonry wall constructed of brick or stone. 
(Code 1980, § 5.153; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-304. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
    The area, height, bulk and placement requirements for C-2 districts shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Code 1980, § 5.154; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-305. - Development standards. 
    The following standards shall apply to all new development, redevelopment, or renovation within the C-2, central business district. 
(1)  Building scale. The intent of these standards is to encourage the construction of buildings that are in scale and design with the majority of the existing buildings in the village, while promoting a traditional architectural style such as; traditional early American and late 1800 to early 1900 architectural style influences, ranging from Colonial styles of Georgian and Williamsburg; Victorian styles of Italianate, Gothic and Queen Anne; and later Romanticized styles of Tudor and French Country. The majority of the older buildings are narrow in width. The intent of these standards is not to limit building width, but to encourage the division of wide facades by dividing the mass in proportion and scale with existing buildings, to create compatibility with existing facades. 
(a)  Large, long facades shall be subdivided into bays, through the location and arrangement of openings and architectural treatments, that are compatible in size and scale to existing buildings. 
(b)  The height to width ratio of one-story, single bay facades, or individual bays of multiple bay facades, is not to exceed 1:2. 
(c)  The height to width ratio of two-story, single bay facades, or individual bays of multiple bay facades, is not to exceed 1:1. 
(2)  Building height. Buildings in the central business district are a mix of one, two, and two and one-half story buildings. Taller buildings, a maximum of four floors, shall be limited to the core of the village and the maximum height should be limited to 2 1/2 floors at the edges of the Village where commercial buildings are adjacent to or facing residential buildings. 
(a)  Buildings located within 300 feet of the Neff Street right-of-way shall be limited to two and one-half stories in height, or 35'-0?. 
(b)  Buildings located between 300 feet of the Neff Street right-of-way and St. Clair Avenue shall be limited to three stories in height, or 42'-0?. 
(c)  Buildings located within 240 feet of the Cadieux Road right-of-way shall be limited to two and one-half stories in height, or 35'-0?. 
(d)  Buildings located between 240 feet of the Cadieux Road right-of-way and Notre Dame Avenue shall be limited to three stories in height, or 42'-0?. 
(e)  Buildings located with frontage on Kercheval between St. Clair and Notre Dame shall be limited to four stories or 54'-0? provided, the fourth story shall be enclosed in a mansard roof, or setback 15 feet from the building facade of the third story. 
(f)  No building may be more than one story taller or less than one story shorter than any adjacent building. 
(g)  Special architectural features will be allowed to exceed the above height if: 
- The feature is located at a corner or, 
- The feature is deemed necessary to the type, use, or style of the building in question. 
- Special architectural features such as pediments, turrets, or other elements compatible with the architecture of the building, shall not exceed the height of the remainder of the building by more than ten feet. 
(h)  Roof top equipment must be screened with architecturally compatible building elements such as parapet walls. 
(3)  Building roof types. 
(a)  Roof types shall consist or flat roofs with parapets, gabled, or hipped roofs consistent with traditional architectural styles of the building. 
(b)  Mansard roofs must extend around all sides of the roof. Cantilevered or mock mansards are not permitted. 
(4)  Street facade. The majority of the existing street facades, the facade that faces a public right-of-way, are comprised of common facade components. The arrangement of facade elements shall follow this model, which include the following typical components: Facade frame, storefront opening, canopy/awning and sign. 


Front Facade Elements 
(a)  Facade frame. The facade frame, shall be constructed primarily of brick or stone, constructed principally in a single plane. E.I.F.S (exterior insulation systems) shall not be permitted. The top of the parapet wall shall be flat or step slightly to accentuate end piers. (a) The facade frame shall be capped by a stone, or simulated stone, coping or narrow cap flashing. Brick shall be laid primarily in running bond with minimal decorative detail. 
(b)  Storefront opening. Storefronts shall be directly accessible from public sidewalks. Each storefront must have transparent areas, equal to 70 percent of its portion of the facade, between one and eight feet from the ground. The wood or metal glass framing system shall be painted, bronze, or powder coated. The building entry is often centered in the storefront opening and is commonly recessed. 
(c)  [Blank walls.] Blank walls shall not face a public street or parking area. Walls facing a public street or parking area shall included windows and architectural features customarily found on the front facade of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge detailing, or decorative finish materials. 
(d)  Canopies/awnings. A canopy or awning is typically located at the top of the storefront opening. 
i.  Awning shall be traditional in design; they shall be triangular in section, sloping outward and down from the top of the opening. Narrow front and side flaps are common. Round-top, half-round, box, or other unusual awning shapes are discouraged. Internally lighted awnings are prohibited. Signage on awnings shall be limited. 
ii.  Canopies shall be narrow in elevation, six inches to 12 inches, and flat. Typically such canopies would have internal drainage. Canopies shall be self-supporting or supported by tension rods. Canopy projections to be limited to 48 inches. Sloping, or unusually shaped, canopies are prohibited. 
(5)  Rear facades. Rear facades, facades not facing a public right-of-way, are as important as street facades because they are located adjacent to parking and, therefore, serve as the primary entrance to the building. Often times they must also accommodate service and delivery functions. 
Rear facades shall exhibit the same components as street facades, however, need not follow as rigorous a design model: 
(a)  Facade frame. The facade frame, like that at the street facade, shall be constructed principally in a single plane. If a parapet is used at the rear facade, the parapet wall shall be flat or step slightly to accentuate end piers, as illustrated. If no parapet is used, downspouts shall be located at the outer sides of the facades, not in the middle of the facade. Acceptable materials include brick or stone consistent with the design of the front facade. 
(b)  Storefront opening. Like the street facade, the storefront opening shall be a rectangular or square opening, ten feet to 12 feet high, yet it may be a smaller portion of the width of the facade, or bay than the street facade; approximately 40 percent of the width. The opening shall be almost entirely glass (window, showcases, or door) with few subdivisions. The wood or metal glass framing system shall be painted, bronze, or powder coated. The building entry is often centered in the storefront opening and is commonly recessed. 
(c)  Canopies/awnings. A canopy or awning typically located at the top of the storefront opening, is recommended. 
i.  Awnings shall be traditional in design; they shall be triangular in section, sloping outward and sown from the top of the opening. Narrow front and side flaps are common. Round-top, half-round, may be approved by the city planning commission if it is determined that a round-top or half-found awning is consistent with the architectural character of the building. Box, or other unusual awning shapes are prohibited. Internally lighted awnings are also prohibited. Awnings are not intended to be a principal means of signage. 
ii.  Canopies shall be narrow in elevation and flat. Typically such canopies would have internal drainage. Canopies shall be self-supporting or supported by tension rods, as illustrated. Canopy projections to be limited to 48?. 
(6)  Materials. Maintained consistent palette of materials is important to establish continuity within the streetscape and to maintain and enhance the overall appearance of the village. The following are identified as acceptable building materials. 


Rear Facade Elements 
(a)  Facade frame. Acceptable materials: 
i.  Brick: Shall be standard modular brick with common tooled mortar joints. Untooled joints, distressed brick, or irregular shaped brick are prohibited. Brick color and texture shall be compatible with original brick facades in the central business district. Textures varied from smooth or glazed to rough. Textures tended to be uniform. 
ii.  Stone: Smooth finish stone such as limestone or sandstone. 
iii.  Aluminum parapet cap: Typical material is aluminum or painted sheet steel. Color and finish shall match that of window framing system. 
iv.  Artificial stone and pre-case parapet cap: To simulate traditional limestone and sandstone caps. 
(b)  Storefront opening. Acceptable materials: 
i.  Storefront framing system: Aluminum or pre-painted steel storefront glazing system. Natural finish aluminum is the most common material and finish. 
ii.  Glass: Clear or with slight green tint. 
iii.  Entry door: One or two-lite door matching storefront glazing system. 
(c)  Canopies. Acceptable materials: 
i.  Canopy facia trim: Metal. Typically, natural finish aluminum or painted. 
ii.  Soffit: Metal or cement plaster. 
iii.  Support rods: Metal. 
(d)  Awnings. Acceptable materials: 
i.  Frame: No requirements. 
ii.  Fabric: Standard fabrics for non-internally lighted awnings. Patterns and colors to be compatible with other facade materials. 
(7)  Colors. Colors shall be limited to those traditional colors that were predominant in early American architectural styles. A color board showing the proposed colors and materials of the various exterior building elements shall be submitted during the site plan review process. 
(8)  Design standard modifications. When a particular building design and the materials and colors or combination of materials and colors proposed to be used in the exterior walls are found by the city planning commission to be in keeping with the intent and purpose of this section, but may differ from the strict application of this section, the city planning commission may modify the requirements of this section. 
(9)  Signs. All signs in the C-2 district shall comply the City Sign Code and be compatible with the architectural style and details of the building on which they are located. 
(10)  Lighting. 
(a)  Site lighting for parking lots shall utilize a similar traditional style fixture as those used in the village streetscape. The model number for the light pole and luminaire, as well as detailed product specifications will be provided by the city. 
(b)  The light source shall be consistent with that used in the city's street lighting along Kercheval Avenue. 
(c)  The light intensity shall average a minimum of one-half foot-candles, measured five feet above grade for parking lots and one- to three-foot-candles measured five feet above grade for pedestrian sidewalks. 
(d)  All lighting shall be shielded or directed away from any adjacent roads, parking, residential zone, or residential use. 
(e)  Building lighting shall be directed downward toward the building. Fixtures shall be compatible with the traditional style of building architecture. 
(Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-306. - Specifically prohibited uses. 
    In order to clarify the type of permitted uses in the C-2 district, the following uses, among others, are specifically prohibited: 
(a)  Pawn shops. 
(b)  Currency exchanges. 
(c)  Payday loan stores. 
(d)  Resale shops. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VI, 10-19-09) 
DIVISION 8A. - HF HOSPITAL FACILITIES DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-307. - Statement of purpose. 
    The hospital facilities (HF) zone district is intended to accommodate the unique nature and requirements of large scale and significant medical facilities associated with a full service hospital and their accessory uses in a manner compatible with the surrounding land uses. 
    Further, it is designed and intended to: 
(1)  Help meet the health and wellness needs of the community. 
(2)  Provide opportunities for the logical and orderly development of hospital facilities. 
(3)  Ensure compatibility between hospital facilities and surrounding residential land uses. 
(4)  Minimize traffic related impacts on adjacent road network. 
(Ord. No. 412, § I, 2-24-14) 
Sec. 90-308. - Permitted uses. 
    In order to ensure consistency with the master plan and the purpose of the HF district, the HF district has been divided in to four subdistricts. The following table lists the permitted, special approval, accessory, and not permitted use allowed in the four subdistricts. 
Use HF-4 HF-3 HF-2 HF-1 Ambulance 
service/ 
maintenance A - - - Conference 
facilities A A - - Diagnostic/ 
laboratory P P - - Educational 
facilities A A - - For the training of interns, nurses or allied health care personnel Essential services P P - - Health club/fitness center A A - - Not available to the public Hospitals P P - - Limited commercial service uses A A - - Uses of a commercial character that are compatible with and are intended to support the needs of the employees or patrons of the district in which they are located. Uses such as but not limited to the following may be considered: pharmacy or optical sales, child or adult day care services, business services, cafeterias and restaurant uses, barber/beauty shops, dry-cleaning drop off, florists, banks, outdoor cafes and outdoor seating areas Mechanical equipment and accessory structures less than 650 square feet in area and 15 feet in height A A A A May be located in parking areas that do not meet the minimum setback requirements Medical clinics P P - - Medical research P P - - Mobile medical technology A - - - Nursing home/ 
convalescent S S - - Including Interim/congregate care (a shared living environment designed to integrate the housing and services needs of elders), nursing home, and convalescent homes. Not including independent or assisted living facilities Parking-Above ground A A P - Parking may be located above existing grade Parking-At grade A A P P No parking level may be located above existing grade Places of worship A A - - Private recreational facilities A A - - Not available to the public Professional office P P - - Primarily for hospital related professions, activities, or support services Short term 
rehabilitation A A - - Specialized 
lodging S S - - i.e. Ronald McDonald House  
Key: P - Permitted S - Special Approval A - Accessory - Not Permitted 
(Ord. No. 412, § I, 2-24-14) 
Sec. 90-309. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
(a)  Setbacks. The following schedule lists the setback requirements for the HF district: 
Parking 1, 2 
(In Feet) HF-4 Buildings 
(In Feet) HF-3 Buildings 
(In Feet) Maumee 40 40 - Cadieux 20 34 140 3 Jefferson 50 - 550 4 Notre Dame 20 40 140  
;adv=6;(1)  Existing parking areas that do not meet the required setbacks may be allowed to be repaired or replaced but not expanded. 
(2)  Light wells may project into the required setback, but in no case shall encroach closer than ten feet to a lot line adjacent to a street. 
(3)  The minimum setback from Cadieux for buildings in the HF-3 district may be reduced to 40 feet subject to special use approval. 
(4)  The minimum setback from Jefferson for buildings in the HF-3 district may be reduced to 450 feet subject to special use approval. 
(b)  Building height. The following schedule lists the maximum building height requirements for the HF district: 
Building Height 
(In Feet) HF-4 1 HF-3 35 2 HF-2 35 HF-1 -  
  1  Buildings in the HF-4 district may not exceed the maximum height of the existing building as of the date the ordinance from which this division is derived goes into effect. 
  2  Buildings in the HF-3 district that exceed 35 feet shall be setback a minimum of 140 feet from Cadieux. Buildings in the HF-3 district shall not exceed the building height allowed in the HF-4 district under any circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 412, § I, 2-24-14) 
Sec. 90-310. - Protective screening. 
(a)  Any surface parking visible from a public street must be screened from the street with a six foot tall decorative wall constructed of brick. To avoid a continuous horizontal surface, there shall be offsets or other architectural features on the wall surface. Walls may not be located within ten feet of an adjacent right-of-way. In addition, a landscape plan shall be provided indicating the use of evergreen and deciduous plant material subject to the approval of the city manager or his designee to further minimize the visual impact of the wall. 
(Ord. No. 412, § I, 2-24-14) 
Sec. 90-311. - Development standards. 
    The following standards shall apply to all new development, redevelopment, or renovation within the HF district: 
(1)  All buildings and other architectural elements shall be subject to review by the City Manager or his designee to ensure compatibility with the existing hospital and surrounding neighborhoods. 
(2)  All buildings shall be predominantly brick with stone and glass as acceptable accent materials. 
(3)  Buildings that have facades greater than 100 feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate wall plane projections or recesses. No uninterrupted length of any façade shall exceed 20 horizontal feet. 
(Ord. No. 412, § I, 2-24-14) 
Sec. 90-312. - Parking. 
    At the time of adoption of this section, the hospital in the HF district shall pay to have a parking study conducted of the existing facility to document current parking supply and parking demand generation to be conducted by a parking consultant selected by the hospital and approved by the city. This study shall be revised for each building addition, or for major changes in use as determined by the city manager or his designee. In no case shall the parking supply be less than 110 percent of the parking demand generation. 
(Ord. No. 412, § I, 2-24-14) 
Sec. 90-313. - Site plan review. 
    For all new construction, renovation consisting of exterior modifications, new use, or expansion of existing use in the HF district over 1,000 square feet or that would represent a major change in use as determined by the city manager or his designee, a site plan must be submitted to the city planning commission showing all buildings, parking areas and landscaping at a scale sufficient to permit study of all elements of the plan. Typical elevations (with color renderings and a material board) and floor plans of the building must also be provided. A duly licensed or certified design professional must prepare plans. 
    A community impact statement must be completed with each application. The contents of the community impact statement are contained in the forms available at the city. If the plans meet the required standards and design and indicate no adverse effects which, in the opinion of the city planning commission, cause injury to adjoining property or the city as a whole, the city planning commission shall determine whether the required standards have been met and then may approve or disapprove the plans. Plans so approved shall regulate the development on the premises unless modified in the same manner as the plans were originally approved. 
    The hospital shall provide the city with an annual report from the management entity providing an update on the status of the facility and addressing any changes in the operation or other impacts such as traffic and parking. 
(Ord. No. 412, § I, 2-24-14) 
Sec. 90-314. - Notice. 
    Notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of all property for which site plan approval is being considered, to the owners of all real property within 150 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 150 feet of the boundary of the property in question. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four such units or spatial areas, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. This notice shall be sent not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing schedule. The noticing requirements from section 90-77 shall be followed where public notice is required by the zoning code (special approval uses or variance). 
(Ord. No. 412, § I, 2-24-14) 
Sec. 90-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT 

Sec. 90-316. - Statement of purpose. 
    The P-1 vehicular parking district is intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used for off-street vehicular parking or private cars, so as to serve business, commercial and institutional areas. This district is also designed to afford maximum protection to next adjacent residential areas by providing landscaped setbacks, fences and well-designed parking lot facilities. It is also intended that this district act as a transitional area between nonresidential areas and residential areas, thereby permitting private developers as well as public agencies to provide needed off-street parking. There is also permitted as special land uses offices, financial institutions, utility buildings and facilities and residential apartments subject to design and locational criteria. 
(Code 1980, § 5.158; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-317. - Permitted uses. 
    Vehicular parking, subject to requirements in section 90-318-90-334 inclusive and commercial antennas subject to provisions at section 90-44 are permitted in the P-1 district. 
(Code 1980, § 5.159; Ord. No. 298, § 1, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-318. - Uses permitted after special review. 
    In the P-1 district the following special approval uses are permitted, subject to application design and locational criteria provided under section 90-319, and to the approval of the city planning commission after public hearing and notice pursuant to the requirements of Section 4a of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq.), as amended, and to site plan review as provided under section 90-333. The following uses are considered to be supporting and compatible with those uses listed in section 90-297 provided they comply with the design and locational criteria in section 90-319. 
(1)  Offices, either business, professional, medical or governmental, including stockbroker, real estate and insurance offices, and travel agencies. 
(2)  Banks, savings and loan, credit union or other type of financial institutions. 
(3)  Buildings and facilities for furnishing utility services, including heat, light, water and power. 
(4)  Residential apartments. 
(Code 1980, § 5.160; Ord. No. 298, § 1, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-319. - Design and locational criteria for uses permitted after special approval. 
(1)  Any of the uses permitted after special approval in the P-1 district shall only be permitted if they are an integral part of a parking structure serving a use or uses located in the C-2 central business district. 
(2)  Office, financial, and utility uses may occupy a portion of the ground floor of a parking structure consisting of the first 40 feet from any facade of the parking structure facing a road. 
(3)  Residential uses in the P-1 district shall only be located above the top level of a parking structure provided the total combined structure shall not exceed 35 feet. 
(4)  Residential dwellings in the P-1 district shall comply with the minimum area per dwelling unit and minimum floor area per dwelling located in the C-2 district. 
(5)  The architectural design of any parking structure must be compatible with the design of buildings located in the C-2 district. 
(Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-320. - Limitation of use. 
    The following regulations shall apply in P-1 districts: 
(1)  Parking areas shall be used only for parking of passenger vehicles operated by the management, the employees, customers and guests of the enterprise doing business in the city. 
(2)  Parking may be with or without charge. 
(3)  No business involving the repair or services to vehicles, trailers, mobile homes, travel trailers, boats or boat trailers, or sale, display, or storage of same shall be permitted from or upon property zoned in a P-1 district. 
(4)  No building other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon the premises, except as provided for in section 90-319, 90-332 and 90-44. There shall not be more than two such buildings in the area and each such building shall not be more than 50 square feet in area nor shall exceed 15 feet in height. 
(5)  Any signs erected or maintained on the premises shall comply with the requirements of chapter 58 of this Code, and any other city sign regulations. 
(Code 1980, § 5.160; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 357, § IV, 8-15-05) 
Sec. 90-321. - Location. 
    All P-1 districts shall be contiguous to a business, commercial or industrial district. In all cases, lots, which are use for parking, shall be the adjacent successive lots from the business or commercial property. 
(Code 1980, § 5.161; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-322. - Ingress and egress. 
    In P-1 districts adequate ingress and egress shall be provided for vehicles to premises used for parking and shall be in accordance with the plan, which shall be submitted in triplicate for approval in accordance with section 90-333. 
(Code 1980, § 5.162; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-323. - Surface of parking area. 
    In P-1 districts the parking area shall be provided with a pavement in accordance with section 90-159(2). 
(Code 1980, § 5.163; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-324. - Front yard. 
(a)  Where a P-1 district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage on the same block with the P-1 district, and wherein residential structures have been erected, there shall be provided a yard space equal to the average setback of homes in the block on the same side of the street. 
(b)  Where the P-1 district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage in the same block with the P-1 district, and wherein residential structures have been erected having a front yard of greater than 20 feet in depth, there shall be provided a yard space equal in depths to the minimum distance of any residential structure so located or to the minimum distance required by such restriction, except in cases where residential structures have been erected at the rear of lots. In such cases, the yard space shall not be less than 20 feet in depth or equal to the minimum required by the private restrictions. 
(c)  Where the P-1 district lies across a street and opposite a residentially zoned district where the lots front upon such a street, there shall be provided a yard space not less than 20 feet in depth, and a protective wall as set forth in section 90-326. 
(Code 1980, § 5.164; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-325. - Side yards. 
(a)  Where a P-1 district is contiguous to side lot lines of premises in a residentially zoned district, there shall be provided a side yard not less than ten feet in width between the side lot lines and the parking area. 
(b)  Where the P-1 district lies across a street and opposite a residentially zoned district where the side lot lines are contiguous to such street, there shall be provided a yard space not less than ten feet in depth. 
(Code 1980, § 5.165; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-326. - Protective wall. 
    Where the P-1 district adjoins or fronts upon residentially zoned or used property, there shall be provided around the parking area between the required yard spaces and the actual parking area a wall in accordance with section 90-159(5). 
(Code 1980, § 5.166; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-327. - Bumper rail. 
    In P-1 district there shall be provided a bumper rail in accordance with section 90-159(6). 
(Code 1980, § 5.167; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-328. - Landscaping. 
(a)  Wherever a wall is required, all land between the wall and the boundaries of the P-1 district shall be kept free from refuse or debris, and shall be landscaped. The landscaped area adjacent to the wall shall be planted with deciduous shrubs, evergreens and/or ornamental trees. Fruit trees shall not be used. Where the arrangement of planting materials will result in exposure of the walls, the walls shall be covered with ivy, spirea border or similar plant material. The remainder of the landscape area, which is not planted with the aforementioned stock, shall be in well-kept lawn. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(b)  All planting plans shall be first submitted to the building inspector for approval as to suitability of planting materials and arrangement thereof in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and requirements of section 90-159. 
(c)  Where required landscaping is not sufficiently and properly maintained, the city manager may, after five days' notice has been given to the property owner as shown on the latest assessment roll, order whatever steps are necessary to suitably maintain the landscaped area and charge all of the costs plus a $5.00 fee to the property owner. 
(Code 1980, § 5.168; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-329. - Lighting. 
    Where lighting facilities are provided, they shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from all residentially zoned properties which are adjacent to the P-1 district, and shall be in accordance with section 90-159(3). 
(Code 1980, § 5.169; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-330. - Approval. 
    All plans for the development of any P-1 district must first be approved by the building inspector before construction is started, after site plan approval by the city planning commission. 
(Code 1980, § 5.170; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-331. - Modifications of requirements. 
    The board of zoning appeals upon application by the property owner of the parking area may modify the yard, wall and ingress and egress requirements where in unusual circumstances, undue hardship would be suffered or no good purpose would be served in compliance with the requirements of this division. In all cases where such a protective wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress or egress to a parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area and better visibility. 
(Code 1980, § 5.171; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-332. - Parking structures. 
    Notwithstanding requirements set forth in section 90-320(4) and section 90-319 for uses permitted under special approval, parking structure may be permitted in the P-1 district subject to the following conditions: A site plan must be submitted per requirements at section 90-333. Specific design standards for the parking structure and appurtenances (e.g., signs) thereto follow: 
(1)  When the parking structure is contiguous to side lot lines of a residentially zoned or used district, there shall be provided a minimum side yard of 15 feet between the side lot lines and the structure. 
(2)  Permitted height of any parking structure shall not exceed 30 feet except as permitted at section 90-319(4). For every one foot the parking structure exceeds ten feet in height, the yard requirements shall be increased by one foot beyond the minimum 15-foot requirements in subsection (1) above. 
(3)  When parking is permitted on the roof of a parking structure, an ornamental wall shall be provided around the perimeter of the roof. This wall shall be of suitable material and in harmony with the architecture of the parking structure and sufficiently opaque as to substantially conceal parked cars. 
(4)  All exterior lighting, especially that which may be provided on the roof, shall be glare-free and so arranged as to reflect away from all residentially zoned or used properties affected by the parking structure. There shall be no lighting of elevations or a parking structure facing any residentially used or zoned property. 
(5)  Signs shall be in accordance with all related city ordinances. 
(Code 1980, § 5.172; Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-333. - Site plan review. 
    For all new construction, renovation consisting of exterior modifications, new use, or expansion of existing use in a P-1 district, a site plan must be submitted to the city planning commission showing all buildings, parking areas and landscaping at a scale sufficient to permit study of all elements of the plan. Typical elevations (with color renderings and a material board) and floor plans of the building must also be provided. All plans must be reviewed and reports submitted thereon by the director of public safety, city engineer, city planner and building inspector. If the plans meet the required standards and design and indicate no adverse effects which, in the opinion of the city planning commission, cause injury to adjoining property or the city as a whole, the city planning commission shall determine whether the required standards have been met and then may approve or disapprove the plans. Plans so approved shall regulate the development on the premises unless modified in the same manner as the plans were originally approved. 
(Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 90-334. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
    The area, height, bulk and placement requirements for P-1 districts shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 336, § I, 11-18-02) 
DIVISION 10. - T-1 MIXED USE TRANSITION-1 

Sec. 90-335. - Statement of purpose. 
    The T-1, transition-1 district is designed and intended to provide a transition from the higher intensity mixed-use core of the central business district (CBD) and the edges of the village. While there are a wider range of uses permitted in this district, it is still intended to promote the development of a pedestrian oriented and accessible, mixed-use district in which a variety of retail, commercial, office, service, civic and residential uses are permitted. Each use shall be complementary to the stated function and purpose of the district and shall not have adverse impact upon adjacent street capacity and safety, utilities, and other city services. 
    The T-1 mixed-use district is further designed and intended to: 
(1)  Maintain and enhance a viable mix of complimentary uses and discourage domination of the village by any single category of use. 
(2)  Provide a physical transition from the larger buildings anticipated in the core of the village to the lower buildings anticipated at the edges of the village. 
(3)  Preserve and enhance the village as a community asset that contributes positively to property values, community identity, and a sense of place. 
(4)  Support the central business district for the citizens of the community to shop in a safe and enjoyable environment. 
(5)  Create a mix of businesses that encourages an active pedestrian environment and promotes both convenience and destination shopping activities while providing opportunities for other uses including office and service uses. 
(6)  Extend greater opportunities for traditional community living, working, housing and recreation to citizens and residents of the city. 
(7)  Discourage the development of separate off-street parking facilities for each individual use, and to encourage the development of off-street parking facilities designed to accommodate the needs of several individual uses with access from side streets only. 
(8)  Promote the creation of urban places such as plazas which are oriented to the pedestrian thereby promoting citizen security and social interaction. 
(9)  Promote developments where the physical, visual and spatial characteristics are established and reinforced through the consistent use of traditional urban design and architectural design elements. Such elements shall relate to the design characteristics of an individual structure or development based on usage of traditional early American and late 1800 to early 1900 architectural style influences, ranging from Colonial styles of Georgian and Williamsburg; Victorian styles of Italianate, Gothic and Queen Anne; and later Romanticized styles of Tudor and French Country, used in a harmonious manner, resulting in coherent overall development patterns and streetscape for the downtown as well as surrounding areas. 
(10)  Discourage commercial and business uses that create objectionable noise, glare or odors. 
(11)  Promote uses that support and compliment the retail focus of the village, such as office and residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-336. - Permitted uses. 
    In the T-1 district the following uses are permitted provided that the use occupies 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or less. The following uses are permitted because they are considered to support and contribute to a vibrant and viable downtown environment. 
(1)  Advertising signs subject to the requirements set forth in chapter 58. 
(2)  Antique and consignment shops. 
(3)  Art galleries. 
(4)  Bake shops, providing that at least 75 percent of all baked goods produced on the premises are sold on the premises at retail and further provided that floor area used for bakery production shall be limited to 500 square feet per establishment. 
(5)  Banks, savings and loan, credit union or other type of financial institutions. 
(6)  Barbershop or beauty shop. 
(7)  Clothing or costume rental establishments. 
(8)  Department stores. 
(9)  Fitness centers or dance studios. 
(10)  Furniture stores. 
(11)  Interior decorating establishments including bath and kitchen design, with a showroom. 
(12)  Offices, either business professional, medical, or governmental, including stockbroker, real estate, insurance offices, and travel agencies. 
(13)  Office supply store. 
(14)  Off-street parking and loading in accordance with article V. 
(15)  Outdoor cafés, and outdoor eating areas subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Such eating areas shall be defined by planters, posts with ropes, or other decorative, removable enclosures. 
b.  The outdoor seating shall in no way impair the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby properties. 
c.  Outdoor seating shall be subject to applicable city, county and state requirements. 
d.  A site plan shall specify the plans for storage of tables, chairs, and equipment during the months when the outdoor seating is not in use. 
e.  The outdoor eating area shall be kept clean and void of litter at all times. 
f.  Outdoor eating areas shall not be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
g.  The capacity of the outdoor seating area shall be provided by the applicant and verified by the building official. 
h.  Additional signs associated with the outdoor eating area are prohibited. 
i.  Details regarding the hours and type of entertainment, music, speakers, or similar devices used in outdoor eating areas must be identified at the time of special use/site plan review. 
j.  Preparation of food and beverages shall be prohibited in any outdoor eating area. The sale and consumption of alcohol are governed by the Michigan Liquor Control Act and local ordinance. 
k.  In addition to the standards listed above, outdoor sidewalk cafés shall also be subject to the following standards: 
(i)  To allow for pedestrian circulation, a minimum of five feet of sidewalk along the curb and leading to the entrance to the establishment must be maintained free of tables and other encumbrances. If the sidewalk is not wide enough to allow for a five-foot wide clearance for circulation, the café should not be permitted. 
(ii)  Pedestrian circulation and access to store entrances should not be impaired. Thus, a boundary (maximum encroachment width and length) into the public sidewalk should be established, with an accessible aisle being maintained between this line and the curb, in accordance with the provisions of the National Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Michigan barrier-free requirements. 
(iii)  Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles, and other elements of street furniture should be compatible with the architectural character of the adjacent buildings. If table umbrellas will be used, they should complement building colors. 
(iv)  Liability issues for use of the public sidewalk should be addressed and reviewed by the city attorney. 
(12)  Photographic establishments. 
(13)  Residential uses above the first floor of a building subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Residential uses shall only be located on the 2 nd story of a building or above. 
b.  Residential uses shall be intergraded into the design of a larger mixed-use development. 
c.  No dwelling unit shall be located on the same floor as a business use (excluding a home occupation), and no floor may be utilized for business or office purpose which is located above a floor used for residential purposes. 
d.  Adequate provisions for off-street parking for any use above the second floor must be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city planning commission. 
e.  Parking for residential uses shall be located in a parking structure connected to or designed as an integral part of the proposed development. 
(14)  Terrace dwellings and apartment houses. 
(15)  Restaurants except those having a drive-in or drive-through facility. 
(16)  Generally recognized retail sales businesses, within an enclosed building, that supplies commodities on the premises for use or consumption off the premises, such as, but not limited to: Groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware. 
(17)  Uses similar to the uses listed above as determined by the city manager or his designee. Such determination shall be based on a finding of fact: 
a.  That the proposed use(s) will contribute to the viable mix of uses in the village; 
b.  Is compatible with the uses permitted in the village; and 
(c)  Will not adversely impact the retail oriented environment of the village. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-337. - Permitted uses after special approval. 
    In the T-1 district the following special approval uses are permitted, subject to the approval of the city planning commission after public hearing and notice pursuant to the requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, and to site plan review as provided under section 90-302. The following uses are considered to be supporting and compatible with those uses listed in section 90-336 provided they comply with the general criteria identified in section 90-300. 
(1)  Uses permitted in section 90-297 that exceed 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Buildings and facilities for furnishing utility services, including heat, light, water and power. 
(3)  Hotel subject to the following standards: 
a.  Adequate parking, as determined by the city, for hotel guests and visitor shall be located in a parking structure connected to or designed as an integral part of the hotel. 
b.  Drop-off or pick-up areas shall be located in that portion of the building directly opposite of the Kercheval Avenue frontage. 
c.  The area located on the ground floor between the exterior wall of a building facing Kercheval Avenue or any intersecting side street and a line parallel to the exterior wall, setback 20 feet, with the exception of the hotel entrance, shall be occupied with a use permitted under section 90-297 or section 90-298 subject to all applicable conditions. Exceptions to this condition may be granted by the city planning commission provided the applicant can demonstrate that the proposal will be consistent with the intent of the T-1 district to provide a pedestrian oriented environment. 
(4)  Interior decorating establishments including bath and kitchen design, without a showroom. 
(5)  Theaters. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-338. - General criteria for uses permitted after special approval in the T-1 district. 
    In addition to specific site plan standards which the city planning commission may apply to the use, the standards contained in section 90-300 shall serve the city planning commission as the basis for decisions involving special land uses. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-339. - Rezoning area requirements. 
    No district shall be zoned as a T-1 district unless the zone shall contain several or all of the uses in section 90-336 and satisfies the objectives of section 90-335. Any expansion of the T-1 district must be consistent with the city's master plan. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-340. - Site plan review. 
    For all new construction, renovation consisting of exterior modifications, new use, or expansion of existing use in a T-1 district, a site plan must be submitted to the city planning commission showing all buildings, parking areas and landscaping at a scale sufficient to permit study of all elements of the plan. Typical elevations (with color renderings and a material board) and floor plans of the building must also be provided. Plans must be prepared by a duly licensed or certified design professional. 
    If the plans meet the required standards and design and indicate no adverse effects which, in the opinion of the city planning commission, cause injury to adjoining property or the city as a whole, the city planning commission shall determine whether the required standards have been met and then may approve or disapprove the plans. Plans so approved shall regulate the development on the premises unless modified in the same manner as the plans were originally approved. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-341. - Protective screening. 
    Protective screening for T-1 districts that directly abut residential districts shall be in compliance with the regulations set forth in section 90-39. In addition, any parking visible from a public street must be screened from the street with a continuous row of evergreen shrubs a minimum of 30 inches high at the time of planting, or a 30-inch decorative masonry wall constructed of brick or stone. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-342. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
    The area, height, bulk and placement requirements for T-1 district shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-343. - Development standards. 
    The development standards for the T-1 district shall be in accordance with the standards in section 90-305. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-344. - Specifically prohibited uses. 
    In order to clarify the type of permitted uses in the T-1 district, the following uses, among others, are specifically prohibited: 
(a)  Pawn shops. 
(b)  Currency exchanges. 
(c)  Payday loan stores. 
(d)  Resale shops. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VII, 10-19-09) 
DIVISION 11. - T-2 MIXED USE TRANSITION-2[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 389, § VIII, adopted October 19, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 90-335A-343A. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 90-345-90-350.3. 

Sec. 90-345. - Statement of purpose. 
    The T-2, Transition-2 district is designed and intended to provide a transition from the higher intensity mixed-use core of the central business district (CBD) and the edges of the village. While there are a wider range of uses permitted in this district, it is still intended to promote the development of a pedestrian oriented and accessible, mixed-use district in which a variety of retail, commercial, office, service, civic and residential uses are permitted. Each use shall be complementary to the stated function and purpose of the district and shall not have adverse impact upon adjacent street capacity and safety, utilities, and other city services. 
    The T-2 mixed-use district is further designed and intended to: 
(1)  Maintain and enhance a viable mix of complimentary uses and discourage domination of the village by any single category of use. 
(2)  Provide a physical transition from the larger buildings anticipated in the core of the village to the lower buildings anticipated at the edges of the village. 
(3)  Preserve and enhance the village as a community asset that contributes positively to property values, community identity, and a sense of place. 
(4)  Support the central business district for the citizens of the community to shop in a safe and enjoyable environment. 
(5)  Create a mix of businesses that encourages an active pedestrian environment and promotes both convenience and destination shopping activities while providing opportunities for other uses including office and service uses. 
(6)  Extend greater opportunities for traditional community living, working, housing and recreation to citizens and residents of the city. 
(7)  Discourage the development of separate off-street parking facilities for each individual use, and to encourage the development of off-street parking facilities designed to accommodate the needs of several individual uses with access from side streets only. 
(8)  Promote the creation of urban places such as plazas which are oriented to the pedestrian thereby promoting citizen security and social interaction. 
(9)  Promote developments where the physical, visual and spatial characteristics are established and reinforced through the consistent use of traditional urban design and architectural design elements. Such elements shall relate to the design characteristics of an individual structure or development based on usage of traditional early American and late 1800 to early 1900 architectural style influences, ranging from Colonial styles of Georgian and Williamsburg; Victorian styles of Italianate, Gothic and Queen Anne; and later Romanticized styles of Tudor and French Country, used in a harmonious manner, resulting in coherent overall development patterns and streetscape for the downtown as well as surrounding areas. 
(10)  Discourage commercial and business uses that create objectionable noise, glare or odors. 
(11)  Promote uses that support and compliment the retail focus of the village, such as office and residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VIII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-346. - Permitted uses. 
    In the T-2 district the following uses are permitted provided that the use occupies 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or less. The following uses are permitted because they are considered to support and contribute to a vibrant and viable downtown environment. 
(1)  Advertising signs subject to the requirements set forth in chapter 58. 
(2)  Antique and consignment shops. 
(3)  Art galleries. 
(4)  Bake shops, providing that at least 75 percent of all baked goods produced on the premises are sold on the premises at retail and further provided that floor area used for bakery production shall be limited to 500 square feet per establishment. 
(5)  Banks, savings and loan, credit union or other type of financial institutions. 
(6)  Barbershop or beauty shop. 
(7)  Clothing or costume rental establishments. 
(8)  Department stores. 
(9)  Fitness centers or dance studios. 
(10)  Furniture stores. 
(11)  Interior decorating establishments including bath and kitchen design, with a showroom. 
(12)  Offices, either business professional, medical, or governmental, including stockbroker, real estate, insurance offices, and travel agencies. 
(13)  Office supply store. 
(14)  Off-street parking and loading in accordance with article V. 
(15)  Outdoor cafés, and outdoor eating areas subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Such eating areas shall be defined by planters, posts with ropes, or other decorative, removable enclosures. 
b.  The outdoor seating shall in no way impair the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby properties. 
c.  Outdoor seating shall be subject to applicable city, county and state requirements. 
d.  A site plan shall specify the plans for storage of tables, chairs, and equipment during the months when the outdoor seating is not in use. 
e.  The outdoor eating area shall be kept clean and void of litter at all times. 
f.  Outdoor eating areas shall not be operated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
g.  The capacity of the outdoor seating area shall be provided by the applicant and verified by the building official. 
h.  Additional signs associated with the outdoor eating area are prohibited. 
i.  Details regarding the hours and type of entertainment, music, speakers, or similar devices used in outdoor eating areas must be identified at the time of special use/site plan review. 
j.  Preparation of food and beverages shall be prohibited in any outdoor eating area. The sale and consumption of alcohol are governed by the Michigan Liquor Control Act and local ordinance. 
k.  In addition to the standards listed above, outdoor sidewalk cafés shall also be subject to the following standards: 
(i)  To allow for pedestrian circulation, a minimum of five feet of sidewalk along the curb and leading to the entrance to the establishment must be maintained free of tables and other encumbrances. If the sidewalk is not wide enough to allow for a five-foot wide clearance for circulation, the café should not be permitted. 
(ii)  Pedestrian circulation and access to store entrances should not be impaired. Thus, a boundary (maximum encroachment width and length) into the public sidewalk should be established, with an accessible aisle being maintained between this line and the curb, in accordance with the provisions of the National Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Michigan barrier-free requirements. 
(iii)  Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles, and other elements of street furniture should be compatible with the architectural character of the adjacent buildings. If table umbrellas will be used, they should complement building colors. 
(iv)  Liability issues for use of the public sidewalk should be addressed and reviewed by the city attorney. 
(16)  Photographic establishments. 
(17)  Residential use subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Residential uses shall only be located on the 2 nd story of a building or above. 
b.  Residential uses shall be intergraded into the design of a larger mixed-use development. 
c.  No dwelling unit shall be located on the same floor as a business use (excluding a home occupation), and no floor may be utilized for business or office purpose which is located above a floor used for residential purposes. 
d.  Adequate provisions for off-street parking for any use above the second floor must be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city planning commission. 
e.  Parking for residential uses shall be located in a parking structure connected to or designed as an integral part of the proposed development. 
(18)  Restaurants except those having a drive-in or drive-through facility. 
(19)  Generally recognized retail sales businesses, within an enclosed building, that supplies commodities on the premises for use or consumption off the premises, such as, but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware. 
(20)  Uses similar to the uses listed above as determined by the city manager or his designee. Such determination shall be based on a finding of fact: 
a.  That the proposed use(s) will contribute to the viable mix of uses in the village; 
b.  Is compatible with the uses permitted in the village; and 
c.  Will not adversely impact the retail oriented environment of the village. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VIII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-347. - Permitted uses after special approval. 
    In the T-2 district the following special approval uses are permitted, subject to the approval of the city planning commission after public hearing and notice pursuant to the requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, and to site plan review as provided under section 90-302. The following uses are considered to be supporting and compatible with those uses listed in section 90-336 provided they comply with the general criteria identified in section 90-300. 
(1)  Uses permitted in section 90-297 that exceed 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Buildings and facilities for furnishing utility services, including heat, light, water and power. 
(3)  Hotel subject to the following standards: 
a.  Adequate parking, as determined by the city, for hotel guests and visitor shall be located in a parking structure connected to or designed as an integral part of the hotel. 
b.  Drop-off or pick-up areas shall be located in that portion of the building directly opposite of the Kercheval Avenue frontage. 
c.  The area located on the ground floor between the exterior wall of a building facing Kercheval Avenue or any intersecting side street and a line parallel to the exterior wall, setback 20 feet, with the exception of the hotel entrance, shall be occupied with a use permitted under section 90-297 or section 90-298 subject to all applicable conditions. Exceptions to this condition may be granted by the city planning commission provided the applicant can demonstrate that the proposal will be consistent with the intent of the C-2 district to provide a pedestrian oriented environment. 
(4)  Interior decorating establishments including bath and kitchen design, without a showroom. 
(5)  Theaters. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VIII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-348. - General criteria for uses permitted after special approval in the T-2 district. 
    In addition to specific site plan standards which the city planning commission may apply to the use, the standards contained in section 90-300 shall serve the city planning commission as the basis for decisions involving special land uses. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VIII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-349. - Zoning area requirements. 
    No district shall be zoned as a T-2 district unless the zone shall contain several or all of the uses in section 90-336 and satisfies the objectives of section 90-335. Any expansion of the T-2 district must be consistent with the city's master plan. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VIII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-350. - Site plan review. 
    For all new construction, renovation consisting of exterior modifications, new use, or expansion of existing use in a T-2 district, a site plan must be submitted to the city planning commission showing all buildings, parking areas and landscaping at a scale sufficient to permit study of all elements of the plan. Typical elevations (with color renderings and a material board) and floor plans of the building must also be provided. Plans must be prepared by a duly licensed or certified design professional. 
    If the plans meet the required standards and design and indicate no adverse effects which, in the opinion of the city planning commission, cause injury to adjoining property or the city as a whole, the city planning commission shall determine whether the required standards have been met and then may approve or disapprove the plans. Plans so approved shall regulate the development on the premises unless modified in the same manner as the plans were originally approved. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VIII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-350.1. - Protective screening. 
    Protective screening for T-2 districts that directly abut residential districts shall be in compliance with the regulations set forth in section 90-39. In addition, any parking visible from a public street must be screened from the street with a continuous row of evergreen shrubs a minimum of 30 inches high at the time of planting, or a 30-inch decorative masonry wall constructed of brick or stone. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VIII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-350.2. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
    The area, height, bulk and placement requirements for T-2 district shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 90-351 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VIII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-350.3. - Development standards. 
    The development standards for the T-2 district shall be in accordance with the standards in section 90-305. 
(Ord. No. 389, § VIII, 10-19-09) 
Sec. 90-350.4. - Specifically prohibited uses. 
    In order to clarify the type of permitted uses in the T-2 district, the following uses, among others, are specifically prohibited: 
(a)  Pawn shops. 
(b)  Currency exchanges. 
(c)  Payday loan stores. 
(d)  Resale shops. 
(Ord. No. 389, § IX, 10-19-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 389, § IX, adopted October 19, 2009, set out provisions intended for use as § 90-344A. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 90-350.4. 
Secs. 90-350.5-90-350.99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - T TRANSITION 

Sec. 90-350.100. - Statement of purpose. 
    The T transition district is designed and intended to provide a transition from the vehicular parking district (P-1) on the outside of the mixed-use core of the central business district (C-2) and the surrounding residential areas. This district is intended to accommodate a range of residential uses to serve as a transition between the activities of the village and the surrounding single-family residential land uses. Various types and sizes of residential accommodations would thereby be provided in this district to meet the needs of different age and family groups without over-taxing existing community facilities, utilities, or services. This district shall be pedestrian-oriented, and its residential uses shall be complementary to residential uses both within and adjacent to the T district. 
(Ord. No. 407, § VIII, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-350.101. - Permitted uses. 
    In the T district the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Apartment houses. 
(2)  Hotel subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Adequate parking, as determined by the city, for hotel guests and visitors shall be provided. 
(3)  Housing for elderly, independent. 
(4)  Housing for elderly, assisted. 
(5)  Public parking facilities. 
(6)  One- and two-family homes existing at the time of establishment of the T district. 
(7)  Uses similar to the uses listed above as determined by the city manager, or his designee. 
Such determination shall be based on finding of fact: 
a.  That the proposed uses(s) will contribute to the viable mix of uses in the village; 
b.  Is compatible with the uses permitted in the village; and 
c.  Will not adversely impact the retail oriented environment of the village. 
(Ord. No. 407, § VIII, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-350.102. - Permitted uses after special approval. 
    In the T district the following special approval uses are permitted, subject to the approval of the city planning commission after public hearing and notice pursuant to the requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, and to site plan review as provided under section 90-74. The following uses are considered to be supporting and compatible with those uses listed in section 90-350.101 provided they comply with the standards identified in section 90-75(g). 
(1)  Commercial antenna. 
(Ord. No. 407, § VIII, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-350.103. - Zoning area requirements. 
    No district shall be zoned as a T district unless the zone shall contain several or all of the uses in section 90-350.101 and satisfies the objectives of section 90-350.100. Any expansion of the T district must be consistent with the city's master plan. 
(Ord. No. 407, § VIII, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-350.104. - Site plan review. 
    For all uses permitted in a T district, a site plan must be submitted to the planning commission pursuant to section 90-74. 
(Ord. No. 407, § VIII, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-350.105. - Protective screening. 
    Protective screening for T districts that directly abut residential districts shall be in compliance with the regulations set forth in section 90-39. In addition, any parking visible from a public street must be screened from the street with a continuous row of evergreen shrubs a minimum of 30 inches high at the time of planting, or a 30-inch decorative masonry wall constructed of brick or stone as determined by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 407, § VIII, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-350.106. - Area, height, bulk, and placement requirements. 
    The area, height, bulk, and replacement requirements for the T district shall be in accordance with the schedule of regulations in section 30-351. 
(Ord. No. 407, § VIII, 7-15-13) 
Sec. 90-350.107. - Development standards. 
    Hotels and other uses with accessory commercial or service uses on the first floor shall comply with the development standards in section 90-305. 
    Residential uses shall comply with the following development standards: 
(1)  Site design standards. 
a.  Parking. 
(i)  All parking spaces, including those in garages, shall be located behind the front building wall of the principal building closest to the front street. Exception: Portions of driveway spaces for residential dwelling units may be located in a front yard provided that the driveways pace has a minimum depth of 18 feet measured from the front property line. 
(ii)  Driveways should access side streets for sites with side street access. Driveways may not access front streets when a site has side street access. The driveway standards may be modified to permit driveways that access front streets when side street access is available if there is no reasonable alternative. 
b.  Front yard landscaping. The area between the building and the front street shall be landscaped except where vehicle or pedestrian circulation areas are located. 
c.  Encroachments. Front stoops attached to a dwelling may project up to six feet into a required front yard, but in no case may project into a right-of-way or similar easement. 
d.  Garages. 
(i)  Garage doors may not be facing a public street. 
e.  Building materials. 
(i)  Combination of materials. Building materials may be combined on a building facade horizontally, with the heavier material below the lighter material. 
(ii)  Primary building materials. Primary building materials shall be used on a minimum of 60 percent of the facade are of the building (excluding the area of doors and windows). 
Durable natural or natural-appearing building materials such as brick, stone, exposed logs or timber, cementitious siding, split face block, or other similar materials are preferred primary building materials. Durable synthetic building materials that convincingly match the appearance of natural building materials may be used as a primary building material. 
(iii)  Accent building materials. Accent materials may be used on up to 40 percent of the facade area of the building (excluding the area of doors and windows). 
Acceptable accent materials include decorative precast concrete block, metal, and glass. Non-durable building materials such as EIFS may be used as an accent building material on up to ten percent of the total wall area of any facade, but may not be used on the base level of a building. 
f.  Base, middle, cap standards. 
(i)  Base. 
(A)  The base of the building shall have a minimum height of ten feet. 
(B)  A horizontal molding or cornice shall be provided at the roofline for a one-story building, between the first and second floor for multiple story buildings with two to four stories, or between the first and second floor or second and third floor for five or more story buildings. This molding or cornice adds visual interest and visually separates the base of the building from upper stories. The molding or cornice shall have a minimum height of four inches and a projection of at least two inches. 
(ii)  Middle. The middle area of the building includes upper stories, and is visually defined by the molding or cornice that defines the base of the building and a cornice or eaves line that defines the cap of the building. There are no specific requirements for the middle of the building. Building material transitions may take place between the base and the middle portions of the facade, or within the middle portion of the facade for buildings four stories or greater where the design intent is to create a more substantial appearing base. 
(iii)  Cap. Pitched roofs shall be sloped no less than 5:12, except that roofs for porches and attached sheds may be no less than 2:12. Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets a minimum of 30 inches high, or higher if required to conceal mechanical equipment from view from the front street or from any single family residential property. Flat roofs shall include a cornice to define the top of the building. 
g.  Building transparency. 
(i)  Minimum first floor transparency. The minimum transparency on the first floor front facade shall be 35 percent for buildings with residential first floor uses. 
(ii)  Maximum upper floor transparency. The maximum transparency on upper stories shall not exceed 50 percent. 
(iii)  Proportion of openings. Building openings, including doors and windows, shall be square or vertical in proportion except on the first floor front facade, where windows may have a horizontal proportion. Individual windows with a vertical proportion may be grouped together even if the group of windows will have an overall horizontal proportion. 
h.  Buildings wider than 75 feet shall incorporate vertical elements in the principal façade to mimic smaller-scale development. 
i.  Encroachments. Balconies on upper stories may project up to six feet from the face of the building, and may encroach into setback areas. 
j.  Mechanical equipment and service areas. 
(i)  Service areas, including utility access, loading areas, and dumpsters shall be located in side or rear yards and shall be screened from view from any street and any residentially used property. 
(ii)  Mechanical and utility equipment, such as gas or electrical meters, telephone boxes, utility cabinets, HVAC equipment, and other similar utility devices (whether ground, wall, or roof mounted) shall be screened from view from a point eight feet above grade level at the centerline of any abutting roads and along any parcel line abutting a residentially used property. The applicant shall submit a line of sight drawing demonstrating that the equipment will not be visible from the above locations. Exterior screening materials shall be the same as the predominant materials of the principal building. 
(iii)  Modification of building design standards. In the interest of architectural diversity, the building design standards may be modified to permit alternate materials or design. Any approved modification must result in a building that is equal to or exceeds the quality and design of a building that complies with the building design standards. 
(2)  Stoop building design standards. 
a.  Design features. Any street-facing façade that is visible from a public right-of-way or private road easement shall include features such as, but not limited to columns, cornices, pediments, articulated bases, and fluted masonry covering a minimum of ten percent of the exterior wall area. 
b.  Front porch or stoop required. Each dwelling unit or building subdivision shall have a minimum 30 square feet unenclosed porch or stoop. The porch or stoop shall be raised at least 18 inches above sidewalk grade. 
The porch or stoop may be covered so long as the area between the surface of the top surface of the stoop and the underside of the canopy covering the stoop is at least 75 percent open. For the purpose of calculating the enclosure requirement, the vertical area of any surface or building element intended to enclose the stoop, including screens, shall be subtracted from the total vertical area of the stoop between the floor and the canopy. 
c.  Elevated first floor. In order to provide privacy for first floor rooms, the first floor of the building shall be elevated a minimum of 30 inches above the level of the sidewalk adjacent to the front property line. 
d.  Entrances. A minimum of 75 percent of all units within a stoop building shall have their principal entrance on the front facade of the building. 
(3)  Courtyard building design standards. 
a.  Courtyard width. The courtyard shall not exceed 60 percent of the width of the lot. 
b.  Ground story design. 
(i)  Entrances. All buildings shall have their principal entrance on the front façade of the building. Entrances may be recessed up to vie feet from the front building wall of the building. 
(ii)  Ground story height. A minimum clear height of 12 feet shall be provided for the ground story in a courtyard building. 
(iii)  Bulkhead below first floor windows. First floor windows may not extend down to grade level. A bulkhead or kickplate with a minimum height of one foot shall be provided below first floor windows. The bulkhead should use primary materials, and the chosen material should appear heavier visually than the material used for the walls. 
c.  Modification of building design standards. In the interest of architectural diversity, the building design standards may be modified. Any approved modification must result in a building that is equal to or exceeds the quality and design of a building that complies with the building design standards. 


(Ord. No. 407, § VIII, 7-15-13) 
ARTICLE VII. - AREA, HEIGHT, BULK AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 90-351. - Schedule. 
Minimum yard setbacks in feet (unobstructed) a Maximum height of buildings Sides Zoning 
district Maximum lot 
coverage 
(percent) Area per dwelling unit in sq. ft. Width 
in feet In 
stories In feet l Front a At least one Total of two Side yard 
adjacent 
to a 
street Rear Minimum floor area per dwelling unit i in sq. ft. Minimum floor area on first floor per dwelling unit (1) E-R 25 20,000 150 3 35 40 b, k c, n, o c, n, o 22 c, j 30 c (2) R-1A 30 15,000 100 21/2 35 35 b, k c, n, o c, n, o 22 c, j 30 c 1,800 1,200 (3) R-1B 30 (p, q) (r, s) 21/2 m 35 m 30 b (c, n, o, p) (c, n, o, p) 20 c, j 25 c 1,200 1,000 (4) R-T g, h 35 4,000 150 21/2 35 25 d c, n, o c, n, o 12 c, d 25 c, d 1,800 (5) RO-1 40 4,000 70 21/2 35 30 c e, f e, f e, f (6) C-1 21/2 35 f f f (7) C-2 f f f f f f f 1,000 (8) P-1 j (9) T-1 2 1/2 35 10 f f f f 1,000 (10) T-2 4 42 f f f f f 1,000 (11) T 3 f(5) 42 f(5) f(6) 5 5 20 c 25 c, d 1,000 (12) HF See section 90-309 (13) NC - 4,000 - 2 35 t - - t t -  
Notes: 
a.  50-foot setback for all buildings in any zoning district is required for all yards abutting on Jefferson Avenue. 
b.  For a lot occupied by any permitted building in the E-R, R-1A, R-1B and R-T districts, other than solely for residential purposes, the required front yard setback shall be 50 feet. However, where 50 percent or more of the lots in any one block (an area between two adjacent streets) has been built upon, the minimum front yard shall be established by using the average depth of the front yards of the built lots. 
c.  In E-R, R-1A, R-1B and R-T districts on a lot occupied by any building which is permitted in the districts other than solely for residential purposes, the width of each side or rear yard shall be not less than 25 feet. 
d.  The distance between buildings, or between any building and the nearest lot line shall not be less than the height of the building, nor less than 20 feet, whichever is greater. No more than ten percent of the required distance may be used for off-street parking area. 
e.  No front, side or rear yard required where 50 percent or more of block is built up with structures not providing any front, side or rear yards. 
f.  For all RO-1, C-1, C-2, and T-2 districts, the following yard requirements shall apply: 
(1)  On the side of a lot which abuts property located in any residential zone, a side yard of not less than 20 feet in width shall be provided. 
(2)  In all cases where a building has a wall not of fireproof construction or a fireproof wall pierced with windows or other openings, the building shall be accessible on at least two sides by public street or alley or by a passageway, open aboveground, not less than ten feet wide, measured to the lot line, extending to a public street or alley. 
(3)  All buildings must be built-to the predominant building line established along the block face between the two closest intersecting streets in an effort to maintain a continuity of storefronts. Exceptions from this requirement may be permitted provided there are plazas or other public amenities incorporated into the area of the proposed setback. 
(4)  The following requirements shall apply to those uses located in the C-2 district: 
(a)  Buildings located within 300 feet of the Neff Street right-of-way shall be limited to two and one-half stories in height, or 35'-0?. 
(b)  Buildings located between 300 feet of the Neff Street right-of-way and St. Clair Avenue shall be limited to three stories in height, or 42'-0?. 
(c)  Buildings located within 240 feet of the Cadieux Road right-of-way shall be limited to two and one-half stories in height, or 35'-0?. 
(d)  Buildings located between 240 feet of the Cadieux Road right-of-way and Notre Dame Avenue shall be limited to three stories in height, or 42'-0?. 
(e)  Buildings located between St. Clair and Notre Dame shall be limited to four stories or 54'-0? provided, the fourth story shall be enclosed in a mansard roof or setback 15 feet from the building facade of the third story and contain only residential uses as permitted under Section 298. 
(f)  No off-street parking area, located at grade, may be located within 100 feet of the right-of-way of Kercheval Avenue. 
(g)  No use, permitted or permitted after special approval, shall have a drive-up facility allowing transactions without leaving a vehicle within 250 feet of the right-of-way of Kercheval Avenue. 
(5)  The following requirements shall apply to those uses located in the T-1 district: 
(a)  The setback from Notre Dame shall be 10'-0?. 
(b)  The setback from Waterloo shall be no less than 10'-0?-, and no more than 25'-0?. 
(c)  The setback from St. Clair shall be no more than 10'-0?. 
(d)  Buildings or portions of buildings located more than 100'-0? from the Waterloo right-of-way shall be limited to three stories in height, or 42'-0?. 
(6)  The following requirements shall apply to those uses located in the T district: 
(a)  Buildings in this area may include an additional story subject to special use approval and further provided that the fourth story shall be enclosed in a mansard roof or setback 15 feet from the building facade of the third story. 
(b)  The setback from St. Clair shall be 10'-0? for a hotel. 
(c)  The setback from St. Clair shall be no less than 15'-0? and no more than 20'-0? for permitted residential uses. 
(d)  The setback from St. Paul shall be no less than 30'-0?. 
g.  Required lot area, lot width and other regulations for single-family residences in an R-T district shall be the same as required for the single-family district abutting on the R-T district at the nearest distance from the lot or lots in question. 
h.  Attached single-family dwellings or terraces may be erected and rented or sold as individual units regardless of the side yard, lot area and lot width requirements of the residential zone classifications, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The building containing the attached houses must meet all use, height, yard and parking provisions of its zone district. 
(2)  The sale of any individual unit must include rights to a common open space for access to a common required parking area, unless the individual unit has a built-in garage in connection therewith. 
(3)  No terrace shall contain more than six such attached dwelling units unless provided with other courts of at least 20 feet in two directions. 
(4)  Each unit shall have utility services. 
(5)  If units in terraces have private ownership, site must be subdivided in accordance with all applicable state, county and city laws. 
i.  The minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall not include area of basements, porches, attached garages or utility rooms. 
j.  For detailed regulations for this district see article V. 
k.  For lots fronting or adjacent to Lake St. Clair, the front yard for purposes of determining setback shall be that yard which faces the lake and the rear yard shall be that yard which is opposite the lake side and which faces Jefferson Avenue. The front yard setback for all buildings, structures, accessory buildings thereto, and fences or walls in excess of four feet in height shall be 75 feet. Modification of the setback requirement may be approved by the board of zoning appeals to a depth equal the setback of the building on the adjacent lot having the greatest setback from the lake, but the maximum depth need not be required to exceed 75 feet. 
l.  For height limitations on aerials and antennas see section 90-44 (commercial antennas), section 90-14 (domestic aerials) and section 90-43 (satellite dish antennas). 
m.  For lots with a width of less than 40 feet the maximum height is one and one-half stories (28 feet). 
n.  For lots in the E-R, R-1A, R-1B and R-T Districts, the following side yard setback requirements shall apply: 
(1)  For lots with a lot width of 50 feet or less: Nine feet (at least one side), 15 feet total of two sides. 
(2)  For lots with a lot width of 51 to 100 feet: Nine feet (at least one side), 20 feet total of two sides. 
(3)  For lots with a lot width of 101 feet or greater: Nine feet (at least one side), 30 feet total of two sides. 
o.  No two adjacent properties shall have buildings erected with less than a nine-foot separation between them. 
p.  Any existing lot created prior to January 01, 2005 shall be considered a buildable lot in the R-1B district provided the lot area is greater than 3,000 square feet. 
q.  Any lot created after must conform to the predominant lot size of the lots on the same side of the street between two closest intersecting streets or 7,500. 
r.  Any existing lot created prior to January 01, 2005 shall be considered a buildable lot in the R-1B district provided the lot width is a minimum of 30 feet. 
s.  Any lot created after must conform to the predominant lot width of the lots on the same side of the street between the two closest intersecting streets or 50 feet, which ever is less. 
t.  For the NC district, the following area, height, bulk, and placement requirements shall apply: 
(1)  The City Council may allow a building height of up to 40 feet subject to permitted use after special approval. 
(2)  Special architectural features will be allowed to exceed the above height if: 
(a)  The feature is located at a corner. 
(b)  The feature is deemed necessary to the type, use, or style of the building in question. 
(c)  Special architectural features such as pediments, turrets, or other elements compatible with the architecture of the building, shall not exceed the height of the remainder of the building by more than ten feet. 
(3)  Front Building Setbacks. All buildings must be built to the predominant building line established along the block face between the two closest intersecting streets. Exceptions from this requirement include: 
(a)  Plazas or other public amenities incorporated into the area of the proposed setbacks. 
(b)  A gallery may extend a maximum of ten feet into the predominant setback area. 
(c)  Expression zone. Architectural features such as bay windows or other projections not exceeding 25 percent (in aggregate) of the building frontage may project up to five feet beyond the predominant building line. 
(4)  Rear building setbacks. All buildings must be setback a minimum of 20 feet from the rear property line. This shall not prohibit buildings that do not comply with this standard as of the date of effect of this ordinance from being rebuilt in the case of destruction or damage (beyond 50 percent of state equalized value), expanded, or otherwise improved. 
(Ord. No. 276, § 2(5.176, 5.177), 9-21-92; Ord. No. 298, § 1, 3-18-96; Ord. No. 348, § I, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 358, § V, 12-12-05; Ord. No. 374, § I, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 389, § X, 10-19-09; Ord. No. 407, § IX, 7-15-13; Ord. No. 412, § II, 2-24-14; Ord. No. 414, §§ II, III, 6-16-14) 
Secs. 90-352-90-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FENCES AND LIVING SCREENS 

Sec. 90-400. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the construction, location, and appearance of fences, privacy screen walls, hedges, and other types of protective barriers in the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(Ord. No. 343, § II, 10-20-03) 
Sec. 90-401. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article the following definitions apply. 
    "Construction site barrier" means a temporary fence erected to protect a construction site from vandalism and unauthorized entry. Construction site barriers do not require a permit unless the barrier will be in place for more than one year or if the intended fence is requested to be placed on the public right-of-way. 
    "Fence" means a structure erected to act as a boundary marker, or erected for the purpose of restricting access to or from a lot or parcel of land, whether enclosing all or part of said lot or parcel. A fence requires a building permit. 
    "Fence owner" means the person or entity that owns the property upon which a fence is erected. 
    "Front building line" means the line established by the main wall of the front of the primary building, extending to each side of the lot line. 
    "Front lot line" means in the case of a lot abutting upon one public or private street the line separating such lot from such street right-of-way. In the case of any other lot, the owner shall, for the purpose of this ordinance, have the privilege of electing any street lot line as the front lot line, providing that such choice, in the opinion of the building inspector, will not be injurious to the existing, or the desirable future, development of adjacent properties. 
    "Front yard" means for the purpose of this article a yard extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and five feet behind the front building line. 
    "Hedge" means any bush, shrub, or any living green fence of any nature encircling, either wholly or any portion of any given area. A hedge must be maintained one foot behind the sidewalk. 
    "Landscape retaining walls" means a non-sight obscuring decorative structure used to enhance, accent, support or protect the landscaping of the site (e.g. boulders, timbers, pre-cast concrete, etc.). A landscape retaining wall must be maintained two feet behind the sidewalk. Landscape retaining walls where the grade on each side of the barrier differs by greater than 24 inches require a building permit. 
    "Ornamental fence" means a fence, including but not limited to a fence, gate, or arbor designed in such a manner and of such materials that it is erected for purposes other than the practical one of preventing persons or domestic animals from passing through it. Ornamental fences require a building permit. 
    "Privacy fence" means a fence of opaque material having such qualities as to constitute a visual barrier. A visual barrier is provided if less than 50 percent of the vertical service of the fence is open to the free passage of air and the distance or open space between boards, slats, rails, stanchions, or balusters is less than or equal to three inches when viewed and measured at 90 degrees to the fence line. 
    "Privacy screen" means a vertical sight-obscuring structure, erected adjacent to or around, but not limited to, a patio, deck, courtyard area, swimming pool, or outdoor hot tub designed to screen, but not enclose, the area behind it or within its confines. Privacy screens shall not exceed six feet in height. 
    "Rear building line" means the line established by the main wall of the rear of the primary building, extending to each side lot line. 
    "Rear yard" means the portion of the yard between the rear building line and the rear lot line. 
    "Side lot line" means any lot lines other than the front lot line and rear lot line. 
    "Side yard (exterior)" means the portion of the yard between the residential home and side right-of-way for corner lot properties beginning at the front building line and extending to the rear building line. 
    "Side yard (interior)" means the portion of the yard between the residential home and side property line, beginning five feet back from the front building line and extending to the rear building line. 
    "Protective screening wall" means a masonry wall erected to screen a residential district from a C-1, C-2 or P-1 zoning district. Screen walls require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 343, § II, 10-20-03) 
Sec. 90-402. - Permit. 
    The erection, construction or substantial rebuilding or any fence or screen shall be performed within all municipal codes and shall require a building permit. Substantial rebuilding is reconstruction of 50 percent or more of the structure, a change in the height of the structure, or a change from the existing material within a 12-month period. Systematic replacement to circumvent the ordinance is prohibited. Painting, cleaning, replacement of like materials, or other actions commonly considered, as general maintenance shall not be defined as "substantial rebuilding." 
(Ord. No. 343, § II, 10-20-03) 
Sec. 90-403. - Application process. 
    Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed, any fence, screen or wall for which a permit is required as defined in this article, shall first apply to the city building inspector for a permit. A permit fee shall be required as prescribed by resolution of the city council. The application for the permit shall include any and all information requested by the building inspector to determine whether or not the construction of such fence, wall or screen will violate any portion of this article. 
(Ord. No. 343, § II, 10-20-03) 
Sec. 90-404. - General requirements. 
(1)  Whenever a non-conforming fence shall fall into a state requiring substantial rebuilding the replacement shall conform to the requirements of this article. 
(2)  No fence or screen shall have barbed wire, razor wire, electrical current, concertina wire or other similar material. 
(3)  The supporting framework and or unfinished side of any fence or screen shall not face adjacent properties or streets. 
(4)  No fence shall be erected adjacent to another fence. 
(5)  It is the responsibility of the person installing the fence to ensure such fence is placed on or within his or her property line. 
(6)  The owner of any fence or screen shall maintain the fence or screen in accordance with property maintenance codes as adopted by the City of Grosse Pointe. 
(7)  All fences and screens shall be maintained plumb and true with adequate support in a safe manner. The owner of a fence or screen shall remove or repair a fence that is dangerous, dilapidated, or otherwise in violation of the Code of Ordinances. 
(8)  Any person who owns property upon which a previous owner has constructed a fence shall be responsible for the care, upkeep and maintenance of the fence. 
(9)  Slats of any material shall not be permitted in a chain link fence. 
(10)  Fences, which enclose public institutions or public playgrounds, shall not exceed eight feet above grade. 
(11)  Commercial grade gates are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 343, § II, 10-20-03) 
Sec. 90-405. - Residential fences. 
(1)  Front yard fences. When located within the front yard, fences shall have a minimum height of 24 inches and a maximum height of 36 inches measured from the finished grade at the property line and shall be setback a minimum two feet from the sidewalk. 
When located within the front yard, fences shall be of an ornamental nature including picket, split rail, or wrought iron type fencing. Front yard fences must have a minimum 50 percent open space between horizontal or vertical pickets with minimum openings of three inches when viewing the fence perpendicularly. Chain link and solid wood fencing is prohibited in front yards. 
Fences located within the front yard are not exempt from section 90-21, corner visibility. 
(2)  Exterior side yard. Fences located between the rear building line and the rear property line and located adjacent to a road may not exceed six feet in height and must be set back a minimum two feet from the sidewalk. 
Residential properties adjacent to the county right-of-way are permitted to replace the existing side yard fence (on the county right-of-way side) to meet existing characteristics such as: height, style, length, material (excluding stockade) with the approval of the building inspector. 
(3)  Interior side yard. When located in an interior side yard between the front building line and the rear building line, fences must be setback five feet from the front building line and may not exceed six feet in height. 
(4)  Rear yard. 
(i)  Non-through lot. A fence may be located on the rear property line not to exceed six feet in height. 
(ii)  Through lot. When located within a rear yard on a through lot where all of the lots located on the same side of the street between two intersecting side streets are through lots, fences may not exceed six feet in height and must be setback a minimum of two feet from the property line. 

Diagram 1 

Diagram 2 
(Ord. No. 343, § II, 10-20-03) 
Sec. 90-406. - Variances. 
    Upon application in writing by any person directly or adversely affected, the board of zoning appeals may, after a hearing in accordance with the established procedures of that board, in its sound discretion and in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the community, reduce or remit the requirements of this article in individual cases coming before such board. 
(Ord. No. 343, § II, 10-20-03) 
Secs. 90-407-90-449. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 90-450. - Purpose. 
    Prevention of pollution from stormwater runoff and the protection of the quality of the waters of the state of Michigan is of utmost importance to the city. It is the purpose of this article and any rules promulgated pursuant to this article: 
(a)  To protect the environment against pollution and other effects from stormwater runoff, and to protect the public health and safety; 
(b)  To provide for the implementation of a stormwater management program in the City to manage and prevent flooding, pollution, and other effects from stormwater runoff; 
(c)  To establish standards and criteria for the design and construction of stormwater management systems subject to the requirements of this article; 
(d)  To establish best management practices for the design, construction, maintenance, and operation of stormwater management systems subject to the requirements of this article; 
(e)  To provide for the issuance of stormwater construction approvals for construction activities subject to the requirements of this article; 
(f)  To provide for the long-term preservation and maintenance of stormwater management systems subject to the requirements of the Ordinance; 
(g)  To authorize the inspection of stormwater management systems subject to the requirements of this article; and 
(h)  To provide for the administration, implementation and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-451. - Incorporation by reference. 
    Rules, regulations, other regulatory standards or statutory provisions incorporated or adopted by reference in this article or any rules promulgated pursuant to this article shall have the same force and effect given to any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-452. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms have the following meanings: 
    Applicant means a person responsible for regulated construction activity on a development site who is seeking to obtain stormwater construction approval. 
    Construction activity means a human-made activity, including without limitation, clearing, grading, excavating, construction and paving, that results in an earth change or disturbance in the existing cover or topography of land, including any modification or alteration of a site or the "footprint" of a building that results in an earth change or disturbance in the existing cover or topography of land. 
    Conveyance means any structure or other means of safely conveying stormwater and stormwater runoff within a stormwater management system, including without limitation a watercourse, closed conduit, culvert, or bridge. 
    City means the City of Grosse Pointe. 
    Development site means the property on which regulated construction activity will occur or is occurring or has occurred. 
    Person means a natural person, trustee, court-appointed representative, syndicate, association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust, institution, agency, government corporation, municipal corporation, city, county, municipality, district, or other political subdivision, department, bureau, agency or instrumentality of federal, state, or local government, or other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. 
    Regulated construction activity means construction activity that is subject to the provisions of this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to this article. 
    Stormwater means water resulting from precipitation, including without limitation rain, snow, and snowmelt. 
    Stormwater construction approval means an approval issued pursuant to this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article. 
    Stormwater management program consists of ordinances, orders, rules, regulations, and other mechanisms that provide for the management of stormwater and stormwater runoff to prevent flooding and to ensure the restoration and/or protection of waters in the city. 
    Stormwater management system means any structure, feature or appurtenance subject to this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to this article that is designed to collect, detain, retain, treat, or convey stormwater or stormwater runoff, including without limitation buffer strips, swales, gutters, catch basins, closed conduits, detention systems, pretreatment systems, wetlands, pavement, unpaved surfaces, structures, watercourses, or surface waters. With respect to the city, stormwater management program consists of the requirements of this article, and activities mandated by the certificate of coverage issued by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality to the city pursuant to the General Permit "Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Subject to Watershed Plan Requirements" (General Permit No. 610316). 
    Stormwater runoff means the excess portion of precipitation that does not infiltrate the ground, but "runs off" and reaches a conveyance, surface water, or watercourse. 
    Surface water means a body of water, including without limitation seasonal and intermittent waters, in which the surface of the water is exposed to the atmosphere, including without limitation lakes, open detention basins, forebays, watercourses, bioretention areas, retention basins, wetlands, and impoundments. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-453. - Applicability. 
    This article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article shall apply to all of the following: 
(a)  Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff into or around new or existing road rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city; 
(b)  Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff into or around city drains; 
(c)  Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff in projects that are subject to the requirements of Act 288 of 1967 (Subdivision Control Act), MCL 560.101 et seq., as amended; 
(d)  Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff into, on, or through property owned by the city; 
(e)  Construction activity that impacts new or existing storm sewer systems owned, operated, or controlled by the city. 
(f)  Construction activity that occurs within and impacts or may impact water quality or water resources in watersheds or sub-watersheds included in the Certificate of Coverage issued by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality to the city pursuant to the General Permit "Stormwater Discharges from Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Subject to Watershed Plan Requirements" (General Permit No. 610316). 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-454. - General requirements. 
    It shall be a violation of this article to engage in regulated construction activity except in accordance with this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article, and pursuant to a valid stormwater construction approval issued by the city. A stormwater construction approval shall be issued in a form and manner approved by the city, and may be incorporated into a construction permit or other approval issued under or required by another ordinance, statute or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-455. - Application for stormwater construction approval. 
(a)  Applicants shall submit a written application for a stormwater construction approval to the city. The application shall be made in a form and manner approved by the city, and shall include all information and documentation required by the city pursuant to this article or rules promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(b)  All proposed modifications to a stormwater management system that has received a stormwater construction approval issued by the city shall be submitted to the city in writing, together with all information and all supporting documentation required by the city pursuant to this article or rules promulgated pursuant to this article to support the proposed modification. A person shall not commence regulated construction activity associated with a proposed modification without the approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-456. - Financial assurance for regulated construction activity. 
(a)  The city may require an applicant to provide financial assurance for regulated construction activity. 
(b)  Financial assurance provided pursuant to this section shall be in the form of a performance bond, cash deposit, or unconditional irrevocable letter of credit. The city may accept, with prior approval, an equivalent instrument as financial assurance for regulated construction activity. 
(c)  The city may establish the form and amount of financial assurance to be provided; the events, circumstances, or occurrences that will cause the city to release the financial assurance mechanism; and other requirements for financial assurance to satisfy the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-457. - General design and construction requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided below, stormwater management systems shall be designed in accordance with the minimum requirements for performance and design that are set forth in this article and in rules promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The city encourages the development and use of innovative stormwater management system designs and construction techniques, including without limitation the use of non-structural practices to reduce stormwater runoff and/or its water quality impacts, to achieve the flood control and water quality objectives of this article and the rules promulgated hereunder. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision in this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, the city may require stormwater management systems to satisfy performance and/or design standards more stringent than the minimum requirements for performance and design set forth in this article and in rules promulgated pursuant to this article when necessary to address unique flood control or water resources protection issues at a development site, on adjacent properties, or downstream of a development site. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-458. - Applicant design responsibilities. 
(a)  Selecting and designing stormwater management systems to meet the requirements of this article and the rules promulgated pursuant to this article shall be the responsibility of the applicant or its designee, subject to the approval of the city pursuant to this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article. The city may deny a stormwater construction approval for a system design that is not in compliance with these requirements. 
(b)  In designing a stormwater management system, the applicant shall consider all relevant and appropriate factors, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  The public health, safety, welfare, and the environment; 
(2)  The inconvenience caused by stormwater runoff on the subject property; 
(3)  The long-term impact of regulated construction activity on stormwater runoff on, from, and beyond the property; 
(4)  The natural drainage pattern of the land; 
(5)  The impact of the regulated construction activity on the affected watershed(s); 
(6)  The effect of complete upstream development on the subject property as determined by applicable master plans and/or stormwater plans; and 
(7)  The extent of downstream improvements necessary for proper stormwater drainage. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-459. - Fees for stormwater construction approvals. 
    The city council will adopt a written schedule from time to time establishing a fee system for administering and implementing the stormwater management program. The fee system may include fees for application submittal and review, project overview, compliance inspections, and any other task or service performed by the city to administer or implement the requirements of this article or rules promulgated hereunder. Fees may include charges for time and materials utilized by the city in implementing and administering the requirements of this article or rules promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-460. - Demonstration of long-term maintenance. 
    The applicant for a stormwater construction approval shall demonstrate to the city in the application or during the application review process, as determined appropriate by the city, that the stormwater management system shall be maintained in perpetuity. This demonstration shall be made in the manner specified in rules promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-461. - Scope of long-term maintenance. 
    For purposes of this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article, long-term maintenance shall include site monitoring and preventative maintenance activities necessary to ensure that a stormwater management system functions properly as designed; remedial actions necessary to repair, modify, or reconstruct the system in the event the system does not function properly as designed at any time; notification to subsequent owners of limitations or restrictions on the property; actions necessary to enforce the terms of restrictive covenants or other instruments applicable to the property pursuant to this article and rules promulgated pursuant to this article; and such other actions as maybe set forth in rules promulgated hereto. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-462. - Authority. 
    Upon presentation of proper credentials and identification, and after stating the authority and purpose of the inspection, city inspectors shall be promptly permitted to enter and inspect a development site. The inspection shall be for the purpose of investigating the development site stormwater management systems, or components of stormwater management systems, to determine compliance or noncompliance with this article, rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, and/or stormwater construction approvals issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-463. - Investigations, informal conferences, and voluntary agreements. 
(a)  If the city believes that a violation of this article, a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, or a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder may have occurred or exists, the city shall make a prompt investigation. If, after this investigation, the city determines that a violation has occurred or exists, the city shall attempt to enter into a voluntary agreement to resolve or correct the violation. An informal conference may be requested by the city or by any other person to facilitate a voluntary agreement. 
(b)  If a voluntary agreement cannot be reached, the city shall take appropriate enforcement action pursuant to this article and other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-464. - Notification of violation. 
(a)  If a voluntary agreement pursuant to section 90-463 cannot be reached, the city shall issue written notice of a violation to the person or persons alleged to have caused or contributed to a violation of this article, a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, and/or an approval issued hereunder. A written notice of violation shall include a statement of facts upon which the violation is based. 
(b)  Within 14 days of the receipt of a written notice of violation, the alleged violator shall submit to the city an explanation of the violation and a plan for correcting the violation to comply with this article, rules promulgated pursuant to this article, and/or stormwater construction approvals issued hereunder. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any previous violation not addressed by the plan or future violation. 
(c)  Within 14 days of the receipt of a written response to a notice of violation, the city shall determine whether the response resolves and/or corrects the alleged violation. If the city determines that the response resolves and/or corrects the violation, then the plan for correcting the violation shall be incorporated into a consent agreement pursuant to section 90-465. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-465. - Consent agreement. 
(a)  A consent agreement may be entered into at any time by and between the city and the person or persons alleged to have caused or contributed to a violation. The consent agreement shall be mutually acceptable to both the city and the recipient(s) and shall reflect the recipient's agreement to assume responsibility for and correct violations of this article, rules promulgated pursuant to this article, and approvals issued hereunder. 
(b)  The consent agreement shall contain a short statement of facts, describe the actions necessary to correct the noncompliance, contain a compliance schedule, and be signed by all parties. The agreement may contain a monetary or other relief as agreed to by the parties for the noncompliance, including without limitation, amounts necessary to compensate the city for costs incurred investigating, administering and/or enforcing this article or rules promulgated hereto. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-466. - Administrative compliance orders. 
(a)  If the city determines that a violation of this article, a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, or a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder has occurred or exists, the city may issue an administrative compliance order pursuant to this section 90-466. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 90-467, the city may issue an administrative compliance order in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The city determines that a person has violated a consent agreement entered into with the city; or 
(2)  a.  The city determines that a person has violated or continues to violate this article, a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, or a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder, and 
b.  The city has attempted to resolve the violation pursuant to sections 90-463 and 90-464 but no voluntary agreement or consent agreement has been entered into. 
(c)  The administrative compliance order shall contain a statement of facts upon which the order is based, a description of the actions that must be taken to correct the noncompliance, a compliance schedule, and other requirements as might be reasonably necessary to address the noncompliance. Administrative compliance orders also may contain administrative fines and penalties, and such other monetary relief for the noncompliance, including without limitation amounts necessary to compensate the city for costs incurred investigating, administering, and enforcing this article or rules promulgated hereto. 
(d)  Within 28 days of being issued an administrative compliance order, the person or persons receiving the order may appeal the issuance of the order pursuant to section 90-470 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-467. - Imminent and substantial injury orders. 
(a)  The city may issue an administrative order without attempting to resolve a violation by using the enforcement procedures described in sections 90-463 and 90-464 if the city finds that a violation of this article, a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, or a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder constitutes or causes, or will constitute or cause, a substantial injury to the public health, safety, welfare, or the environment, and it is prejudicial to the interests of the people of the city to delay action. 
(b)  Administrative orders issued pursuant to this section 90-467 shall contain a statement of facts upon which the order is based, and notification to the person that it must immediately take action to discontinue, abate, correct, or otherwise address the imminent and substantial injury caused or likely to be caused by the noncompliance. 
(c)  Within seven days, the city shall provide the person an opportunity to be heard and to present any proof that the noncompliance does not or will not constitute imminent and substantial injury to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment. 
(d)  An order issued pursuant to this section 90-467 is effective on issuance and shall remain in effect for a period of not more than seven days, unless the city brings an action to restrain the alleged non-compliance pursuant to section 90-468 before the expiration of that period. If the city brings such an action within the seven-day period, the order issued by the city shall remain in effect for an additional seven days or such other period as is authorized by the court in which the action is brought. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-468. - Municipal civil infractions. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or rules promulgated hereunder, including without limitation any notice, order, stormwater construction approval, agreement, decision, or determination promulgated, issued, made, or entered by the city under this article or rules promulgated hereunder, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not more than $500.00 per day, plus costs, abatement of the violation and other sanctions. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-469. - Separate offenses. 
    Each act of violation, and each day or portion of a day that a violation of this article, rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, stormwater construction approval, order, notice, or determination issued, made or entered into under this article is permitted to exist or occur, constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Sec. 90-470. - Appeal. 
    Any person whose legal rights, duties, or privileges are determined by the city pursuant to this article or a rule promulgated pursuant to this article, and who is aggrieved by the city's determination, may appeal to the zoning board of appeals for relief of that grievance. 
(Ord. No. 375, § I, 3-17-08) 
Secs. 90-471-90-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PERMITTED WITH APPROVAL USES 

Sec. 90-500. - Intent. 
    In the development and enactment of this article, it is recognized that there are some uses which, because of their nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational, particularly when several of them are concentrated into limited areas of the city, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Such concentration tends to detract from the aesthetics of the neighborhood; cause annoyance or disturbance to the citizens and residents who live, work in, or pass through the neighborhood; attract an undesirable quantity of transients; adversely affect property values; cause an increase in crime; and encourage residents and other businesses to move elsewhere. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. This control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area. Uses subject to these controls shall be permitted only upon approval of the planning commission. Uses subject to these controls, referred to as "permitted with approval uses," are as follows. 
(Ord. No. 418, § II, 4-20-15) 
Sec. 90-501. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following definitions of specific permitted with approval uses shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this text, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade for sale, barter, or rental, books, magazines, other periodicals, films, posters, video tapes, or other materials or means for the recording or reproduction of a visual display on a video screen or other display device which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
    Adult mini motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 person used for presenting for on-premises viewing, by use of motion picture devices or any coin-operated means, material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motel means a motel which presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), for entertainment of its patrons. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting for on-premises viewing, by use of motion picture devices or any coin-operated means, material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined below), for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult personal service business means a business whose activities include a person, while nude or partially nude, providing personal services for another person on an individual basis in a closed room. It includes, but is not limited to, the following activities and services: modeling studios, photographic studios, wrestling studios, individual theatrical performances, body painting studios, and massage studios. 
    Cabaret means an establishment which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers. 
    Check cashing/personal loan establishment means a person or business that for compensation engages, in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. "Check cashing/personal loan establishment" does not include a state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan company. "Check cashing/personal loan establishment" also does not include a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including consumables, to retail buyers that cashes checks or issues money orders for a minimum flat fee not exceeding $2.00 as a service that is incidental to its main purpose or business. 
    Fortune telling and similar uses shall mean and include telling fortunes, forecasting of future events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, including, but not limited to clairvoyance, clairaudience cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading telepathy, or other craft, art, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, or magic, of any kind or nature. 
    Gaming establishment means an establishment where patrons wager money on the outcome of a game, including but not limited to a card game or a slot machine. 
    Hookah lounge means an establishment where patrons partake in the use of flavored tobacco and/or cigars, packaged tobacco, e-cigarettes, from a hookah, similar type water pipe, and/or smoking device, while seated at a table or bar. 
    Massage parlor or massage establishment means a place where manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced for pay upon the human body by anyone using mechanical, therapeutic, or bathing devices or techniques, other than the following: a duly licensed physician, osteopath, or chiropractor; a registered or practical nurse operating under a physician's directions; or, registered physical or occupational therapists or speech pathologists who treat patients referred by a licensed physician and operate only under such physician's direction. A massage establishment may include, but is not limited to, establishments commonly known as massage parlors, health spas, sauna baths, Turkish bathhouses, and steam baths. Massage establishments, as defined herein, shall not include properly-licensed hospitals, medical clinics, or nursing homes, or beauty salons or barber shops in which massages are administered by certified massage therapists. 
    Partially nude means a person having any or all of the following body parts exposed: buttocks, genitals, pubic area or female breasts. 
    Pawn shop/pawn broker means any business that loans money on the security of pledges of personal property, or deposits or conditionally sells personal property, or purchases or sells personal property. 
    Permitted with approval use means any or all of the following uses: adult bookstores, adult mini motion picture theaters, adult motion picture theaters, adult motels, adult personal service businesses, adult supply stores, cabarets, check cashing/personal loan establishments, fortune telling/palm reading and similar uses, gaming establishments (including non-profit bingo, poker), hookah lounges, massage parlors, pawn shops/pawn brokers or collateral loan or exchange establishments, pool or billiard halls, smoke shops, e-cigarette shops, cigar lounges, e-cigarette lounges, and tattoo/body piercing parlors. 
    Pool/billiard hall means a building or portion thereof having within its premises three or more pool tables or billiard tables, or combination thereof, regardless of size, and whether activated manually or by the insertion of a coin, token, or other mechanical device. 
    Smoke/e-cigarette shop means a retail establishment where 50 percent or more of the retail area, defined as wall to wall, is used for the display, promotion, sale or use of products listed below; or an establishment where the sale of products listed below constitutes greater than 50 percent of the establishment's merchandise: 
(1)  Cigarettes, e-cigarettes, cigars and packaged tobacco; 
(2)  Tobacco smoking and e-cigarette paraphernalia products including, but not limited to: pipes for smoking tobacco, cigarette holders and cigarette rolling papers; and 
(3)  Promotional merchandise including, but not limited to the following; posters, shirts, jackets, and hats advertising tobacco and e-cigarette products. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; and 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. 
    Tattoo/body piercing parlor means any business having as its principal activity: 
(1)  The application or placing, by any method permanent or semi-permanent, designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols, or any other marks upon or under the human skin within or any substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture the skin; or 
(2)  Providing external body modifications through the application of a tattoo, body-piercing, or branding. 
(Ord. No. 419, § II, 4-20-15) 
Sec. 90-502. - Permitted with approval uses. 
    Uses subject to the controls contained herein shall be referred to as permitted with approval uses. These uses shall include the following: 
(1)  Adult bookstore; 
(2)  Adult mini motion picture theater; 
(3)  Adult motel; 
(4)  Adult motion picture theater; 
(5)  Adult personal service business; 
(6)  Adult supply store; 
(7)  Cabaret; 
(8)  Check cashing/personal loan establishment; 
(9)  Fortune telling/palm reading and similar uses; 
(10)  Gaming establishments (including non-profit-bingo, poker); 
(11)  Hookah lounge; 
(12)  Massage parlor; 
(13)  Pawn shop/pawn broker or collateral loan or exchange establishments; 
(14)  Pool or billiard hall; 
(15)  Smoke shop, e-cigarette shop, cigar lounge, e-cigarette lounge; and 
(16)  Tattoo/body piercing parlor. 
(Ord. No. 419, § II, 4-20-15) 
Sec. 90-503. - Procedure. 
    It shall be unlawful to establish any permitted with approval use except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  Planning commission approval. 
a.  Any person owning or having an interest in the subject property may file an application for a license to use such property for one or more permitted with approval uses provided for in this article. Such application shall be filed with the planning commission. 
The application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the city clerk. An applicant for a license, which shall include all partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant, and all officers and directors of a corporate applicant and all stockholders including more than five percent of the stock of a corporate applicant, or any other person who is interested directly in the ownership or operation of the business, shall furnish the following information under oath: 
i.  Name and address, including all aliases. 
ii.  Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
iii.  All residential addresses of the applicant for the past three years. 
iv.  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair. 
v.  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
vi.  Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other county, city, or state under an establishment license or similar business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation. 
vii.  All criminal statutes, whether federal or state, or city ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations. 
viii.  Fingerprints and two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches of the applicant. 
ix.  The address of the establishment to be operated by the applicant. 
x.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent and the name and address of all shareholders owning more than five percent of the stock in said corporation and all officers and directors of the corporation. 
b.  Any applicant for a permitted with approval use must fully comply with section 90-283 of the Grosse Pointe Code requiring site plan review, and with all other applicable provisions of the Code and this article. 
c.  Upon receiving an application for a permitted with approval use, the planning commission shall conduct necessary field inspections, surveys and investigations; prepare maps, charts or other pictorial materials; hold necessary hearings; and otherwise process said application. 
d.  The planning commission shall give due notice of receipt of the application for permitted with approval use in such manner as is prescribed by the provisions of Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended. 
e.  Subsequent to the deadline for response to the notice of application, a decision shall be made by the planning commission to either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection (2) of this section. 
f.  Upon approval or approval with conditions of the application by the planning commission, a license shall be granted for the permitted with approval use. Said license shall be a nontransferable license for the life of the use, and shall be issued upon payment by the applicant of a license fee to be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Approval standards. 
a.  No permitted with approval use shall be established in any zoning district other than a C-1 zoning district. 
b.  No Permitted with approval use shall be established within 1,000 feet of any other permitted with approval use. Measurement shall be made from front door to front door along the street line. 
c.  No permitted with approval use shall be established within 1,000 feet of a pre-existing school or place of worship, whether or not that school or place of worship is located in the City of Grosse Pointe. Measurement shall be made from the front door of the proposed permitted with approval use to any door of the preexisting school or place of worship along the street line. 
d.  No permitted with approval use shall be approved by the planning commission unless all of the following findings are made: 
i.  That the establishment, maintenance, location and operation of the permitted with approval use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public heath, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare; 
ii.  That the permitted with approval use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose permitted nor substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood; 
iii.  That the establishment of the permitted with approval use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in that district; 
iv.  That the permitted with approval use will not be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any materials depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," from any public way or from any other property. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign show window, or other opening; 
v.  That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary facilities have been or will be provided; 
vi.  That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress designed so as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and 
vii.  That the permitted with approval use will in all other aspects conform to the applicable requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
e.  Prior to granting any permitted with approval use, the planning commission may modify any existing requirements or may impose any additional conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance or operation of the permitted with approval use as may in its judgment be necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards specified above. The planning commission may require such evidence and guarantees as it deems necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being, and will be, fulfilled. 
f.  In any case where a permitted with approval use has not been established within six months after the granting of a license therefore, then without further action by the planning commission, the permitted with approval use license shall be null and void. 
(3)  Revocation of license. The planning commission shall revoke a license or permit for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any application or material facts were omitted from any application. 
b.  The operator or any employee of the operator, violates any provision of this article or any rule or regulation adopted by the council pursuant to this article; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the planning commission shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge. 
c.  The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license or permit or the operator is convicted of any felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature. 
d.  Any cost or fee required to be paid under the City Code or council resolution is not paid. 
e.  Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or consumed on the premises. 
(4)  Transfer of license. The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the license. 
(5)  Eligibility of license. Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be liable to receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as permitted with approval establishment for six months from the date of revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 419, § II, 4-20-15) 
Sec. 90-504. - Appeal. 
    An appeal may be taken to the circuit court from any decision of the planning commission on an application for a permitted with approval use. 
    No application for a permitted with approval use which has been denied wholly or in part by the planning commission shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order or denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 419, § II, 4-20-15) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1980 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1980 Code, as updated through October 19, 1987, which are included herein. Sections of the 1980 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1980 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.11 1-14 1.13 1-15 1.31-1.35 30-26-30-30 1.51-1.54 2-46-2-49 1.58 2-50 1.71-1.73 2-51 1.81-1.89 2-52-2-60 1.111 2-61 1.115 2-62 1.121 2-63 1.125 2-64 1.136 2-65 1.211-1.216 2-96-2-101 1.221-1.227 2-26-2-32 1.241-1.244 2-111-2-114 2.1-2.4 62-1-62-4 2.20-2.31 78-26-78-37 2.32 78-39 2.33 78-38 2.61 78-61 2.62-2.65 78-67-78-70 2.67-2.70 78-81-78-84 2.72-2.77 78-96-78-101 2.79-2.88 78-111-78-120 2.90-2.94 78-62-78-66 2.111, 2.112 78-141, 78-142 2.115-2.118 78-144-78-147 2.131-2.137 74-51-74-57 3.1-3.4 50-1-50-4 3.31-3.43 86-26-86-38 3.51(1)-(6) 82-51 3.51(7) 82-52 3.52-3.62 82-53-82-63 3.64-3.68 82-64-82-68 4.1-4.13 66-26-66-38 4.18 66-39 4.20, 4.21 66-40, 66-41 4.23, 4.24 66-42, 66-43 4.26 14-261 4.29 66-44 4.37-4.39 66-45-66-47 4.51-4.60 66-71-66-80 4.71, 4.72 86-61, 86-62 5.1, 5.2 90-1, 90-2 5.3-5.13 90-3 5.21, 5.22 90-4, 90-5 5.27, 5.28 90-6, 90-7 5.29-5.61 90-11-90-43 5.71-5.81 90-126-90-136 5.91-5.95 90-156-90-160 5.101-5.103 90-206-90-208 5.108-5.110 90-221-90-223 5.115-5.117 90-236-90-238 5.121-5.125 90-251-90-255 5.129-5.134 90-266-90-271 5.139-5.143 90-281-90-285 5.148-5.154 90-296-90-302 5.158-5.172 90-316-90-330 5.181-5.186 90-66-90-71 5.188 90-73 5.191-5.194 90-96-90-99 5.196-5.198 90-101-90-103 5.201 90-10 5.202, 5.203 90-8, 90-9 5.221-5.230 70-1-70-10 5.231 70-12 5.232 70-11 5.260-5.272 54-27-54-39 5.273 54-26 54-40 5.280-5.284 90-171-90-175 6.1-6.3 38-27-38-29 6.4 38-26 6.5-6.7 38-30-38-32 6.102 6-27 6.103 6-26 6.104-6.111 6-28-6-35 6.114, 6.115 6-36, 6-37 7.1-7.21 18-51-18-71 7.22 18-73 7.31 18-51 7.32 18-56 7.33, 7.34 18-74, 18-75 7.51 18-121 7.61-7.67 18-131-18-137 7.81-7.85 18-151-18-155 7.101-7.119 18-176-18-194 7.131-7.134 18-216-18-219 7.151-7.153 18-241-18-243 7.195 18-266 7.225, 7.226 18-286, 18-287 8.2, 8.3 14-27, 14-28 8.5 14-30 8.42, 8.43 14-52, 14-53 8.45-8.47 14-55-14-57 8.62-8.71 14-83-14-92 8.102, 8.103 14-117, 14-118 8.105-8.107 14-120-14-122 8.131-8.139 14-146-14-154 8.151-8.157 14-176-14-182 8.193 14-208 8.195-8.199 14-210-14-214 8.202, 8.203 34-27, 34-28 9.1 42-1 9.2-9.5 42-31-42-34 9.7-9.11 42-2-42-6 9.20-9.22 42-56-42-58 9.25 42-7 9.26(1)-9.26(3) 82-26-82-28 9.26(5) 82-29 9.27 42-8 9.31, 9.32 42-81 9.33, 9.34 42-82, 42-83 9.41-9.45 46-86 9.61 46-1 9.61(5) 46-182 9.62(1) 46-56 9.62(2), 9.62(3) 46-111, 46-112 9.62(4) 46-181 9.62(6), 9.62(7) 46-2, 46-3 9.62(8), 9.62(9) 46-57, 46-58 9.62(10), 9.62(11) 46-113, 46-114 9.62(12) 46-146 9.62(13) 46-183 9.62(14) 46-4 9.62(15), 9.62(16) 46-147, 46-148 9.62(17) 46-81 9.62(19) 46-59 9.62(20)-9.62(22) 46-115-46-117 9.62(25)-9.62(29) 46-149-46-153 9.62(31) 46-119 9.62(32) 46-31 9.62(34) 46-120 9.62(35) 46-5 9.62(36), (37) 46-184 9.62(38) 46-60 9.62(39) 46-32 9.62(40), 9.62(41) 46-83, 46-84 9.62(42), 9.62(43) 46-6, 46-7 9.62(44) 46-121 9.62(45) 46-206-46-209 9.62(46) 46-8 9.62(47) 46-87 9.63, 9.64 46-154, 46-155 9.65-9.67 46-85 9.69, 9.70 46-122, 46-123 9.81-9.85 10-1-10-5 9.92-9.97 10-51-10-56 9.99-9.105 10-28-10-34 9.107, 9.108 10-36, 10-37 9.121, 9.122 18-26, 18-27 9.123(a), 9.123(b) 18-28, 18-29 9.141, 9.142 26-1, 26-2 9.161-9.163 46-156 9.165 46-156 9.628 46-82 10.1, 10.2 74-26, 74-27 10.4 74-29 10.31-10.33 74-81-74-83 10.34-10.43 74-83-74-92  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1980 Code, as updated through October 19, 1987, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1980 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede October 19, 1987, but which were never included in the 1980 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since October 19, 1987, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 253  2-21-89 1(8.28) 74-29 254  3-20-89 1(7.23) 18-72 259  8-20-90 1(8.171) 58-1 1(8.172)-1(8.174) 58-31-58-33 1(8.175-8.178) 58-34 1(8.179) 58-2 1(8.180), 1(8.181) 58-35, 58-36 1(8.182)-1(8.184) 58-3-58-5 261  2-25-91 1(2.5(1))-1(2.5(8)) 62-32-62-39 1(2.5) 62-31 271  9-16-91 2(1.137) 2-66 273 12-16-91 1(5.187) 90-72 1(5.195) 90-100 274 12-16-91 1 74-29 275  6-15-92 1(2.113) 78-143 276  9-21-92 2(5.176, 5.177) 90-351 277  9-21-92 1(9.91) 10-26 1(9.98) 10-27 1(9.106) 10-35 1(9.109)-1(9.111) 10-38-10-40 278  8-16-93 1(8.1) 14-26 2(8.4) 14-29 279  8-16-93 1(8.41) 14-51 1(8.44) 14-54 280  8-16-93 1(8.60) 14-81 2(8.61) 14-82 281  8-16-93 1(8.101) 14-116 2(8.104) 14-119 282  8-16-93 2(8.191), 2(8.192) 
2(8.194) 14-206, 14-207 
14-209 283  8-16-93 1(8.201) 34-26 2(8.204) 34-29 3(8.205) 34-30 4(8.206) 34-31 284  8-16-93 1(8.301) 14-236 2(8.302) 14-237 3(8.303) 14-238 285 10-18-93 1.1-1.38 22-1-22-38 2.1 22-39 286 10-18-93 1-6 22-40 287 11-15-93 1(3.11)-1(3.17) 50-26-50-32 288 12-31-93 1 22-39 291  5-23-94 1 6-29 292  6-20-94 1 78-143 293  8-15-94 1-7 Adopting ordinance, p. v 295  4-17-95 1 18-28 296 11-20-95 1 78-143 297 11-20-95 1 10-5 298  3-18-96 1 90-44, 90-207, 90-222, 90-237, 90-252, 90-282, 90-298, 30-317, 30-318, 90-351 299  7-15-96 1 78-143 300  1-13-97 1 66-39 2 90-159(2) 301  4-21-97 1 74-29 302  6-16-97 1 90-132 303  6-16-97 1 90-207(4) 2 90-222(1) 3 90-237(3) 4 90-252(6) 304  6-16-97 1 78-143 305 10-20-97 1       Added 46-210 306 12-15-97 1 18-28 307  7-20-98       Added 78-121-78-121.12 308  7-20-98 1 78-143 309 10-19-98 1 90-207(4) 2 90-222(1) 3 90-3 310 11-16-98 1 78-143 311 12-21-98 1       Dltd 30-26-30-30       Added 30-26-30-28 312  1-25-99 1 46-123 313  3-15-99 1 74-58 314  6-21-99 1 78-143 315  9-20-99 1, 2 2-66(1)-(4) 316 10-18-99 1 74-29(5.15), (5.62) 317  1-24-00 1 46-81 318  3-20-00 1 14-81 2       Rpld 14-82, 14-82 319  4-17-00 1 74-29(5.15), (5.62) 320  6-19-00 1 74-143 321  7-17-00 1.1-22.7       Added 56-26-56-117 322 10-16-00 1 56-50 323  3-19-01 1 56-55 2 56-65 324  6-18-01 1 78-143 325  7-16-01 1 34-26-34-29       Rpld 34-30 326  7-16-01 I 14-206-14-209 327  9-17-01 I, II 90-3 III       Added 90-45 328  9-17-01 I       Added 1-16-1-21 329  9-17-01 1       Added 46-118(d) 2 46-118(note) 330  9-17-01 1       Added 56-71A 331 10-15-01 I 14-91 332  6-17-02 I 78-143 333  7-15-02 I       Added 78-40 334 10-21-02 I       Added 42-90-42-94 335  6-17-02 I       Added 74-1-74-4 336 11-18-02 I 90-156(14) 90-296-90-298       Added 90-299, 90-300       Rnbd 90-299-90-302       as 90-301-90-304       Added 90-305 90-316, 90-317       Added 90-318, 90-319       Rnbd 90-318-90-330       as 90-320-90-332       Added 90-333, 90-334 337  1-27-03 I       Added 74-10-74-13 338  5-12-03 1 78-143 339  5-22-03 I 56-50 340  6-16-03 I 14-26-14-30 341  6-16-03 I       Added 14-1-14-4 342 10-13-03 I 26-1 343 10-20-03 I 42-3 II       Added 90-400-90-406 344 12-15-03 I 86-26-86-31 345 12-15-03 I 14-213 346  5-10-04 1 78-143 347  5-17-04 I       Added 90-76 348  5-17-04 I 90-266-90-273 90-351 349 10-18-04 I       Added 74-100-74-103 350 11- 1-04 I 90-3 II 90-25 III 90-45 IV 90-156(4) V 90-207(4) VI 90-222(1) VII 90-237(3) 351 11-15-04 I       Added 42-9 352  2-28-05 I 74-26 II 74-29 353  5- 9-05 I 90-42 II       Added 90-68(4), (5) 90-71 354  5- 9-05 I       Added 90-74, 90-75 355  5- 9-05 1 78-143 356  6-20-05 I       Rpld 58-1-58-5, 58-31-58-36       Added 58-1-58-13 357  8-15-05 I 90-3 II 90-74(w) 90-76(b)(4) 90-76(c)(1) 90-76(h) 90-76(c)(4) III 90-159(12) 90-299(3)(g) 90-320(5) 358 12-12-05 I 90-3 II 90-4 III 90-129 IV 90-206-90-209 90-221-90-223 90-236-90-239 90-252(1) 90-270 v 90-351 359  3-20-06 I 90-76 360  4-24-06 I 14-1-14-4 361  4-24-06 I 14-26-14-30 362  4-24-06 I 14-116-14-122 363  4-24-06 I       Rpld 14-81-14-92       Added 14-81-14-93 364  4-24-06       Dltd 14-51-14-57       Added 14-51-14-59 365  4-24-06 I 14-206-14-214 366  5-15-06 1 78-143 367  6- 5-06 I 90-298 368  6-19-06 I 56-96       Added 56-96A, 56-96B 56-39       Added 56-118 369  9-18-06 I       Added 66-1 370 10-16-06 I 90-1 II 90-3 III 90-76(c)(3) IV 90-76(g)(1) V       Added 90-77 VI-XV 90-96-90-104 XVI       Added 90-207(8) XVII       Added 90-222(6) XVIII       Added 90-237(2) XIX       Added 90-252(10) 371 12-18-06 I 78-121.1-78-121.12 372  1-22-07 I 2-31 II 56-29 373  5-21-07 1 78-143 374  8-20-07 I 90-351 II 90-297(14) III 90-297(15)-(18) IV       Rpld 90-298(a)(2) V 90-17 375  3-17-08 I       Added 90-450-90-470 376  5-19-08 1 78-143 377  7-21-08 I       Added 28-1-28-9 378  9-15-08 I, II 58-2 III 58-5 IV 58-8(j) V 58-8(m) VI 58-9 VII 58-9(i) VIII 58-10(h) IX       Added 58-11(d)15. X       Rnbd 58-11(d)15.       as 58-11(d)16. 379 10-20-08 I 66-28 380 12-15-08 I       Added 28-20-28-29 381  5-18-09 I 78-141 II 78-142 III 78-143 382  6-15-09 I 14-26-14-30 383  6-15-09 I 14-81-14-93 384  6-15-09 I 14-116-14-122 385  6-15-09 I 14-51-14-59 386  6-15-09 I       Added 14-271-14-274 387  6-15-09 I 14-1-14-4 388  6-15-09 I       Added 42-57(12) 389 10-19-09 I 90-156(5) II 90-156(14) III 90-296, 90-297 IV 90-298(a) V       Rpld 90-299 VI       Added 90-306 VII       Added 90-335-90-344 VIII       Added 90-345-90-350.3 IX       Added 90-350.4 X 90-351 390  1-11-10 I       Added 42-10 391  7-19-10 I 90-268 392 11-15-10 I 56-43 II 56-49 III 56-50 IV 56-54 V 56-55 VI 56-59 VII 56-60 VIII 56-64 IX 56-65 393 12-13-10 I 18-74 II       Rpld 18-75 III 18-154 394 12-13-10 I       Added 14-300-14-308 395  5-16-11 I 78-143 396  5-16-11 I 14-26-14-30 397  5-16-11 I 14-81-14-93 398  5-16-11 I 14-116-14-122 399  5-16-11 I 14-51-14-59 400  5-16-11 I 14-271-14-274 401  5-16-11 I 14-206-14-214 402  5-16-11 I 34-26-34-30 403  1-23-12 I       Added 14-400-14-402 404  2-13-12 1 42-3(b) 405  5-21-12 I 46-182 406  5-21-12 I 78-143 407  7-15-13 I, II 90-3 III 90-4 IV 90-156(1) V 90-156(14) VI 90-157 VII 90-159(1) VIII       Added 90-350.100- 
90-350.107 IX 90-351 408  7-15-13 I       Rpld 90-22 II 90-39 III 90-41 IV 90-42 V 90-44(a) VI 90-296 VII 90-297 VIII 90-298(a)(5) 409  7-15-13 I 56-29 II 56-48 III 56-96 410  9- 5-13 I 90-297(15) 411 11-18-13 I 56-29 Minutes of 11-18-13       Rpld 46-3 412  2-24-14 I       Added 90-307-90-314 II 90-351 413  5-19-14 I 78-143 414  6-16-14 I       Added 90-274-90-279 II, III 90-351 IV 90-3 V 58-8(h) VI       Added 58-11(d)(17) 415  6-16-14 I 46-182 417  1-26-15 I 14-1-14-4 418  4-20-15 I       Rpld 42-90-42-94 II       Added 90-500-90-504 419  4-20-15 I 70-68 II 78-71 420  5-18-15 I 78-143 421  7-20-15 II 28-20-28-29 422  8-17-15 I 56-29 423  2-22-16 I       Added 2-67 424  3-21-16 I       Added 50-40-50-50 425  3-21-16 I 1-17 II       Rpld 58-11(d)12. 426  5-16-16 I 78-143 427  8-15-16 I 78-143 428  1-23-17 I 18-72 429  5-15-17 I 78-143 430  6-19-17 I 10-38, 10-39 431  6-19-17 I 82-56 432  3-19-18 I       Added 66-100 433  5-21-18 I 74-143 434  7-18-18 I       Added 90-268(3) 435 12-17-18 I       Added 18-300 II       Added 42-100 436 12-17-18 I       Added 90-46 437  1-14-19 I       Added 46-182 438  1-14-19 I 56-56  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 15.231 et seq. Ch. 2 15.261 et seq. Char. § 26 Ch. 2 15.321 et seq. Char. § 21 15.341 et seq. Char. § 21 Ch. 2 28.451 et seq. 46-182 46-186 28.466 46-182 46-186 29.1 et seq. Ch. 34 30.401 et seq. Ch. 26 38.571 56-96A 38.1101-38.1106 56-117 46.401 et seq. Char. § 20 117.1 et seq. Char. §§ 1-63 117.3(1) Char. § 26 117.3(a) Char. § 11, Char. § 12 Char. § 35 117.3(c) Char. § 3 117.3(e) Char. § 6 117.3(f), 117.3(g) Char. § 34 117.3(h) Char. § 36 117.3(i) Char. § 35 117.3(k) Char. § 27 Char. § 29 14-116 14-206 14-236 34-26 117.3(k) et seq. 14-51 117.3(m) Char. § 27 117.4a Char. § 43 117.4a(1) Char. § 47 117.4b Char. § 43 117.4d Char. § 43 117.4i 1-13 117.5 Char. § 43 117.5b Char. § 29 1-1 117.61 et seq. Char. § 1 123.51 et seq. Ch. 50 125.31 et seq. Char. § 11A Ch. 54 54-27 54-36 125.36 54-31 125.581 et seq. Ch. 54 54-37 Ch. 90 90-44 90-72 90-268 90-298 125.584 et seq 90-299 90-318 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 14 14-81 125.1504 14-26 14-51 14-81 14-116 125.1508(a) 14-26 14-51 14-81 14-116 14-271 125.1508(b) 14-91 125.3101 et seq. 90-1 90-76 125.3601 et seq. 90-96 129.12 Char. § 52 131.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 141.101 et seq. 78-147 141.421 et seq. Char. § 37 Char. § 50 Ch. 2, Art. III 141.441 et seq. 2-112 2-114 168.1 et seq. Char. § 3 Ch. 30 168.25 Char. § 4 168.24a(1) Char. § 10 168.644a Char. § 8 168.644e Char. § 7 168.654 et seq. Char. § 6 168.706 Char. § 9 211.1 et seq. Char. § 34 211.28 Char. § 17 211.43b Char. § 52 247.241 et seq. Ch. 82 252.301 et seq. Ch. 58 257.1 et seq. Ch. 74 257.605, 257.606 Ch. 74 257.610 Ch. 74 257.923 74-1 257.951 Ch. 74, Art. II 257.951 et seq. 74-26 287.290 Ch. 10 299.401 et seq. Ch. 62 323.1 et seq. 78-121.2 333.1101 et seq. 46-157 338.883 et seq. 14-91 338.1051 14-308 436.1 et seq. Ch. 6 6-33 436.17a 6-29 480.11 et seq. 74-10 560.101 et seq. 54-39 Ch. 70 600.3801 Ch. 42 600.8701, et seq. 1-18 600.9921 Char. § 18 750.49 et seq. Ch. 10 750.81 46-56 750.161 46-60 750.167 46-118 750.167(1)(a) 46-60 750.167(1)(c) 46-2 750.167(1)(e) 46-111 750.167(1)(l) 46-117 750.170 46-115 750.200 et seq. Ch. 34 750.240 et seq. Ch. 34 750.243a et seq. 46-182 750.267 et seq. 46-4 750.271 et seq. 46-84 750.448 46-149 750.552 46-85  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
MSA Section  
this Code 2.212 et seq. 1-2 3.560(101) et seq.       74-29(5.82) 3.752 Char. § 52 4.559(1) et seq. Ch. 34 4.824(11) et seq. Ch. 26 4.1700(51) et seq.       Char. § 21 4.1700(71) et seq.       Char. § 21 Ch. 2 4.1800(11) et seq.       Char. § 26 Ch. 2 4.1801(1) et seq. Ch. 2 5.359(1) et seq. Char. § 20 5.2014(1) Char. § 47 5.2071 et seq. Char. §§ 1-63 5.2073(1) Char. § 26 5.2073(a) Char. § 11, Char. § 12 Char. § 35 5.2073(c) Char. § 3 5.2073(e) Char. § 6 5.2073(f), 5.2073(g) Char. § 34 5.2073(h) Char. § 36 5.2073(i) Char. § 35 5.2073(k) Char. § 27 Char. § 29 14-26 14-51 14-116 14-206 14-236 34-26 5.2073(m) Char. § 27 5.2074, 5.2075 Char. § 43 5.2077 Char. § 43 5.2082 1-13 5.2084 Char. § 43 5.2084(2) Char. § 29 1-1 5.2085 et seq. Char. § 1 5.2421 et seq. Ch. 5 5.2731 et seq. 78-147 5.2931 et seq. 42-93 Ch. 90 90-1 90-44 90-72 90-96 90-298, 90-299 90-318 5.2932 et seq. Ch. 54 54-37 5.2949(1) et seq. Ch. 14 14-81 5.2991 et seq. Char. § 11A Ch. 54 54-27 54-36 5.2996 54-31 5.3188(1) et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 5.3228(21) et seq.       Char. § 37 Char. § 50 Ch. 2, Art. III 5.3230(1) et seq. 2-112 2-114 6.1001 et seq. Char. § 3 Ch. 30 6.1030(1) et seq. Char. § 10 6.1544(1) Char. § 7 6.1644(1) Char. § 8 6.1654 et seq. Char. § 6 6.1706 Char. § 9 7.1 et seq. Char. § 34 7.86 Char. § 52 9.361 et seq. Ch. 82 9.391(101) et seq.       Ch. 58 9.1801 et seq. Ch. 74 9.2020(1) 74-29(5.83) 9.2305, 9.2306 Ch. 74 9.2310 Ch. 74 9.2325 74-29(5.15) 74-29(5.15a) 74-29(5.15b) 74-29(5.15c) 9.2325(2) 74-29(5.15) 74-29(5.15b) 9.2325(6) 74-29(5.15e) 9.2382 74-29(5.97) 9.2410(5) 74-29(5.83) 9.2561 et seq. 74-26 9.2651 Ch. 74, Art. II 12.541 Ch. 10 13.29(1) et seq. Ch. 62 14.15(1101) et seq.       46-157 18.971 et seq. Ch. 6 6-33 18.988(1) 6-29 26.430(101) et seq.       54-39 Ch. 70 27A.3801 Ch. 42 27A.8312 74-29(2.5e) 27A.9921 Char. § 18 tit. 28 Ch. 46 28.244 et seq. Ch. 10 28.276 46-56 28.358 46-60 28.364 46-118 28.364(1)(a) 46-60 28.364(1)(c) 46-2 28.364(1)(e) 46-111 28.364(1)(h) 46-3 28.364(1)(l) 46-117 28.367 46-115 28.397 et seq. Ch. 34 28.437 et seq. Ch. 34 28.440(1) et seq. 46-182 28.478 et seq. 46-4 28.482 et seq. 46-84 28.703 46-149 28.820(1) 46-85 28.841 et seq. 74-29(5.15) 28.841-28.1274(2) 74-29(5.15)  
