CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GLADSTONE, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Commission 
Adopted October 28, 2002 
Republished in 2012 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GLADSTONE, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Tom Sinnaeve 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dave Cowen 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Carolyn Povich 
Jim McKnight 
Doug Mellon 
City Commission 
____________ 
Brian Horst 
City Manager 
____________ 
Linda Gray 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GLADSTONE, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Darin S. Hunter 
Mayor 
____________ 
Hugo D. Mattonen 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Craig R. Lauerman 
Joeseph L. Maki 
David L. Olson 
City Commission 
____________ 
Darla Falcon 
City Manager 
____________ 
Kim Berry 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Gladstone, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, as supplemented through July 13, 1987, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    This 2012 republication includes all amendatory legislation through Ord. No. 580, adopted April 12, 2010, and was accomplished under the supervision of Connie Hamilton, Editor. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Leesa Hampton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Gladstone, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Gladstone, Michigan. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Gladstone, Michigan. 2002. 
ORDINANCE NO. 542 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF GLADSTONE, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY OF GLADSTONE ORDAINS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Gladstone, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 62, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 24, 2001, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Except as otherwise provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be responsible for a civil infraction for which the sanction is a civil fine of up to $500.00. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each date that the violation continues is a separate offense. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, as to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 24, 2001 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect ten (10) days after final adoption and publication, in accordance with City Charter. 
Introduced: 10/14/02 CITY OF GLADSTONE: Published: 10/19/02 Public hearing: 10/28/02 By: _____ Adopted: 10/28/02   It's Mayor Published: 11/2/02 Effective: 11/12/02 By: _____   It's City Clerk  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this City of Gladstone, Michigan Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. 581  4-11-2011 Include 1 582 11-22-2010 Include 1 583  4-25-2011 Omit 1 584  8-22-2011 Include 1 585  1- 9-2012 Include 1 586  1- 9-2012 Include 1 587  4-23-2012 Include 1 588  4-23-2012 Omit 1 589  6-25-2012 Include 2 591  4-22-2013 Omit 2 590  6-10-2013 Include 2 592 12- 9-2013 Include 2 594  3-10-2014 Include 2 593  5-12-2014 Include 2 595  5-12-2014 Omit 2 597  6-22-2015 Include 3 599  7-25-2016 Omit 3 600  7-25-2016 Omit 3 601  9-12-2016 Omit 3 602  1-23-2017 Include 3  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Gladstone Charter as adopted by the voters on April 2, 1923 and effective on April 10, 1923. The Charter as published in the city's 1976 Code has been used as the base document for this part I. No history notes indicated that any amendments were reflected in text. Subsequent amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Capitalization has been made consistent with the city Code. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. of 1963, art. VII, § 22; home rule cities generally, MCL 117.1 et seq. 

CHAPTER I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 1. - [Incorporation.] 
    The inhabitants of the City of Gladstone, Michigan, as its limits now are or hereafter may be established, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate, to be known as the "City of Gladstone," and as such shall have and may exercise all powers which now are or hereafter may be conferred upon or reserved to cities under the constitution and laws of this state, as fully and completely as though said powers were specifically enumerated herein, and no numeration of particular powers by this Charter shall be held to be exclusive. 
State Law reference- City a body corporate, MCL 117.1. 
Sec. 2. - [Existing wards abolished.] 
    All wards heretofore existing in this city are hereby abolished and the city shall hereafter consist of one ward. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for wards, MCL 117.3(e). 
Sec. 3. - [Boundaries of election districts and precincts.] 
    The boundaries of the several election districts or precincts shall remain as they heretofore existed until the said boundaries shall be changed by the commission, in accordance with the general laws of this state, or in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
State Law reference- Annexation, MCL 117.6. 
CHAPTER II. - PLAN OF GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 1. - [Commission created.] 
    The form of government provided for in this Charter shall be known as the "commission-manager plan." There is hereby created a commission of five citizens, to be elected in the manner hereinafter specified, which shall have full power and authority, except as herein otherwise provided, to exercise all powers conferred upon the city. The members of the commission shall hold office from noon of the second Monday in April, following their election. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that council provide for election of mayor and legislative body, MCL 117.3(a). 
Sec. 2. - [Legislative and governing body.] 
    The commission shall constitute the legislative and governing body of said city, possessing all powers herein provided for, with power and authority to pass such ordinances and adopt such resolutions as they shall deem proper in order to exercise any or all powers possessed by said city. 
Sec. 3. - [Election of commissioner members.] 
    The members of the commission shall be elected on a nonpartisan ticket from the city at large, and shall be subject to recall as hereinafter provided. No person shall be eligible to the office of commissioner who is not a citizen of the United States and a resident of the City of Gladstone at least one year immediately prior to his nomination. 
(Election of 4-6-1992) 
Editor's note- Charter ch. II, § 3, has been editorially altered to reflect the results of the referendum approved by the voters on April 6, 1992. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for manner of nomination of elected officers, MCL 117.3(b). 
Sec. 4. - [Term of office.] 
    Each member of the commission shall be elected to serve a term of three years, except as hereinafter provided. The commission shall be the judge of election and qualification of its own members. 
Sec. 5. - [Meetings.] 
    At 7:30 o'clock p.m., on the first Monday following the regular municipal election, the commission shall meet at the usual place for holding meetings of the legislative body of the city, for the purpose of organization. The clerk shall preside at the first meeting under this Charter, and until the mayor shall have been selected, as hereinafter provided. Thereafter the commission shall meet at such times as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, except that it shall meet regularly not less than twice each month. The mayor, any two members of the commission, or the manager, may call special meetings of the commission, upon at least ten hours' written notice to each member, served personally or left at his usual place of residence; provided, however, any special meeting at which all members of the commission are present shall be a legal meeting for all purposes without such written notice. All meetings of the commission shall be public and any citizen may have access to the minutes and records thereof at all reasonable times. The commission shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall keep a journal of its proceedings, in English, which shall be regularly published, at least monthly, or after each meeting, as the commission shall determine, and said commission shall provide full publicity and information relative to all matters of public interest or concern in said city. 
State Law reference- Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Sec. 6. - [Quorum.] 
    A majority of all members elected to the commission shall constitute a quorum, but a less[er] number may adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance. The commission shall act only by ordinance or resolution. 
Sec. 7. - [Mayor; mayor pro tem.] 
    The commission, at its first regular meeting following the first election under this Charter, and following each municipal election thereafter, shall elect, by ballot, one of its members mayor, who shall be the presiding officer and executive head of the city, and perform such other duties as are, or may be imposed or authorized by the laws of the state or this Charter. In times of public danger or emergency he may, with the consent of the commission, take command of the police and such other department and subordinates of the city as may be deemed necessary by the commission, and maintain order and enforce laws. The commission shall also, at the first regular meeting elect by ballot another member of the commission mayor pro tem, who during the absence or disability of the mayor to perform his duty, shall act in the name and instead of the mayor, and shall, during the time of such absence or disability, exercise all the duties and possess all the powers of the mayor. The mayor and mayor pro tem shall receive compensation only as commissioners. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for selection of mayor, MCL 117.3(a); mandatory that Charter provide for duties of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Sec. 8. - [Compensation.] 
    Each commissioner shall be paid for his services the sum of five dollars for each and every regular meeting of the commission attended by such member; provided, however, that no member of the commission shall be entitled to receive more than one hundred and twenty dollars in any one year, and pro rata for any portion of the year. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the commission and each of its members shall deal with the administrative branch of the city government solely through the manager, except in the department of finance and law, and neither the commission, nor any member thereof, shall give any order or direction, either publicly or privately, to any of the subordinates of the manager, except as provided in section 7 of this chapter. 
Editor's note- The compensation of commissioners provided for in Charter ch. II, § 8, has been superseded by action of the local officers compensation commission, which commission is established in Code ch. 2, art. VI, div. 4. 
Sec. 9. - [Vacancy.] 
    A vacancy in any elective office shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining members of the commission. Such appointee shall hold office until the next regular state or municipal election taking place more than sixty days after such vacancy occurs, at which election a successor shall be elected for the unexpired term of the member in whose office the vacancy occurs; provided, however, that the term of no member shall be lengthened by his resignation and subsequent appointment. 
Sec. 10. - [Absence from meetings.] 
    Absence from three consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the seat of a member, unless the absence is excused by the commission by resolution setting forth the reason for such absence and such excuse fully entered upon the journal. 
Sec. 11. - [Justice of the peace.] 
    The office of justice of the peace is hereby provided for. There shall be elected the first election hereunder two justices of peace. Said officers shall be nominated and elected in the same manner as is provided for the nomination and election of commissioners. They shall hold office for the term of four years, provided that, of the two justices first elected hereunder, the one receiving the lesser number of votes shall be deemed to have been elected for two years only. 
Editor's note- Charter ch. II, § 11, is obsolete, as the position of justice of the peace has been abolished. See MCL 600.9921, 600.9930. 
Sec. 12. - [Departments of city government.] 
    The commission shall, by a general ordinance, establish the departments of city government and determine and prescribe the functions and duties of each department, and may by a vote of four of its members, create new departments, combine existing departments and establish temporary departments for special work. 
Sec. 13. - [City manager, city clerk, city assessor and assistant city assessor.] 
    The commission shall appoint a city manager, city clerk, city assessor and may appoint one or more assistant city assessors, as the commission may determine, each of whom shall be appointed for an indefinite period and be removable by the commission. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for appointment of such officers as deemed necessary, MCL 117.3(a). 
Sec. 14. - [Chief administrative officer.] 
    The manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He shall be chosen by the commission solely on the basis of his administrative and executive qualifications, and shall, during his term of office, reside in the City of Gladstone; provided, however, he shall be a citizen of the United States of America. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Sec. 15. - [Administration of city affairs.] 
    The manager shall be responsible to the commission for the proper administration of the affairs of the city, and to that end, shall make all appointments, including a city treasurer and city attorney, except as herein otherwise specifically provided. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Sec. 16. - [City manager's presence required at meetings.] 
    He [the city manager] shall be required to be present at all meetings of the commission and be entitled to be present at all meetings of its committees and to take part in all discussions, but shall have no vote. 
Sec. 17. - [Compensation of city manager; removal of office.] 
    The manager shall receive compensation to be fixed by the commission. If the commission for any reason shall desire to remove the manager at any time, it shall notify him in writing, specifying reasons for removal and fixing a date within thirty days for hearing such charges. The serving of such notice on the manager shall automatically suspend him from office, pending the date fixed for the hearing. After serving one year, a manager may be removed only upon the affirmative vote of four members of the commission. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Sec. 18. - [Assistant managers.] 
    The commission may provide for appointment by the manager of assistant managers, who may be assigned by the manager to act as heads of departments. 
Sec. 19. - City clerk. 
    The city clerk shall be clerk of the commission and shall, with the mayor, sign and attest all ordinances, and the journal or record of the commissioner's proceedings shall be prepared, kept and signed by the city clerk and approved in writing by the mayor. In addition, the clerk shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by this Charter, the general laws of the state or by the commission. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Sec. 20. - City attorney. 
    The director of the department of law must be an attorney-at-law and may be termed city attorney. He shall be the legal advisor, city attorney and counsel for the city and for the officers and departments thereof, in all matters relating to their official duties, and shall perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him from time to time by the commission, either by ordinance or resolution. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for duties of officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Sec. 21. - [Questions of law.] 
    The commission, city manager, the director of any department or any officer or board, not included in any department, may require the opinion in writing of the city attorney upon any question of law involving their respective powers and duties [with the approval of either the city commission or city manager.] 
(Election of 4-6-1992) 
Editor's note- Charter ch. II, § 21, has been editorially altered to reflect the results of the referendum approved by the voters on April 6, 1992. 
Sec. 22. - Public health. 
    The commission shall have and exercise for the city all the powers and authority conferred upon boards of health by the general laws of the state, or by ordinance, so far as the same are not inconsistent with this Charter and the commission may enact all ordinances deemed necessary for the preservation and protection of the health of the inhabitants of the city for preventing and introduction or spreading of malignant, infectious and contagious diseases within the city, or for the removal of persons having such diseases to such proper place within or without the city limits, as may be deemed necessary for the public safety. The commission may enact such ordinances as it may deem proper or expedient for regulating the proceedings and mode of exercising such powers and authority. The commission may establish, maintain and regulate suitable hospitals at places within or without the corporate limits of the city. 
Sec. 23. - Purchasing agent. 
    The commission shall by ordinance provide for the creation of the office of purchasing agent, prescribe his duties and the rules and regulations relative thereto. The manager, or some person to be designated by the manager, shall act as purchasing agent. If such other person is so designated, he shall act under the direction of said manager. 
Sec. 24. - [Purchases.] 
    No purchase shall be made except on a requisition by the head of the department, countersigned by the manager, and approved by the chief accounting officer. No purchase shall be made in excess of appropriations. 
Sec. 25. - Representation on board of supervisors. 
    The mayor, city assessor, and two members of the commission to be appointed by the commission shall be the city's representatives on the board of supervisors of Delta County. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. II, § 25, are superseded by MCL 46.401 et seq. 
Sec. 26. - [Representatives' rights, powers and duties.] 
    The representatives of the city aforesaid shall be endowed with all the rights, powers and duties conferred upon supervisors of townships by the general laws of this state, except where otherwise provided for in this Charter. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. II, § 26, are superseded by MCL 46.401 et seq. 
Sec. 27. - Compensation, bonds, etc., of officers. 
    All appointive officers of the city shall perform such duties as shall be prescribed by ordinance, this Charter or the general laws of the state, or which may be required by the commission, manager and the heads of the departments. 
ec. 28. - [Compensation of officers, permanent employees and election officials.] 
    The compensation of all officers and permanent employees of the city, including all election officials, shall be fixed by the commission except as otherwise specifically provided herein. 
Sec. 29. - [Oath.] 
    Every officer shall, before he enters upon the duties of his office, subscribe and file with the city clerk an oath to support the Constitution of the State of Michigan, and to faithfully perform the duties of his office to the best of his ability. 
Sec. 30. - [Bonds.] 
    The commission shall require the city manager and city clerk to give bonds and may require any other officer or employee to give a bond for the faithful performance of his duty, in such amount as it may determine, and the premium thereof shall be paid by the city. 
Sec. 31. - [Filing, approval and recording of bond required before entering office.] 
    Any officer or employee required by the provisions of this Charter, the general laws of the state, any ordinance of the City of Gladstone or by the commission, to give bond, shall not enter upon the duties of his office or employment until such bond shall be duly filed, approved and recorded. 
Sec. 32. - [Filing and approval of bonds.] 
    All such bonds, except as herein otherwise provided, shall be approved by the commission and filed with the clerk, excepting the bond of the clerk, which shall be filed with the treasurer. 
Sec. 33. - [Office and employment of commissioner member.] 
    No elective officer shall hold any office or employment except that to which he was elected, compensation for which is paid out of city money, nor be elected or appointed to any office created, or the compensation of when [which] was increased or fixed by the commission while he was a member thereof, until the expiration of one year from the date when he ceased to be a member of the commission. 
Sec. 34. - [Bonds required to be surety company bonds.] 
    All bonds required under the provisions of this Charter shall be surety company bonds. 
Sec. 35. - [Acceptance of gifts, etc.] 
    No member of the commission, the manager or other officer or employee of the city shall accept any gift, frank, free ticket, pass, reduced price or reduced rate of service from any person, firm or corporation operating a public utility within the city or from any person known to him to have or to be endeavoring to secure a contract with the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the transportation of policemen or firemen in uniform or wearing their official badges, when the same is provided for by ordinance or otherwise. No member of the commission shall be eligible to an appointive office within its gift, during the period for which he was elected. 
Sec. 36. - [Qualification and fitness for office.] 
    All officers and employees shall be elected or appointed with reference to their qualifications and fitness, and for the good of the public service, and without reference to their political faith or party affiliations. 
CHAPTER III. - REGISTRATIONS, NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for time, manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c); Michigan Election Law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - [Registration of electors and conduct of elections.] 
    The general registration and election laws of the State of Michigan, except as herein otherwise provided, shall apply to and control the registration of electors and the conduct of elections in the City of Gladstone. 
State Law reference- Michigan Election Law, MCL 168.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2. - [Electors.] 
    The inhabitants of the city having the constitutional qualifications of electors of the state, shall be electors of the city. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. III, § 2, are superseded by MCL 168.491 et seq. in that such act provides for the qualifications of electors of the city. See MCL 168.492. 
Sec. 3. - [Inspectors of election.] 
    At least thirty days prior to the first election after they enter upon the duties of their office, the city commission shall appoint three qualified electors in each voting precinct to be inspectors of election for such precinct, and they shall continue so to act at the will of the city commission. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. III, § 3, are superseded by MCL 168.674. 
Sec. 4. - [Regular city election.] 
    The regular city election shall be held on the first Monday in April of each year. 
Sec. 5. - [Special elections.] 
    Special elections may be held at such times and places as the city commission shall by resolution designate, the purpose of which shall be fully set forth in the resolution. 
State Law reference- Special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639. 
Sec. 6. - [Nomination of candidates for elective offices.] 
    Candidates for elective offices shall be nominated from the city at large by petitions, blanks for which shall be furnished by the city clerk. Each petition shall be signed by not less than twenty-five and not more than fifty qualified electors, and shall be filed with the city clerk at least twenty days prior to the election. Each elector signing shall add his residential street and number and date of signature. No electors shall sign petitions for more candidates for any office than the number to be elected to such office. No petition shall be left for signatures in any public place other than the city clerk's office. 
State Law reference- Nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a. 
Sec. 7. - [Notice of time and place for elections; propositions to be voted upon.] 
    Notice of the time and place of holding any election, and the propositions to be voted upon, shall be given by the city clerk at least ten days before such elections by posting such notices in three public places in each election precinct, and by publishing a copy thereof in three consecutive issues of a newspaper published and circulated in the city within twenty days before such election. The notices shall also contain the names of the candidates to be voted upon, and the hours of opening and closing the polls. 
State Law reference- Election notices, MCL 168.647 et seq. 
Sec. 8. - [Preparation of ballot.] 
    Within three days after the time limited for filing nomination petitions, the city clerk shall certify to the city commission the names of all candidates duly nominated and the special matters to be submitted to the electors, and the board [of election commissioners] shall thereupon prepare the ballot, shall print thereon the names of candidates in rotation as provided by the primary election laws of the state and the office, without any party name or designation, and the special matters, if any, to be voted upon. 
Sec. 9. - [Poll hours.] 
    The polls shall be open in each voting precinct from seven o'clock a.m. until eight o'clock p.m. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 168.720. 
Sec. 10. - [Canvassing of votes; announcement of results.] 
    Immediately on the closing of the polls the election inspectors shall canvass the votes, and announce the result, as provided in the general election laws for county and state elections. They shall first canvass the votes for city officers and shall forthwith make a statement of all votes cast at the election and file the same at once with the city clerk. The candidate or candidates, where more than one are to be elected for the same office, receiving the greatest number of votes shall be declared elected. 
State Law reference- Canvass of election returns, MCL 168.323. 
Sec. 11. - [Board of city canvassers.] 
    The board of election commissioners shall act as a board of city canvassers and shall meet at the city hall on the Thursday following any city election at the usual hour of meeting and shall canvass the result of the election. Upon the completion of the canvass the commission shall file with the city clerk a statement of the votes cast and of the candidates elected, and of the votes on any question or proposition submitted to the electors. The city commission shall enter the same on the official records of the city. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. III, § 11, are superseded by MCL 168.24a, which vests canvassing authority in a four-member county board of canvassers. 
Sec. 12. - [Notice to persons elected.] 
    Within five days after the canvass the city clerk shall give notice to the persons elected of their election. 
Sec. 13. - [Tie votes.] 
    If two of more candidates shall receive an equal number of votes the commission shall determine by lot which one is elected to the office. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. III, § 13, are superseded by MCL 168.24a, 168.852, which statutes vest canvassing authority in a four-member county board of canvassers and provide for such board to conduct the tie-breaking lot. 
Sec. 14. - [Candidates for mayor.] 
    [At city elections, electors may vote for their recommended candidate for mayor from among any of the incumbent commissioners. The city commission is required to consider such recommendation when it elects the mayor of the city, but is not bound by such recommendation.] 
(Election of 4-6-1992) 
Editor's note- Charter ch. III, § 14, has been editorially added to reflect the results of referendum approved by the voters on April 6, 1992. 
CHAPTER IV. - RECALL 

Sec. 1. - [Removal of elective officer from office.] 
    Any elective officer of the City of Gladstone may be removed by the qualified electors of the city in accordance with the general laws of the state providing for recall of the city officials. 
State Law reference- Recall, MCL 168.951 et seq. See also Mich. Const. of 1963, art. II, § 8. 
CHAPTER V. - ORDINANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for adopting, continuing, amending and repealing ordinances, MCL 117.3(k). 

Sec. 1. - [Enacting clause.] 
    The enacting clause of all ordinances shall read "The City of Gladstone ordains," but such caption may be omitted when said ordinances are published in book form or are revised and digested by authority of the commission. 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 2. - [Majority vote of commissioners required for adoption.] 
    The adoption of any ordinance by the commission shall require for its passage the concurrence of a majority of all the members of the commission. 
Sec. 3. - [Effective date; emergency ordinances.] 
    The time when any ordinance shall take effect shall be prescribed therein, which time shall not be less than ten days from the date of its publication, except emergency ordinances, which may be given immediate effect. No ordinance shall be finally passed on the day it is introduced, except in cases of public emergency. An emergency ordinance shall be defined to be one necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health, safety or providing for the usual daily operation of a department and which contains a statement of its urgency. 
Sec. 4. - [Certificate of final passage.] 
    Immediately upon the final passage of any ordinance the mayor and clerk shall sign the same under a certificate of the day and date of its passage. 
Sec. 5. - [Publication.] 
    All ordinances shall be published once within one week after their passage, in a newspaper printed and circulated within the city, and the clerk shall certify on the records of ordinances the date of publication and newspapers in which any ordinance was so published, and such certificate shall be prima facie evidence that legal publication of an ordinance has been made. Proof of publication thereof shall be filed with the clerk and a separate record be made thereof, but omission of such proof shall not invalidate said ordinance. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. V, § 5, are modified by the provisions of MCL 117.3(k), as such statute authorizes publication of a summary of an ordinance in lieu of the full text of an ordinance. 
Sec. 6. - [Record and authentication.] 
    All ordinances shall be recorded in an indexed book marked "Ordinance Record" and record of each ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and clerk. Such record and authentication shall be done within one week after the final passage of any ordinance, but failure to so record and authenticate any ordinance shall not invalidate it or suspend its operation. 
Sec. 7. - [Reenactment.] 
    No repealed ordinance shall be revived unless the whole, or so much as is intended to be revived, shall be reenacted. When any section or part of any ordinance is amended, the whole section, as amended, shall be reenacted. 
Sec. 8. - [Time limit for commencement of prosecution for violation.] 
    Prosecutions for violation of any ordinance of the city shall be commenced within two years after the commission of the offense, provided that the limitations herein imposed shall not apply to violations penal in their nature, and shall not be construed as a limitation of the city's right to forfeit any franchise, grant or license, for violation of the terms and conditions thereof, after said two-year period. 
Sec. 9. - [Process for prosecution of violation.] 
    Prosecution for violations of the ordinances of the city may be commenced by complaint and warrant, and all process in such cases shall be in the name of "The People of the City of Gladstone." The practice in such cases shall be the same as near as may be, as in criminal cases, cognizant by justices of the peace under the general laws of the state, or as may be provided for cases cognizable by any municipal court hereafter created. 
Editor's note- References in the provisions of Charter ch. V, § 9, to justices of the peace and municipal courts are obsolete, as the same have been abolished. See MCL 600.9921, 600.9930. 
Sec. 10. - [Direction of process.] 
    All process issued in any prosecution or proceedings for the violation of any ordinance shall be directed to any police officer of the city, or County of Delta, and may be executed in any part of the state by said officer or any other officer authorized by law to serve process issued by a justice of the peace. 
Editor's note- The reference in the provisions of Charter ch. V, § 10, to justices of the peace is obsolete, as the same have been abolished. See MCL 600.9921, 600.9930. 
Sec. 11. - [Pleading by title and section number.] 
    In all judicial proceedings it shall be sufficient to plead any ordinance by title and the number of section or sections, and it shall not be necessary to plead the entire ordinance or section. 
Sec. 12. - [Judicial notice.] 
    Judicial notice shall be taken of the enactment, existence, provisions and continuing force of all ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 13. - [Proving in judicial proceedings.] 
    Whenever it shall be necessary to prove any ordinance or resolution of the commission in any judicial proceedings, the same may be proved from the record thereof kept by the clerk, by a copy thereof, duly certified by the clerk under the seal of the city, or from any volume purporting to have been published, printed or compiled by authority of the commission. 
Sec. 14. - [Original jurisdiction.] 
    The circuit court for the County of Delta shall have original jurisdiction in all cases arising under the ordinances of the city for violation thereof when the fine or forfeiture imposed shall exceed one hundred dollars or when the offender may be imprisoned for a term exceeding three months. The justices of the peace, until otherwise provided by the commission, shall have original jurisdiction in all cases when the fine or forfeiture imposed shall not exceed one hundred dollars or when the offender may be imprisoned for a term not exceeding three months. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. V, § 14, are superseded by MCL 600.8311, which statute vests jurisdiction over ordinance violations in the district court. See also MCL 600.601 et seq. 
Sec. 15. - [Ordinances, regulations and resolutions in force at time of the effective date of the Charter.] 
    All ordinances, regulations and resolutions in force at the time this Charter shall take effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions thereof, shall remain and be in force until amended, modified or repealed. 
Sec. 16. - [Provision of pensions for injured employees of the fire and police departments and their dependents.] 
    The city commission may, by ordinance, provide for pensioning persons injured by violence, accidents or exposure while employed by the city in the fire or police departments, when such injuries arise out of, or in the course of such employment; also for the dependents of the person killed while so employed, and for persons who have been in such employment of the city for twenty-five years or more, subject to such rules and regulations as the commission may prescribe. 
Sec. 17. - [Fire limits.] 
    The commission shall have the power to prescribe by ordinance, limits or districts to be known as "fire limits" and to prescribe the manner of construction of buildings therein, both as to kind of material and type of construction, to prohibit within such limits or districts, as it shall deem expedient, the location of shops, factories, the prosecution of any trade or business, the keeping of lumberyards, the storing of lumber or other easily inflammable and explosive material in any place, when in the opinion of the commission the danger from fire is thereby increased and may pass and enforce such other ordinances and regulations as it may deem necessary for the prevention and suppression of fire. 
Editor's note- To the extent that Charter ch. V, § 17, deals with the regulation of building construction, it is superseded by the mandatory state construction code from which a local government cannot exempt itself. See MCL 125.1508a. Portions of this section are also superseded by the zoning authority granted in MCL 125.581 et seq. 
Sec. 18. - [Purchasing, erection and maintenance of grounds and buildings within and outside the corporate limits of the city.] 
    When the commission shall deem it for the public interest, grounds and buildings for necessary public uses may be purchased, erected and maintained within and beyond the corporate limits of the city, and as to such premises beyond the corporate limits of the city, the commission shall have authority to pass and enforce, and over such lands, buildings and property, in the same manner and to the same extent as if they were situated within the city, all such ordinances and police regulations as may be necessary for the care and protection thereof, and for the management and control of the persons kept or confined in any building maintained upon such property. 
CHAPTER VI. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 

Sec. 1. - [Proposed ordinance petition.] 
    Any proposed ordinance may be submitted to the commission by a petition signed by electors of the city equal in number to fifteen percent of the highest vote cast in the city for commissioners at the last preceding general election. The petition shall contain a request that the ordinance be submitted to a vote of the people if not passed by the commission, and the ordinance shall either be contained in the petition or shall be attached to it. 
Sec. 2. - [Time limit for petition passage, amendment or submission for vote.] 
    Within thirty days after such petition is presented to the commission, the commission shall either pass the proposed ordinance without alterations, or it shall amend the ordinance if it deems it advisable, retaining, however, the general purpose thereof, or it shall submit the same, without amendment, to a vote of the electors of the city. 
Sec. 3. - [Publication of amended ordinances.] 
    In case the commission shall amend the ordinance, it shall publish the same, as amended, in one or more newspapers in the city, and if within fifteen days thereafter a protest against the adoption of the ordinance, as amended, be filed, signed by electors of the city equal in number to ten percent of the highest vote cast in the city for commissioners at the last preceding general election, the ordinance, as amended, shall be submitted to the electors of the city. If no such protest shall be filed, the ordinance shall take effect at the time prescribed by the ordinance, or if that has expired, at the expiration of said period of fifteen days. 
Sec. 4. - [Submission of original with amended ordinance; adoption.] 
    In case the amended ordinance is submitted to the electors the original ordinance shall be submitted at the same time as an alternative, but no elector shall vote "yes" to both ordinances. If each ordinance shall have a majority of votes cast on the adoption of the same, the one having the greater number of votes shall be considered adopted. If a single ordinance is submitted and the majority of qualified electors voting thereon shall vote in favor thereof, it shall be adopted. 
Sec. 5. - [Ordinances not to be in effect for ten days after passage.] 
    No ordinance passed by the commission, except when otherwise required by the general laws of the state or by the provisions of this Charter (excepting ordinances for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, which shall contain a statement of urgency and shall be passed by unanimous vote of the commission), shall go into effect for ten days from the time of its final publication and if during the said ten days there shall be presented to the commission a protest against the passing of said ordinance, signed by electors of the city equal in number to at least fifteen percent of the highest vote cast for candidates for commissioners at the last preceding general election, said ordinance shall thereupon be suspended from taking effect and it shall be the duty of the commission to reconsider said ordinance, and if the same is not entirely repealed, the commission shall submit it to the vote of the electors. 
Sec. 6. - [Number of ordinances presented to be voted upon.] 
    Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same election, in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 7. - [Proposition for ordinance repeal or amendment.] 
    The city commission may submit a proposition for the repeal of any such ordinance, or for amendments thereto, to be voted upon at any city election, and if such proposition receives a majority of the votes cast thereon at such election, the ordinance shall thereby be repealed or amended. 
Sec. 8. - [Submission of ordinances to electors; special election.] 
    All ordinances submitted to the electors shall be submitted at the next general municipal election after final action taken by the commission, if one is held within ninety days, but if no general election shall be held within that time, a special election shall be called by the city commission for that purpose and held within that time. Not more than one special election shall be held for such purpose in the period of six months. 
Sec. 9. - [Effective date of adopted ordinances.] 
    Whenever the electors shall adopt an ordinance it shall go into effect at the time prescribed therein, or if that time shall have expired, ten days after the election. 
Sec. 10. - [Repeal or amendment of adopted ordinances.] 
    No ordinance which has been adopted by the votes of the electors shall be repealed or amended within five years, except by vote of the electors. 
Sec. 11. - [Publication of ordinances or propositions for amendment or repeal.] 
    All ordinances or propositions for amendment or repealing of ordinances submitted to the voters, shall be published at least once in one or more of the newspapers in the city, not more than thirty nor less than ten days prior to the election. 
Sec. 12. - [Publication of Charter.] 
    Within one year after this Charter takes effect, the city commission shall cause to be published, in pamphlet form, this Charter, with the amendments thereof, if any, and all ordinances then in force in the city, with proper revision of all such ordinances to incorporate all amendments, and at least once in each ten years thereafter, the city commission shall cause to be compiled and published, in pamphlet form, this Charter, all amendments thereto, all ordinances and all longterm contracts between the city and public utility corporations. 
CHAPTER VII. - FRANCHISES GRANTING OF PUBLIC UTILITY FRANCHISES 

Sec. 1. - [Restrictions.] 
    Public utility franchises and all renewals and extensions thereof and amendments thereto shall be granted by ordinance only. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than thirty years. 
State Law reference- Franchises limited to 30 years, Mich. Const. art. VII, § 30. 
Sec. 2. - [Franchises not subject to revocation.] 
    No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation at the will of the commission shall be enacted nor become operative until the same shall have first been referred to the people at a regular or special election and receive the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the commission for referral to the electorate before thirty days after application therefor has been filed with the commission, nor until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be ordered by the commission unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the commission, shall have first been paid to the treasurer by the grantee. 
State Law reference- Approval of electors of irrevocable franchise, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 25; expense of special election to be paid by franchisee, MCL 117.5(i). 
Sec. 3. - [Franchises subject to revocation.] 
    A franchise ordinance which is subject to revocation at the will of the commission may be enacted by the commission without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted unless it shall have so been on file in the office of the clerk for public inspection for at least four weeks after publication of a notice that such ordinance is so on file. 
Sec. 4. - Conditions of public utility franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the following rights of the city, but this enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the commission to insert in such franchise any provision within the power of the city to impose or require: 
(a)	To repeal the same for misuse, nonuse or failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)	To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c)	To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. The right to establish standards of service and quality of products and the right to prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates herein retained may be delegated to the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successor in office or duties; 
(d)	To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)	To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the commission to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public; 
(f)	To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges and public places and the space above and beneath them; 
(g)	To relocate its facilities, at its own expense, from time to time when requested by the city commission. 
Sec. 5. - Regulation of rates. 
    All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing rates, fares and charges, and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility used shall in no event include a value predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits. 
Sec. 6. - Use of public places by utilities. 
    Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges and public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use. Every such public utility may be required by the city to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and other public places of the city by the city and by other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public utility the commission shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid thereof and the arbitration award shall be final. 
CHAPTER VIII. - GENERAL FINANCE 

Sec. 1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the City of Gladstone shall commence on the first day of April in each year. 
Sec. 2. - [Accounts; financial reports; records.] 
    Accounts shall be kept by the chief accounting officer showing the financial transactions for all departments of the city, which accounts shall conform to any uniform system required by law. Forms for all such accounts shall be prescribed by the chief accounting officer, with the approval of the manager, which shall be adequate to record all cash receipts and disbursements, all revenue accrued and liabilities incurred, and all transactions affecting the acquisition, custody and disposition of all property, and to make such reports of the financial transactions and conditions of the city as may be required by law, ordinance or resolution. Financial reports shall be prepared for each quarter and each fiscal year, and for such other periods as may be required by the manager or the commission. Adequate cost records shall be kept in all departments of the city; also a complete financial record of all properties of the city and the cost and value thereof. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for system of accounts conforming to such uniform system as may be required by law, MCL 117.3(n). 
Sec. 3. - [Payments.] 
    Payments by the city shall be made only upon vouchers certified by the head of the appropriate departments or divisions of the city government, by means of drafts, checks, orders or warrants, duly approved by the chief accounting officer and countersigned by the treasurer. Such draft, checks, order or warrant shall specify the fund from which it is payable and shall not be paid from any other fund. The chief accounting officer shall examine all payrolls, bills and other claims and demands against the city, except claims for unliquidated damages and shall issue no warrant unless he finds that the claim is in proper form, correctly computed and duly certified, and that it is justly and legally due and payable, that an appropriation has been made therefor which has not been exhausted or that the payment has been otherwise legally authorized and that there is money in the city treasury to make payment. He may investigate any claim, and for such purposes may examine witnesses under oath. If he finds such bill, claim or demand is fraudulent, erroneous or otherwise invalid, he shall not issue a warrant therefor. 
Sec. 4. - [Collection of taxes, special assessments and license fees; deposit.] 
    All taxes, special assessments and license fees accruing to the city shall be collected by the city treasurer. All money received by any officer or employee of the city, for or in connection with the business of the city, shall be paid promptly into the city treasury and shall be deposited with such responsible banking institutions designated by the commission, furnishing such security as the commission may determine and paying the highest rate of interest, and all such interest shall accrue to the benefit of the city. The commission shall provide, by ordinance, for the prompt and regular payment and deposit of all city moneys, as required by this section. All fees received by any officer or employee shall belong to the city. 
Sec. 5. - [Property tax revenues.] 
    The revenues raised by general taxation upon all the property in the city or by loans to be repaid by such tax shall be divided into such and so many funds as the commission may, by ordinance or resolution, determine. 
Sec. 6. - [Annual audit.] 
    Not later than thirty days after the close of each fiscal year the manager shall provide that an annual audit be made of the accounts of all the officers and departments of the city government, by public accountants approved by the city commission, who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the financial affairs of the city or any of its officers or employees. In addition to the annual audit the commission or manager may, at any time, provide for such examination or audit of the accounts of any officer or any department of the city government, as they may determine. 
Sec. 7. - [Annual budget.] 
    Not later than one month after the end of each fiscal year the manager shall prepare and submit to the commission an annual budget for the ensuing fiscal year, based upon detailed estimates furnished by the several departments and other divisions of the city government, according to a classification as nearly uniform as possible. The budget shall present the following information: 
(a)	An itemized statement of the appropriations recommended by the manager for current expenses and for permanent improvements for each department and each division thereof for the ensuing fiscal year, with comparative statement, in parallel columns, of the appropriations and expenditures for next preceding fiscal year, and the increases and decreases in appropriation recommended. 
(b)	An itemized statement of the taxes required and of the estimated revenues of the city from all other sources for the ensuing fiscal year, with comparative statements, in parallel columns, of the taxes and other revenues for the current and next preceding fiscal year, and of the increases and decreases estimated or proposed. 
(c)	A statement of the financial condition of the city and an inventory of all property owned by the city. 
(d)	Such other information as may be required by the city commission. Such budget shall be printed in a newspaper and copies shall be available for distribution not later than two weeks after its submission to the commission, and a public hearing shall be given by the commission before action thereon. 
State Law reference- Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, MCL 141.121 et seq. 
Sec. 8. - [Annual appropriation ordinance.] 
    Not later than two months after the beginning of the fiscal year, the commission shall pass an annual appropriation ordinance which shall be based on the budget submitted by the manager, as approved or amended by the commission. The total amount of appropriation shall not exceed the estimated revenues of the city, as set forth in the preceding section. Before the annual appropriation ordinance has been passed, the commission upon request in writing by the manager, may make appropriations for current departments until the annual appropriation ordinance is in force, and may borrow such moneys as may be necessary therefor. No liabilities shall be incurred by any officer or employee of the city, except in accordance with the provisions of the annual appropriation ordinance, or under continuing contracts and loans authorized under the provisions of this Charter. At any meeting after the passage of the appropriation ordinance and after at least one week's notice in a newspaper printed and circulating in the city, the commission, by a vote of four members, may amend such ordinance so as to authorize the transfer of unused balances appropriated for one purpose to another purpose, or to appropriate available revenues not included in the annual budget. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for annual appropriation ordinance, MCL 117.3(h). 
Sec. 9. - [Annual tax levy.] 
    The commission shall, by ordinance, levy such taxes each year as may be necessary to meet the appropriations made (less the estimate of the amount of revenue from other sources) and all sums required by law to be raised on account of city debt, together with such addition, not exceeding five percent of the amount of the budget, as may be necessary to meet commissions, fees and abatements in amount of taxes collected from the estimate subject in each case to the laws of the State of Michigan. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for annual tax levy, MCL 117.3(g). 
Sec. 10. - [Annual tax levy to pay city expenses and liabilities.] 
    The commission shall have authority, within the limits herein prescribed, to raise annually by taxation, such sums of money as may be necessary to defray expenses and pay the liabilities of the city, and to carry into effect the powers in this Charter granted. 
Sec. 11. - [Certification, levy and collection of sums ordered in the annual appropriation bill.] 
    All sums ordered in the annual appropriation bill in any year, to be raised for the several general funds, shall forthwith be certified by the clerk to the assessor, and shall be levied and collected upon the assessed valuation of all taxable property within the city. 
Sec. 12. - [Taxes, charges and penalties to be a lien upon the property assessed; exception.] 
    All taxes, charges and penalties, other than special assessments, ordered to be spread on any tax roll, shall become a lien upon the property assessed, on and after the first day provided for the collection of such roll. 
Sec. 13. - [Property tax limit.] 
    The aggregate amount which the commission may raise by a general tax upon the taxable, real and personal property in the city for the purpose of defraying the general expenses and liabilities of the corporation, shall not exceed in any one year, one and one-half percentum of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city, as fixed by the assessment roll of the year in which the tax is levied. 
State Law reference- Tax limitations, MCL 117.3(g). 
Sec. 14. - [Special assessment.] 
    In addition to the above amount [as set forth in section 13 of this Charter] the commission may raise, by special assessment, in a special assessment district, such sums as they deem necessary for the purpose of grading, curbing, paving, graveling and otherwise improving the streets, and for constructing sidewalks, sewers and drains, and making other improvements, chargeable upon the land and property in the district according to frontage or benefits, and for all other purposes for which special assessment funds are constituted. The commission may also raise by tax, in each street district, for defraying the expense of working upon, improving, and repairing and cleaning the streets of the district and for all purposes for which a street district fund is constituted, a sum not exceeding in any one year one fourth of one percent on the assessed value of the taxable real and personal property in the district. A tax or assessment of not more than two dollars per year may be levied upon each lot or premises drained by a private sewer for drain leading into any public drain or sewer. 
State Law reference- Tax limitations, MCL 117.3(g). 
Sec. 15. - [Borrowing of money in anticipation of taxes.] 
    Money may be borrowed in anticipation of taxes and the receipts from taxes during any fiscal year by the issue of notes or certificates of indebtedness, but the aggregate amount of such loans at any time outstanding shall not exceed twenty-five per centum of the receipts from taxes during the preceding fiscal year, and all such loans shall be paid out of the receipts from taxes of the fiscal year in which they are issued, except in cases of special assessments. 
Sec. 16. - [Work or improvements not to commence until appropriation or special assessment made.] 
    No public work or improvement shall be commenced, or expenditure made, nor any contract therefor be let or made, excepting as herein otherwise provided, until an appropriation has been made therefor or a special assessment shall have been levied to pay the costs and expenses thereof. No such work or improvement shall be paid for, or contracted to be paid for, except from the proceeds of such appropriation or special assessment, or from the proceeds of bonds or other obligations issued in anticipation of the collection of such appropriations or special assessments. 
Sec. 17. - [Gifts for charitable or other public purposes.] 
    Subject to the limitation of this Charter and of the general laws, the commission shall have the power to receive devises, bequests, gifts, donations of all kinds of property within or without the city, in fee simple or in trust, for charitable or other public purposes, and to do all things and acts necessary to carry out the purposes of such bequests, gifts and donations, with power to sell, lease or otherwise manage or dispose of the same, in accordance with the terms of the bequests or donations. 
Sec. 18. - [Liability for collection of personal property taxes.] 
    The city treasurer and the sureties on his bond shall each be jointly and severally liable for all city taxes assessed against personal property, unless it be affirmatively shown that said city treasurer has used all legal processes authorized by this Charter or by any general law of the state for the collection of such taxes, and in the absence of the use by said city treasurer of such legal process for the collection of said taxes the failure of said city treasurer to collect city taxes assessed against personal property shall be grounds for his removal by the commission. 
Sec. 19. - [Publication of names of persons delinquent in payment of personal property taxes.] 
    The city treasurer shall, within sixty days after city taxes are delinquent and personal demand therefor shall have been made, cause to be published in a newspaper published and circulating in the City of Gladstone to be designated by him, a list giving the names of all persons who are delinquent in the payment of said taxes assessed against personal property, together with the amount of such tax, which publication shall be continued at least once in each week for three successive weeks. 
Sec. 20. - [Contracts not to be awarded to persons delinquent in payment of personal property taxes.] 
    No contract shall be awarded and no moneys shall be paid by the City of Gladstone to any person, firm or corporation who is, at the time, being more than thirty days delinquent in the payment of taxes assessed against the personal property of such person, firm or corporation, and all contracts so awarded to any such person, firm or corporation shall be void and no recovery shall be had thereunder or on account of any work, service or material furnished on account thereof. 
Sec. 21. - [Money owed by city to delinquent taxpayer to be deducted from amount of delinquent tax.] 
    In event of any money being due or claimed to be due to any person, firm or corporation from the city on any account whatsoever, and there being due at the same time from such person, firm or corporation city taxes assessed against personal property of such person, firm or corporation, it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to deduct from any check, warrant or voucher which he may be authorized to sign, countersign or pay to such person, firm or corporation so delinquent, the amount of such taxes so assessed against personal property, and the city is hereby given an offset and counterclaim for taxes assessed against personal property against any person, firm or corporation to which the city may be indebted or liable on any account whatever. 
[Sec. 22. - Transfer of income, surplus moneys or other assets between city funds.] 
    [Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the city commission may transfer income, surplus moneys, or other assets from one city fund to another city fund for the purpose of allowing the various funds to operate efficiently and minimize the need for additional taxes or revenues.] 
(Election of 4-3-1989) 
Editor's note- Charter ch. VIII, § 22, has been editorially altered to reflect the results of the referendum approved by the voters on April 3, 1989. 
CHAPTER IX. - BONDS 

Sec. 1. - [Issuance; borrowing of money.] 
    The city and the commission thereof may borrow money and issue bonds therefor on the faith and credit of said city, provided that at no time shall the bonded indebtedness of the city exceed eight percentum of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the city. School bonds and bonds issued to cover the cost of purchasing or installing, improving or extending public utilities, which are a lien or mortgage on the utility and are payable from the income of such utility and which are not a general obligation of the city, shall not be included in the aforesaid limitation. 
Editor's note- The interest rate provided for in Charter ch. IX, § 1, is superseded by MCL 133.1a. 
State Law reference- Authority to borrow money on credit of city and issue bonds therefor, limitation on bonded indebtedness, MCL 117.4a(1). 
Sec. 2. - [Purposes for issuance.] 
    Bonds may be issued for the following purposes: sewers, drains, sewage disposal and treatment works, and for enlarging, improving or extending the same; waterworks, water mains, water filtration on purifying plants and works for increasing the water supply and the distribution and protection thereof; fire stations, firefighting equipment, fire alarm apparatus; police stations, police equipment, police telegraph and alarm equipment; the purchase or installation of public utilities, gas manufacturing and electric generating plants and distribution systems, heating plants, wireless telephone and telegraph stations, street railway or transportation system or the extension or improvement thereof; parks, playgrounds, recreation grounds and buildings and the improvement thereof; civic and community houses and centers, libraries, hospitals, dispensaries and clinics of all kinds; workhouses and farms, almshouses, juvenile homes, grade separations, bridges, viaducts, street improvements by grading, paving, curbing or otherwise, markets and market houses, fuel markets and yards, garbage disposal works, garbage collection equipment, street cleaning apparatus, aviation fields or landings, hangars, municipal or public buildings, docks and wharfs and harbor improvements; for paying the city's share of street improvements and sewers, when said improvements are paid in part by special assessments; for any municipal improvement necessary to advance the peace, health, safety and welfare of the city or its inhabitants. The cost of procuring sites and furnishing of equipment shall be deemed to be part of all of the aforesaid. The aforesaid enumeration of powers shall not be limitation of the right and power of the city to issue bonds for other purposes; provided, however, that no bonds shall be issued to defray operative and administrative costs and expenses of the city. 
Sec. 3. - [Ordinance passage required.] 
    Whenever the commission shall desire to issue bonds, they shall pass an ordinance stating the amount of bonds to be issued and the purpose thereof, how and when the same shall be due and payable and the rate of interest thereon, which ordinance shall not be finally passed on the day it is introduced except in case of public emergency. Such ordinance shall be published once before its final passage by the commission in a newspaper published and circulating in the city and thereafter shall be published once in each week for three successive weeks immediately preceding the election hereinafter provided. The time when such ordinance shall take effect shall be prescribed therein and it shall be submitted to the electoral vote of said city for adoption or rejection at a general or special municipal election to be held therein, and the commission is hereby empowered to call a special municipal election, to be held in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and the general laws of this state for the submission to the electors of the question of issuing bonds for the aforesaid purposes, and all persons having qualifications of electors under the constitution and general laws of this state shall be eligible to register and vote at said special or general election on said bonding question. If three-fifths of the votes cast upon the question shall be in favor of the adoption of such ordinance and the issuance of such bonds, then such ordinance shall be considered as adopted and such bonds may be issued. 
Sec. 4. - [Interest rate; payments.] 
    All bonds shall bear interest at not exceeding six per centum per annum, and be payable in equal annual installments not exceeding thirty in number, the first installment to become due not later than two years after date, and shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk, under the city seal. The coupons evidencing the interest upon said bonds may be executed with the facsimile signatures of said mayor and clerk. Whenever bonds shall be issued, it shall be the duty of the commission annually, at the time and in the manner that other taxes are to be levied, to levy a tax in addition to all other taxes authorized by this Charter sufficient to pay the principal and interest of such bonds as they respectively become due. 
Sec. 5. - [Authority to borrow money and issue bonds.] 
    The commission shall have the authority to raise money by loans in anticipation of the receipts from special assessments for the purpose of defraying the cost of the improvement for which the assessment was levied. Bonds or notes may be issued for such loans, which shall not exceed the amount of the assessment for the completion of the whole work, nor shall such loan be made until after the special roll shall have been confirmed. The commission shall pledge the faith and credit of the city for the payment of such loan. 
State Law reference- Authority to borrow money and issue bonds therefor in anticipation of payment of special assessments, MCL 117.4a(2). 
Sec. 6. - [Loans for disaster relief.] 
    In case of fire, floods and other calamities, the commission may borrow, for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property, a sum not exceeding one-quarter of one percentum of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city, due in not more than three years. For any such loan, lawfully made, the bonds of the city may be issued, payable in equal annual installments. 
CHAPTER X. - TAXATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - [State laws to control assessment of property and collection of taxes.] 
    All the provisions of the general tax laws of the State of Michigan, except as herein otherwise provided, shall apply to and control the assessment of property and the collection of taxes in the City of Gladstone, and the taxing officers of the city shall have the same power and be subject to the same duties as like officers under that law. The city clerk, city assessor and city treasurer shall take notice of said law and comply therewith. 
Sec. 2. - [Board of review.] 
    The city commission shall act as the board of review, and the city assessor and city attorney shall be required to attend all sessions of such board, and act in an advisory capacity. It shall meet for the purpose of reviewing the assessment roll on the first Monday in the month of June, shall choose one of its members to be chairman, and the city clerk shall be clerk of the board. It shall regulate for itself its order of procedure, but no person who shall appear before it shall be refused a reasonable opportunity for a hearing. It shall remain in session at least three days successively and as much longer as may be necessary to complete the review, and when in session their hours shall be eight o'clock a.m. to twelve o'clock noon, and one-thirty o'clock p.m. to five-thirty o'clock p.m. On the completion of its work, its chairman and clerk shall certify to the same, as provided by the general tax law. After all hearings have been had, the board may adjourn for the purpose of completing its work on the roll, but the same shall be duly certified on or before the first day of July. 
Editor's note- The dates and times in the provisions of Charter ch. X, § 2, are superseded by MCL 211.29 et seq. See also MCL 211.161. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for meeting of board of review, MCL 117.3(i); completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL 211.30a. 
Sec. 3. - [Notice of meetings of board of review.] 
    The city clerk shall give notice to the public of the time and place of meeting of the board of review by publication in at least one newspaper published and circulated in the city, at least six days immediately preceding such meeting and also by posting three copies of such notice in each voting precinct in the city. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. X, § 3, are superseded by MCL 211.29. See also MCL 211.161. 
Sec. 4. - [Delivery of certified copy of annual appropriation resolution and statement of school taxes.] 
    On or before the first day of October in each year, the city clerk shall make and deliver to the assessor a certified copy of the annual appropriation resolution and of the statement of school taxes as prepared by the board of education of the public schools of the City of Gladstone, filed in his office. 
Sec. 5. - [Listing of special funds taxes.] 
    The assessor, in assessing taxes, shall place in a separate column those included in the special funds. 
Sec. 6. - [Due date of general city taxes; interest for late payment.] 
    The taxes assessed on the general city tax roll for each fiscal year shall be due and payable on the fifteenth day of July of each year, and may be paid any time up to and including the fifteenth day of August following, without any collection fee or additional charge. An additional charge of four percent shall be added to all unpaid general city taxes after the fifteenth day of August until return thereof, as delinquent together with such accrued penalties or charges, shall be made to the county treasurer. 
Editor's note- Taxes are now due December 31. See MCL 211.40, 211.2. Interest on unpaid taxes is controlled by MCL 211.44. See MCL 211.161. 
Sec. 7. - [Publication of notice of taxes due.] 
    The city treasurer shall give notice in two consecutive issues of a newspaper published and circulated in said city at least six days prior to July 15th and by posting notices in 12 conspicuous places throughout the city at least six days prior to July 15th, which notices shall be sufficient demand for the payment of all taxes on said roll, and that the payment therein specified may be made to him at any time up to and including the fifteenth day of August without any collection fee therefor, provided that an addition of four per centum shall be made thereto after the fifteenth day of August, until return as delinquent to the county treasurer by the city treasurer. Provided, however, that the failure to give the notice specified in this action for the payment of such tax shall not invalidate the said tax nor release the persons or property assessed from the penalty herein specified. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. X, § 7, are superseded by MCL 211.44. See MCL 211.161. 
Sec. 8. - [Taxes considered lien.] 
    The taxes so assessed shall be and remain a lien upon the lands upon which they are levied and upon the personal property of the owner and a charge against the persons owning the property, as provided for in the general laws of the state. 
Sec. 9. - [Assessment rolls.] 
    The assessor shall keep the original assessment rolls in his office until the meeting of the board of supervisors of Delta County in the month of June, and present such rolls to said board, which rolls, after equalization by said board, shall be the assessment rolls of the city for all assessment purposes whatsoever, except the levying of taxes to be collected in the month of July, as herein provided. 
Sec. 10. - [Apportioning of school, state and county taxes.] 
    On the first day of November, the assessor shall apportion and spread upon the tax roll all school, state and county taxes certified to him by the board of supervisors or otherwise and such other taxes as are legally required to be spread on the roll. 
Sec. 11. - [Delivery of certified copy of assessment roll.] 
    Within thirty days after the first day of November, the assessor shall deliver a certified copy of the assessment roll to the city treasurer, to be filed in his office, to which roll shall be annexed a warrant signed by the assessor and directed to the treasurer, and in all other respects as near as may be as warrants of township treasurers for the collection of state, county and township taxes. 
Sec. 12. - [Notice to taxpayers of delivery of tax rolls.] 
    Upon receiving said tax rolls as herein provided, the treasurer shall give notice to the taxpayers of the city that such rolls have been delivered to him and that the taxes therein levied can be paid to him and at his office at any time from the tenth day of December to and including the tenth of January next ensuing, without any charge for collection, but that [a] four percent collection fee will be charged and collected upon all taxes remaining unpaid after the tenth day of January. Said notice shall be given for publication at least six days prior to December 10 in a newspaper published in said city, but any defect in said notice, or any omission to comply with the provisions of this section shall not invalidate the said tax roll, or any measure thereafter to be taken to enforce collection of the taxes thereon. 
Editor's note- The provisions of Charter ch. X, § 12, are superseded by MCL 211.44. See MCL 211.161. 
Sec. 13. - [Collection procedure for delinquent taxes.] 
    For the collection of all taxes remaining unpaid on the general tax roll after the fifteenth day of August and the tenth of January of each year, the treasurer shall proceed in the same manner as township treasurers are required by law to do for the collection of taxes in townships, and shall, for that purpose, have all the power and authority conferred by law upon township treasurers for such purposes. And it is hereby made mandatory upon the treasurer to exhaust all the legal remedies for the collection of unpaid personal tax before the return thereon. 
Sec. 14. - [Payment to board of education treasurer and county treasurer.] 
    The treasurer shall, within ten days after the expiration of the time limited in his warrant, or in case of extension of time, for collecting such taxes within ten days after such time has expired, pay over to the treasurer of the board of education the amount which by law is payable to him, and on the first day of March, or within ten days thereafter, shall pay to the county treasurer the balance which by law is payable to him, and shall make his returns according to the general laws of the state relating to township treasurers, except as herein otherwise provided, and such general laws shall govern in all things not herein otherwise provided for. 
Sec. 15. - [Payment on undivided shares.] 
    Any person owning an undivided share or other part or parcel of real property assessed in one description may pay the same on the part thus owned by paying an amount having the same relation to the whole tax as the part on which payment is made has to the whole parcel. The person making such payment shall accurately describe the part or share on which he makes payment, and the receipt given and the record of the receiving officer shall show such description and by whom paid. And in the case of the sale of the remaining part or share for nonpayment of taxes, he may purchase the same in like manner as any disinterested person. These provisions shall include all taxes that may be assessed against real property, including special assessments. 
Sec. 16. - [Fees and penalties for collection of taxes.] 
    The fees and penalties for the collection of all taxes provided for by this Charter or the general laws of the state shall belong to the city, and shall be paid by said treasurer into the city treasury. 
CHAPTER XI. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Powers relative to special assessments, MCL 117.4a et seq. 

Sec. 1. - [Power to levy and collect.] 
    The commission shall have the power to provide for the payment of all or any part of the cost of construction, reconstruction, repairs, operation or maintenance of any structure or work in the nature of public improvements by levying and collecting special assessments upon property specially benefitted. Such special assessments may be made payable in yearly installments for a period not exceeding 20 years. 
(Election of 4-6-1992) 
Editor's note- Charter ch. XI, § 1, has been editorially altered to reflect the results of the referendum approved by the voters on April 6, 1992. 
Sec. 2. - [Public improvements.] 
    When the owners of the majority of the frontage of land are liable to be assessed in any special assessment district, or part of the city which may be constituted a special assessment district, the commission may order such improvements to be made. In other cases public improvements shall be made in the discretion of the commission. 
Sec. 3. - [Costs and expenses approved to be defrayed by special assessment; exception.] 
    The cost and expense of any improvements which may be defrayed by special assessment shall include the cost of survey, plans, assessments, and cost of construction. In no case shall the whole amount to be levied by special assessment upon any lot or premises for any one improvement exceed fifty percent of the value of such lot or land as last before valued and assessed by the state and county taxation in the general tax roll; any cost that would exceed that percent which would otherwise be chargeable upon that lot or premises shall be paid from the general funds of the city. The commission shall prescribe the fees that may be charged in the work of making any special assessment as a part of the assessment. 
Sec. 4. - [Declaration by resolution of determination.] 
    When the commission shall determine to make any public improvement or repairs and defray the whole or part of the cost and expense thereof by special assessment, they shall so declare by resolution, stating the nature of the improvement and what part or proportion of the expenses thereof shall be paid by special assessment and what part, if any, shall be paid by the general funds of the city, and shall designate the district or lands and premises upon which the special assessment shall be levied. 
Sec. 5. - [Estimates of expense; publication of notice.] 
    Before ordering any public improvements or repairs, any part of the expenses of which is to be defrayed by special assessment, the commission shall cause estimates of the expense thereof to be made, and also plat and diagram, when practicable, of the work and of the locality to be improved, and deposit the same with the clerk for public examination, and they shall give notice thereof, and of the proposed improvements, and of the district to be assessed, and of the time and place when the commission will meet and consider any objections thereto, by publication at least once five days prior to such meeting, in a newspaper published and circulated in the city. 
Editor's note- The notice provisions in Charter ch. XI, § 5, appear to be superseded by MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 6. - [When made according to frontage or benefits.] 
    When any special assessment is to be made pro rata upon lots and premises in any special assessment district, according to frontage or benefits, the commission shall, by resolution, direct the same to be made by the assessor, and shall state therein the amount to be assessed and whether according to frontage or benefits, and describe or designate an assessment district comprising the lands to be assessed. 
Sec. 7. - [Assessment roll.] 
    Upon receiving such orders and directions, the assessor shall make out an assessment roll, entering and describing therein all the lots, premises and parcels of land to be assessed, with the names of the persons, if known, chargeable with the assessments thereon, and shall levy thereon and against such property the amount to be assessed, in the manner directed by the commission and provisions of this Charter applicable to the assessment. In all cases where the ownership of any description is unknown to the assessor, he shall, in lieu of the name of the owner, insert the word "unknown," and if by mistake or otherwise any person shall be improperly designated as the owner of any lot or parcel of land or premises, or if the same shall be assessed without the name of the owner, such assessment shall not for any cause be vitiated, but shall in all respects be as valid upon and against such lot, parcel of land or premises as though assessed in the name of the owner, and when the assessment shall have been confirmed it shall be a lien on such lot, parcel of land or premises, and collected as in this Charter provided. 
Sec. 8. - [Division between each lot or parcel.] 
    If the assessment is required to be according to frontage, the assessor shall assess to each lot or parcel of land such relative portion of the whole amount to be levied as the length or front of such premises abutting upon the improvement bears to the whole frontage of all lots to be assessed, unless on account of the shape or size of any lot, an assessment for a different number of feet would be more equitable. If the assessment is directed to be according to benefits, they shall assess upon each lot such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied as shall be proportioned to the estimated benefits resulting to such lot improvement. When he shall have completed the assessment roll, he shall report the same to the commission. Such report shall be signed by the assessor and may be in the form of a certificate, endorsed on the assessment roll, as follows: 
State of Michigan, 
City of Gladstone 
ss. 
TO THE COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF GLADSTONE 
I hereby certify and report that the foregoing is a special assessment roll and the assessment made by me, pursuant to a resolution of the commission of the said city, adopted on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , A.D. 19 ____________ , for the purpose of paying that part of the cost which the commission decided should be paid and borne by special assessment for the (insert here object of the assessment) and in making such assessment I have, as near as may be according to my best judgment, conformed in all things to the direction contained in the resolution of the commission hereinbefore referred to and the Charter of the city, relating to such assessment. 
Dated 
_____ Assessor  
Sec. 9. - [Expense incurred for separate or single lot, parcel or premises.] 
    When any expense shall be incurred by the city upon or in respect to any separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises which, by the provisions of this Charter, the commission is authorized to charge and collect as a special assessment against the same, and not being that class of special assessments required to be made pro rata upon several lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor, material or services for which such expense was incurred, verified by the manager, with a description of the lot or premises upon or in respect to which the expense was incurred, and the name of the owner or person, if known, chargeable therewith, shall be reported to the commission in such manner as they shall prescribe. The provisions of the preceding section of this Charter with reference to special assessments generally, and the proceedings necessary to be had before making the improvements, shall not apply to assessments to cover the expenses incurred in respect to that class of improvements contemplated in this section. 
Sec. 10. - [Determination of expense amount chargeable.] 
    The commission shall determine what amount or part of every such expense shall be charged, and the person, if known, against whom, and the premises upon which the same shall be levied as a special assessment, and as often as the commission shall deem it expedient, they shall require all of the several amounts so reported and determined and the several lots or premises, and the persons chargeable therewith, respectively, to be reported by the clerk to the assessor for assessment. 
Sec. 11. - [Special roll and levy.] 
    Upon receiving the report mentioned in the preceding section [10], the assessor shall make a special roll and levy as a special assessment therein upon each lot or parcel of land so reported to him and against the person chargeable therewith, if known, the whole amount or amounts of all the charges so directed as aforesaid, to be levied upon each of such lots or premises respectively, and when completed, he shall report the assessment to the commission, and all the several assessments shall be kept separated. 
Sec. 12. - [Filing and numbering of roll; publication of notice.] 
    When any special assessment roll shall be reported by the assessor to the commission, as in this Charter directed, the same shall be filed in the office of the clerk and numbered consecutively. Before adopting such assessment roll, the commission shall cause five days' notice to be published in some newspaper of the city of the filing of the same with the clerk, and appointing a time when the commission and the assessor will meet to review said assessment. Any person objecting to the assessment may file his objections thereto in writing with the clerk. The notice provided for in this section may be addressed to the persons whose names appear upon the special assessment roll and to all others interested therein, and may be in the following form: 
"Notice of Special Assessment." 
To (insert the names of the persons against whom the assessment appears) and to all other persons interested: 
Take notice, that the roll of the special assessment heretofore made by the assessor for the purpose of defraying that part of the cost which the commission decided should be paid and borne by special assessment for the (insert the object of the assessment and the locality of the proposed improvement in general terms) is now on file in my office for public inspection. Notice is also hereby given that the commission and the assessor of the City of Gladstone will meet at the city hall in said city on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ to review said assessment, at which time and place opportunity will be given all persons interested to be heard. 
Dated _____ _____ City Clerk  
Editor's note- The notice provisions in Charter ch. XI, § 12, are superseded by MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 13. - [Meeting to review roll.] 
    At the time and place appointed for the purpose as aforesaid, the commission and assessor shall meet and there, or at some adjourned meeting, review the assessment roll, and shall hear any objections to any assessments which may be made by any person deeming himself aggrieved thereby, and the commission may correct said roll as to any assessment, or description of premises appearing therein, and may confirm it as reported, or as corrected, or they may refer the assessment back to the assessor for revision, or annul it and direct a new assessment, in which case the same proceeding shall be held as in respect to the previous assessment. When a special assessment shall be confirmed, the clerk shall make an endorsement upon the roll, showing the date of confirmation. 
Sec. 14. - [Confirmation.] 
    When any special assessment roll shall be confirmed by the commission it shall be final and conclusive. 
Sec. 15. - [Lien upon lot or parcel of land after confirmation.] 
    All special assessments shall, from the date of confirmation thereof, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed, and shall be a charge against the respective owners of the several parcels as assessed until paid. 
Sec. 16. - [Division into installments; due annually.] 
    Upon the confirmation of any special assessments, the amount thereof may be divided into not more than 20 installments, one of which shall be collected each year, at such times as the commission shall determine, with annual interest at a rate not [to exceed the lawful interest rate], but the whole assessment after confirmation may be paid to the city treasurer at any time in full, with the accrued interest thereon, provided that no interest shall be charged until twenty days after confirmation. 
(Election of 4-6-1992) 
Editor's note- Charter ch. XI, § 16, has been editorially altered to reflect the results of the referendum approved by the voters on April 6, 1992. 
Sec. 17. - [Due and payable upon confirmation; exception.] 
    All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the commission shall make payable at a future time, as provided in the preceding section, shall be due and payable upon confirmation. 
Sec. 18. - [Invalidity; reassessment.] 
    In all cases of special assessments of any kind against any property where such assessments have failed to be valid in whole or in part, the commission shall be and they are hereby authorized to cause to be reassessed such special taxes or assessment, and to enforce their collection, and it is further provided that whenever, for any cause, mistake or inadvertence, the amount assessed shall not be sufficient to pay the cost of such improvements made and enjoined on the property, or on the owners of property in the local assessment district where the same are made, that it shall be lawful, and the commission is hereby directed and authorized to cause to be made, a reassessment upon all the property in each local assessment district to pay for such improvements and to continue requiring such reassessments until a valid and sufficient assessment shall have been made. 
[Sec. 19. - Reserved.] 
Sec. 20. - [Description of lots and premises contained in roll, names of owners and occupants; levy; collection.] 
    Whenever any special assessment shall be confirmed and be payable, the commission may direct the clerk to report to the assessor a description of such lots and premises as are contained in said roll, with the amount of the assessment levied upon each and the name of the owner or occupant against whom the assessment was made, and direct said assessor to levy the several sums so assessed respectively. The assessor shall levy the sum therein mentioned upon the respective lots and premises to which they are specially assessed and against the persons chargeable therewith, as a tax, in the general tax roll next thereafter to be made in a column for special assessments, and thereupon the amount so levied in said tax roll shall be enforced and collected with the other taxes in the tax roll and in the same manner, and shall continue to be a lien upon the premises assessed until paid, and when collected shall be paid into the city treasury. 
Sec. 21. - [Warrant for collection.] 
    Whenever any special assessment shall be confirmed and be payable as hereinbefore provided, the commission instead of requiring assessments to be reported to [sic] the assessment so made in the special assessment roll to be collected directly therefrom, and thereupon the clerk shall attach his warrant to a certified copy of said special assessment roll, therein commanding the treasurer to collect from each of the persons assessed in said roll the amount of money assessed to and set opposite his name therein, and in case any person named in said roll shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessment, upon demand, then to levy and collect the same by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of such person and return said roll and warrant, together with his doing thereon, within sixty days from the date of such warrant. 
Sec. 22. - [Responsibility for collection; nonpayment.] 
    Upon receiving said special assessment roll and warrant, the treasurer shall proceed to collect the amount assessed therein. If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessment upon demand, the treasurer shall seize and levy upon any personal property found within the city or elsewhere within the State of Michigan belonging to such person and sell the same at public auction, first giving six days' notice of the time and place of such sale, by posting such notice in three public places in the city or township where such property may be found. The proceeds of such sale, or so much thereof as may be necessary for that purpose, shall be applied to the payment of the assessment, the costs and expenditures of seizure and sale, and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person entitled thereto. 
Sec. 23. - [Return of roll and warrant to clerk; list of delinquencies.] 
    The treasurer shall make return of said assessment roll and warrant to the clerk, according to the requirements of the warrant, and if any of the assessments in said roll shall be returned unpaid, the treasurer shall attach to his return a statement, verified by affidavit, containing a list of the persons delinquent and a description of the lots and premises upon which the assessment remains unpaid, and the amount unpaid by each. 
Sec. 24. - [Renewal of warrant.] 
    Said warrant may be renewed from time to time by the clerk if the commission shall so direct, and for such time as they shall determine, and during the time of such renewals the warrant shall have the same force and the treasurer shall perform the same duties and make the like returns as above provided. In case any assessment shall be finally returned by the treasurer unpaid, as aforesaid, the name shall be certified to the assessor, in the manner provided in section 19 of this chapter, and shall then be levied, together with the penalty of ten percent of the amount of said assessment, in the next tax roll, and be collected and paid in all respects as provided in section 19 of this chapter. 
Sec. 25. - [Collection of delinquencies by suit.] 
    At any time after a special assessment has become payable, the same may be collected by suit, in the name of the city, against the person assessed, in an action of assumpsit in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. In every such action a declaration upon the common counts for money paid shall be sufficient. The special assessment roll and a certified order or resolution confirming the same shall be prima facie evidence of the regularity of all the proceedings in making the assessment of the whole amount due, and of the right of the city to recover judgment therefor. 
State Law reference- Authority to institute action in assumpsit to recover unpaid special assessment, MCL 211.501. 
Sec. 26. - [Assessments not properly made.] 
    If, in any such action, it shall appear that, by reason of any irregularities or informalities, the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant, or upon the lot or premises sought to be charged, the court may never-the-less on satisfactory proof that expenses have been incurred by the city which are a proper charge against the defendant or the lot or premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant, or upon such lot or premises. 
Sec. 27. - [Sidewalks to be kept free of obstructions, etc.] 
    If the owner or occupant of any lot or premises shall fail to remove the snow, ice and filth from the sidewalk upon which such property abuts, or to remove and keep the same from obstruction, encroachments, encumbrances or other nuisances, or fail to perform any other duties required by the city in respect to such sidewalks or the premises of any person, within such time and in such manner as the city shall require, the city may cause the same to be done, and the expenses or such part thereof as the city shall have determined, together with a penalty of ten per centum, may be charged and collected as a special assessment against such property as in this Charter provided. 
Sec. 28. - [Crediting and use of revenues and moneys raised; surplus.] 
    Revenues and moneys raised by taxation in every special assessment district in the city shall be credited to separate special assessment funds, and money so raised shall be used solely for the purpose specified. Provided, if there be a surplus after paying for the specified improvements, such surplus shall be refunded pro rata, as follows: by refund where the tax has been paid in full, and by credit on the assessment roll where the tax has not been fully paid. 
CHAPTER XII. - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, SEWERS AND DRAINS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Charter may provide for use, regulation, improvement and control of streets, alleys and public ways, MCL 117.4h(1). 

Sec. 1. - [Authority to control and improve; responsibility for costs and expenses.] 
    The commission shall have control of and maintain all streets, highways and alleys in the city and may improve the same by grading, graveling, curbing, paving, repaving, constructing sidewalks, or otherwise, and shall have authority to lay out, open, widen, extend, straighten, alter, close, vacate, or abolish any highway, street, or alley in the city whenever they shall deem the same a public improvement. The expense of such improvement may be paid by special assessment upon the property adjacent to or benefitted by such improvement, in the manner in this Charter provided for levying and collecting special assessments, or, in the discretion of the commission, a portion of such cost and expenses may be paid by special assessment as aforesaid, and the balance by the city. 
Sec. 2. - [Resolution to vacate, discontinue or abolish, street, alley or public ground; meeting; notice.] 
    When the commission shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue or abolish any street, alley or public ground, or any part thereof, they shall by resolution so declare and in the same resolution shall appoint a time, not less than four weeks thereafter, when they shall meet and hear objections thereto. Notice of such meeting, with a copy of said resolution, shall be published once not less than two weeks before the time appointed for such meeting, in a newspaper published and circulated in the city. 
Sec. 3. - [Authority to determine and establish grades.] 
    The commission shall have authority to determine and establish the grade of all streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, curbs and public grounds within the city and may change or alter the grade of any street, sidewalk, curb, alley or public ground, or any part thereof, whenever, in their opinion, the public convenience will be promoted thereby. Whenever a grade shall be established or altered, a record and diagram thereof shall be kept in the office of the city clerk or other official or department, as the commission may determine by administrative ordinance. 
Sec. 4. - [When city responsible for costs.] 
    Whenever any street, alley or public ground or highway shall have been graded, or pavement, sidewalk or curb shall have been constructed in conformity to grades established by authority of the city, and the expenses thereof shall have been assessed upon lots or lands bounded by or abutting upon such street, alley, sidewalk, curb or public highway, the owner or owners of such lots or lands shall not be subject to any special assessment occasioned by any subsequent change of grade of such pavement, alley, sidewalk, curb or public highway, but the expense of all the improvements occasioned by such change of grade shall be chargeable to and be paid by the city. 
Sec. 5. - [Determination of responsibility for costs.] 
    Such part of the expense of improving or repairing any street, lane or alley by grading, graveling, paving, repaving, curbing, constructing sidewalks or otherwise improving or repairing the same as the commission shall determine and in keeping the same free from dust and nuisance may be paid by the city, or the whole or such part of the expense of such improvements, as the commission shall determine, may be defrayed by special assessment, upon the lots and premises included in a special assessment district, to be constituted of lands fronting upon such improvement and such other lands as in the opinion of the commission may be benefitted by the improvement. 
Sec. 6. - [Power to require construction and maintenance of sidewalks; crosswalks.] 
    The commission shall also have power to cause and require the owners of lots and premises to construct and maintain sidewalks adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises and to keep the same in repair at all times and to construct and lay the same upon such lines and grades, and of such width, materials and manner of construction, in such manner as may have been prescribed by ordinance or resolution to the commission, and in the event of any failure by such owner to construct, maintain or keep such sidewalks in proper repair, he shall be liable to the city for any damages that it may sustain by reason of such failure of any such owner, provided that the city shall construct crosswalks in streets and alleys at such times, manner and places as the commission shall deem necessary. 
Sec. 7. - [Authority to establish, construct and maintain sewers, etc.] 
    The commission may establish, construct and maintain a sewerage system, sewage disposal system, sewers and drains whenever and wherever necessary, and of such dimensions and materials and under such regulations as they may deem proper. 
Sec. 8. - [Special assessments for construction of sewers and drains.] 
    Special assessments for the construction of sewers and drains shall be made in the manner provided in this Charter for making special assessments. 
Sec. 9. - [Right to connect to public sewers and drains.] 
    The owners or occupants of lots and premises shall have the right to connect the same at their own expense by means of private drains, with the public sewers and drains, under such rules and regulations as the commission may prescribe. 
Sec. 10. - [Special assessments for provision of ditches and drains.] 
    Such part of the expense of providing ditches and drains and improving watercourses as the commission may determine may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands and premises benefitted thereby. 
CHAPTER XIII. - REPLACING STREET OPENINGS 

Sec. 1. - [Contract restrictions.] 
    No contract shall be made with any person involving the removal of the soil or the tearing up of the surface of any street, alley or other public place, unless such contract shall provide for replacing such street, alley or other public place, in the same condition as near as may be, as it was immediately before being torn up or the removal of said soil, and for the full performance of the requirement of such contract and this provision therein full security shall be required of and received from the contractor by the city. 
CHAPTER XIV. - CONTRACTS 

Sec. 1. - [When required; bids.] 
    Any public work or improvement costing more than one thousand dollars shall be executed by contract. Contract shall be awarded to a responsible bidder. Bids for such contracts shall be opened not less than three days after advertisement therefor in some newspaper published and circulated in the city, but the commission shall have the right to reject any or all bids and to advertise again, and all advertisements shall contain a reservation of this right. Provided that where the commission is not satisfied with the bids obtained, it may authorize the doing of such work under the direction of the manager. 
Sec. 2. - [Reservation of right to furnish additional labor and material and render assistance.] 
    Every contract shall reserve to the city the right, when it shall become satisfied that the work provided for in any contract will not be completed within the time limited, to furnish additional labor and material, if necessary, and render such other assistance as it may deem advisable, for the completion of such contract, at the expense of the contractor, and retained by the city, out of the contract price, or recovered by legal proceeding. 
Sec. 3. - [Reservation of right to determine proper performance of contract, suspend work, order reconstruction, forfeit contract, relet or complete work.] 
    Every contract to which the city is a party shall reserve to the city the right to determine finally all questions as to the proper performance of such contract or any unfinished portion thereof, and in case of the improper, dilatory or imperfect performance thereof, to suspend the work at any time and to order the partial or entire reconstruction of the same, and whenever, because of unreasonable delay in the work or for other just cause, it shall declare such contract forfeited, it may complete or relet the work covered by such contract, or any unfinished portion thereof. Power is hereby given the city to determine all such questions arising under any such contract, according to the true intent and meaning thereof. 
Sec. 4. - [Changes or modifications.] 
    When it becomes necessary, in the prosecution of any work or improvement under contract, to make minor alterations or modifications, changes or modifications shall be made only on the written order of the manager. 
Sec. 5. - [Costs of changes or modifications to be agreed upon in writing.] 
    No such order shall be made until the price to be paid for the work or material, or both, and the credits, if any to be allowed by the city under the altered or modified contract, shall have been agreed upon in writing, and signed by the contractor and by the manager. 
Sec. 6. - [Written report required upon completion of work.] 
    Upon the completion of any public work or improvement wherein a bond for construction or maintenance has been furnished, the manager shall, before the payment of the final estimate or balance due thereon, file with the clerk and the city attorney a written report certifying whether such work or improvement has, in his judgment, been done in all respects in accordance with the construction specifications. Provided such report shall not waive any right of the city to later complain of noncompliance with such construction specifications. 
Sec. 7. - [Annual report of defects and costs of repair and maintenance of work.] 
    It shall be the duty of the manager, annually during the life of all maintenance bonds given to the city, upon public works or improvements, to report in writing to the commission the defects and costs of repair and maintenance of such work or improvements. 
Sec. 8. - [Institution of proceedings upon noncompliance.] 
    It shall be the duty of the commission promptly to institute appropriate proceedings on behalf of the city whenever there shall have been default in complying with such construction or maintenance specifications. 
Sec. 9. - [Drawings, profiles and estimates required for improvements costing over $1,000.00.] 
    No public improvement costing more than one thousand dollars shall be contracted for or commenced until drawings, profiles and estimates for same shall have been submitted to the commission and approved by it, and the same, or a copy thereof, shall thereafter remain on file in the office of the clerk subject to inspection by the public. 
Sec. 10. - [Personal interest prohibited.] 
    No member of the commission, the manager or any other officer or employee of the city, shall be personally interested in any contract with or for the city, nor in the expenditures of any money on the part of the city, and every such contract shall be void. 
CHAPTER XV. - CONDEMNATION AND APPROPRIATION OF PROPERTY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Condemnation, MCL 213.1 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - [Right to purchase, condemn or appropriate private property for public use or purpose.] 
    Private property, whether within or without the city limits, may be purchased, condemned or appropriated for public use for the purpose of opening, widening, altering or extending streets, alleys and avenues for the construction of bridges, docks, wharfs, harbor improvements, viaducts, grade separations, public buildings, parks, parkways, markets and market places, sewers, drains and watercourses, public and detention hospitals, public cemeteries, sewerage disposal, water supply, water mains, waterworks, gas and electric lighting plants and works, and for the protection thereof, or any necessary lawful public use, not specifically enumerated herein. 
Sec. 2. - [Acquisition of ownership of private property for public use or purpose.] 
    If it shall become necessary to condemn or appropriate private property for the public uses or purposes specified in the preceding section, the right to occupy and hold the same, and the ownership therein and thereto, may be acquired by the city in the manner and with like effect as provided by the general laws of this state, relating to the taking of private property for public use. 
Sec. 3. - [Institution of proceedings for acquisition of private property for public use or purpose.] 
    Whenever the commission shall have decided a public improvement to be necessary, and shall have declared that they deem it necessary to take private property, describing it, for such public improvement, designating it, and that the improvement is for the use or benefit of the municipality, they shall, by resolution, direct the city attorney to institute proceedings in [on] behalf of the municipality before the proper court to carry out the object of the resolution in regard to taking private property by the city for such private use. 
CHAPTER XVI. - UTILITIES 

Sec. 1. - [Power to construct, maintain, conduct and control.] 
    The commission shall have the power to construct, maintain, conduct and control, municipal gas, electric and waterworks plants of this city, and may improve and extend the present plants or construct new plants as need therefor shall arise, to enable it to furnish the city and its inhabitants, or others, with an adequate supply of electric current for light and power and for gas and water supply. The commission shall make all such ordinances, rules and regulations, as may be needed for the safe, economical and efficient management thereof. 
Sec. 2. - [Estimate required for improvement, extension and construction of plants.] 
    In case the commission shall declare that it is expedient to improve or extend the present plants or construct new plants for the purpose of supplying current for light and power purposes, gas and water supply, the cost of which must be met by bond issues or loans, then the commission shall cause to be made and recorded in their proceedings, an estimate thereof, and the question of raising the amount required for such persons shall be submitted to the electors of the city at its regular election or at a special election called for that purpose by the commission, as provided for in this Charter, and shall be determined to have been favorably carried if three-fifths of the electors voting at such election by ballot, shall so decide. 
    The commission shall construct such improvements and extensions to the existing plants as the normal growth of the plants require, the cost of such improvements and extensions to be met by reinvesting the depreciation reserve, and no extensions or improvements in excess of this amount shall be made except by reference to the electors as required above. 
Sec. 3. - [Loans; interest.] 
    It shall be lawful for the city to borrow a sum of money, as provided in this Charter or by general law, to be used exclusively for the purpose of improving or extending the present municipal utility plants or to construct new plants, as provided in the preceding sections of this chapter. The commission shall have the power to fix the time and place of the payment of the principal and interest of the debt contracted under the provisions of this chapter, not inconsistent with this Charter, and to issue bonds of the city therefor, but the rate of such interest shall not exceed six percent per annum, and such bonds shall not be sold for less than their par value, provided that the total amount expended for improving or extending the present municipal utility plants or constructing new plants, shall not exceed the amount of the estimate of expense thereof, provided for in section 2 of this chapter. 
Sec. 4. - [Power to fix rates annually.] 
    The commission shall have the power to fix such just and equitable rates as may be deemed advisable for supplying the inhabitants of the city, or others, with lights, power, gas and water and shall annually, on the first Monday in June, fix such rates for the year ensuing. 
Sec. 5. - [Appropriation of private property for construction, maintenance or operation of utilities.] 
    If it shall be necessary, in the judgment of the commission, to appropriate private property, either within or without the city, for the construction and maintenance, or for the due operation of lighting, power, gas or waterworks, the right to occupy and hold the same, and the ownership therein or thereto, may be acquired by the city in the manner and with like effect as provided in this Charter for the taking of private property for public use. 
Sec. 6. - [Accounts; financial results report.] 
    Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city, distinct from other city accounts, and in such manner as to show the true and complete financial result of such city ownership, or ownership and operations, including all assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. These accounts shall show the actual cost to the city of each public utility owned, the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements, all expenses of maintenance, the amounts set aside for sinking fund purposes, and in the case of city operation, all operating expenses of every description. They shall show as nearly as possible the value of any service furnished to or rendered by any such public utility by or to any other city or governmental department. They shall also show a proper allowance for depreciation, insurance, interest on the investment, and estimates of the amount of taxes that would be chargeable against the property, if privately owned. The commission shall annually cause to be made and printed for public distribution a report showing the financial results of such city ownership or ownership and operation, which report shall give the information specified in this section, and such information as the commission shall deem expedient. 
Sec. 7. - [Alienation or disposition of property, easements, income or other equipment, privilege or asset; exceptions.] 
    The city shall not sell, exchange, farm out, lease out, or in any way alien or dispose of the property, easements, income or other equipment, privilege or asset belonging to and appertaining to its system of electric light and power, gas or waterwork plants, or its parks, and all contracts, negotiations, grants, leases or other forms of transfer in violation of this provision shall be void and of no effect as against the city, unless and except the proposition for such purpose shall first have been submitted according to the law to the qualified electors of the city and approved by them by a vote of three-fifths of the electors voting thereon, and with all the same or similar formalities as may be required by this Charter or the state laws of Michigan, preliminary to the purchase by said city of any municipal utility. But change or alienation of such articles or equipment of the said electric lighting, gas, waterworks, plants, or parts as are worn out or useless, or which could with advantage to the service be replaced by new or improved machinery or equipment. 
Sec. 8. - [Authority to issue mortgage bonds.] 
    The City of Gladstone is hereby authorized to issue mortgage bonds beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness, prescribed by law, for the construction or purchase, or reconstruction or improvement of an electric generating plant and distributing system, provided that the mortgage bonds so issued shall not impose any liability upon the City of Gladstone, but shall be secured only upon the property and revenue of the electric generating plant and distributing system, including a franchise to operate such electric plant and distributing system within the City of Gladstone for a period of twenty years from the date of sale of such electric generating plant and distributing system and franchise on foreclosure, such franchise hereby granted is specifically declared to be a part of the property of the utility to be covered by the mortgage. 
CHAPTER XVII. - LEGAL DEFINITIONS AND PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1. - [Generally.] 
    Where the following specified words are used herein they shall each be construed to mean as follows: 
1.	State shall mean the State of Michigan. 
2.	City shall mean the City of Gladstone. 
3.	Commission shall mean the city commission. 
4.	Manager shall mean the city manager. 
5.	Clerk shall mean the city clerk unless from the context the contrary shall plainly appear. 
6.	Treasurer shall mean the city treasurer. 
Sec. 2. - [Singular and plural numbers; masculine, feminine and neuter genders.] 
    Words imparting the singular number only may extend to and embrace the plural number, and words imparting the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number. Words imparting the masculine gender only may extend and apply to the masculine, feminine or neuter gender. 
Sec. 3. - [Joint authority.] 
    Words purporting to give joint authority to two or more public officers or other persons, either as a board or otherwise, shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared. 
Sec. 4. - [Person; written, in writing.] 
    The word "person" may extend and may apply to bodies politic and corporate, as well as individually. The words "written" and "in writing" may be construed to include printing, engraving, typewriting and lithographing except that this rule shall not apply to provisions requiring written signature, unless it be otherwise expressly herein provided. 
Sec. 5. - [Severability.] 
    Should any portion of this Charter be declared void, illegal or unconstitutional, such finding shall not invalidate the remainder of this Charter. 
Sec. 6. - [Liability.] 
    The city shall not be liable for unliquidated damages for personal or other injuries unless the person suffering the injury or sustaining the damage, or someone in his behalf, shall serve a notice in writing upon the city, within sixty days after such injury shall have occurred, which notice shall specify the location and the nature of the defect, the injury sustained and the names of the witnesses and attending physicians, if any, which said witnesses were present at the happening of the accident complained of, and whose names are known at that time by said claimant. The failure to so notify the city within the time and in the manner specified herein, shall exonerate, excuse and exempt the city from any and all liability on account of any such injury. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter ch. XVII, § 6, are superseded by MCL 691.1401 et seq. 
Sec. 7. - [Notice.] 
    Service of all process and notice of claims for unliquidated damages against the city shall be made on the Mayor, Manager or Clerk. 
Editor's note- The provisions of charter ch. XVII, § 7, are superseded by MCL 691.1401 et seq. 
Sec. 8. - [Subpoena.] 
    The commission shall have the power to hold hearings and to compel, by subpoena, the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and data, in any proceedings or hearing pending before it. The forms of the subpoena shall be prepared by the City Attorney. The commission shall provide by ordinance for the punishment of any person who, having been personally served with subpoena, wilfully disobeys the same. Such subpoena may be served by any person of lawful age. Each witness shall be entitled to receive the same fee for attendance as is provided by law for the payment of witness fees in the Circuit Court in the state. 
Sec. 9. - [Commission to prescribe methods.] 
    The commission shall, by ordinance, prescribe the methods to more effectually carry out the foregoing provisions. 
Sec. 10. - [Effect of adoption.] 
    After the adoption of this Charter, the city shall continue to be vested with all properties, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects, records, files, books and papers belonging to it, as formerly incorporated. No right or liability, either in favor of or against the city, existing at the time of the taking effect of this Charter, and no suit or prosecution of any character shall in any manner be affected by such change, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All debts and liabilities of the city shall continue to be its debts and liabilities, and all fines and penalties imposed, and all taxes and assessments levied and uncollected at the time of such change shall be collected, and all licenses issued by the city shall be and remain the same as if such change had not been made, provided that when a different remedy is given in this Charter, or in any ordinance pursuant thereto, which can be made applicable to any rights existing upon the adoption of this Charter, or subject thereto, the same shall be deemed cumulative to the remedies before provided and may be used accordingly, unless the newly provided remedy shall be expressly declared to be exclusive therein. 
CHAPTER XVIII. - ADOPTION OF CHARTER 

Sec. 1. - [Submission to electors.] 
    This Charter shall be submitted to the electors of the City of Gladstone, for their adoption or rejection, on the second day of April 1923. Prior to such submission, said Charter shall be published once in the "Delta Reporter," a newspaper published and circulating in said City, at least twenty days before the date of said submission. 
Sec. 2. - [Effective date.] 
    If adopted, this Charter shall take effect on the tenth day of April 1923, and it is expressly provided that all officers, boards and commissions and appointed officers now existing, shall continue their official duties and retain all their official powers and prerogatives until twelve o'clock noon of the fourteenth day of May, 1923 when the first commission provided for under the Charter, shall take office and in case of appointive officers, until their successors, to whom their respective duties shall have been committed under this Charter, shall have been selected and qualified, according to the provisions of the Charter, or until their appointment has been revoked or the office abolished by the action of the commission, whereupon their respective duties, powers and compensation shall cease and terminate. 
Sec. 3. - [Duty of council.] 
    It shall be the duty of the Council of the City of Gladstone, in office when this Charter takes effect, to comply with all the requirements of said Charter relating to primary nomination and election under this Charter which election shall be held on the seventh day of May, 1923. 
Sec. 4. - [Initial terms.] 
    At the first election under this Charter, the two candidates, receiving highest number of votes shall be deemed to be elected and serve for a period of two years from and after the second Monday in April, 1924, the two receiving the next highest number of votes shall be deemed to be elected and serve for a period of one year from and after the second Monday in April 1924; and the person receiving the next highest number of votes shall be deemed to be elected and serve until the second Monday in April, 1924. 
Sec. 5. - [Constable.] 
    There shall be elected at the first election held under this Charter one Constable who shall hold office until the second Monday of April, 1925 and until his successor shall have been elected and qualified. Thereafter one Constable shall be elected at the general city election of each odd number year for a term of two years. 
Sec. 6. - [Duty of commission and clerk.] 
    The commission of said city is hereby authorized and required to perform the same duties in and for said city as our bylaws imposed upon Township Boards of the several townships of this state, in reference to all matters not herein otherwise provided for, and the City Clerk or his deputy shall perform all duties of Township Clerk or which Township Clerks are authorized to perform that are necessary to be performed in said city, and not herein otherwise provided for. 
Sec. 7. - [Succession.] 
    The commission first elected under this Charter and their successors in office shall be held and deemed in law and in fact the successors of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Gladstone, Michigan and of the Board of Fire, Light and Water commissioners and of the Board of Trustees of the Cemetery, and of all officers and Boards existing under Act number 321 of the local acts of 1893, entitled "An Act to Re-incorporate the City of Gladstone in the County of Delta, and to repeal all acts or parts of acts inconsistent with the provisions of this act and all acts amendatory thereto" and the Corporation created by this Charter shall be deemed the legal successor of the Corporation and all Boards created under said act number 321 of the public acts of 1893 and acts amendatory thereof and upon the qualifications of the commissioners comprising the commission elected under the provisions of this Charter, all powers, rights, privileges and duties of the officers holding office under and by virtue of the provisions of act number 321 of the Public Acts of 1893 and acts amendatory thereof shall cease and the commission created under this Charter shall have and exercise all the rights, powers and duties heretofore performed by the officers holding office under and by virtue of said act number 321 of the Public Acts of 1893 and acts amendatory thereof, and all such further rights, powers and duties as may be conferred by the Constitution and laws of this state or by this Charter or any future amendments thereto. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of amendments to the basic Charter. 
Election 
Date Section 
this Charter  4- 3-1989 Ch. VIII, § 22  4- 6-1992 Ch. II, § 3 Ch. II, § 21 Ch. III, § 14 Ch. XI, § 1 Ch. XI, § 16  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Gladstone, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Gladstone Code." 
(Code 1976, § 10.01(A)) 
State Law reference- Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the city commission may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the city. 
    City. The term "city" shall mean the City of Gladstone, Michigan. 
    City commission. The term "city commission" shall mean the city commission of Gladstone, Michigan. 
    Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Gladstone, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)	"And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)	"Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	"Either...or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly, but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" shall mean Delta County, Michigan. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Gender. Words of one gender shall include all other genders. 
    Includes, including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of such terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
    Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
    May. The term "may" shall be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. 
    Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" shall include the term "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, boards, commissions, employees. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to city officers, city departments, city boards, city commissions and city employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person who appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing. 
    Person. The term "person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, governmental unit and any other group or combination acting as a unit and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" shall mean real and personal property. 
    Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. For example, a reference to Public Act No. 168 of 1959 is a reference to Act No. 168 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1959. Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to such act, as amended. 
    Real property, real estate, land. The term "real property" shall include land, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Road, street, highway and alley. The terms "road," "street," "highway" and "alley" shall mean the entire width subject to an easement for a public right-of-way or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The term "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from property. 
    Shall. The term "shall" shall be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Swear. The term "swear" shall include the term "affirm." 
    Tenses. The present tense shall include the past and future tenses. The future tense shall include the present tense. 
    Week. The term "week" shall mean seven consecutive days. 
    Written. The term "written" shall include any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
    Year. The term "year" shall mean 12 consecutive months. 
(Code 1976, §§ 10.04, 10.07) 
State Law reference- Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes references. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code which are printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history of such section. Editor's notes, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections, or that otherwise appear in footnote form, are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1976, §§ 10.01(C), 10.03, 10.06) 
State Law reference- Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive any repealed ordinance. 
(b)	The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
State Law reference- Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4, 8.4a. 
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code, or the ordinance adopting this Code, shall affect the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed in this section, and all such ordinances or portions of ordinances shall continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)	Annexing property into the city or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)	Deannexing or excluding property from the city. 
(3)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)	Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(5)	Making or approving an appropriation or budget. 
(6)	Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(7)	Granting any right or franchise. 
(8)	Adopting or amending a comprehensive plan. 
(9)	Levying or imposing a special assessment. 
(10)	Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any road, street, sidewalk or alley. 
(11)	Establishing the grade or any road, street or sidewalk. 
(12)	Dedicating, accepting or vacating a plat. 
(13)	Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(14)	Granting a tax exemption for specific property. 
(15)	Providing rates or rate regulation for cable television. 
(16)	Not codified in this Code: 
a.	Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations; or 
b.	Ordering, requiring or authorizing the erection or installation of traffic control signs, signals, devices or markings. 
(17)	Rezoning property or amending the zoning map. 
(18)	That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(19)	That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(20)	The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(Code 1976, § 10.12) 
Sec. 1-6. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Code that can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Code are severable. 
(Code 1976, § 10.05) 
State Law reference- Severability of state statutes, MCL 8.5. 
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject mater, shall be construed as restatements and continuations of such legislation, and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u. 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code which are repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected by such repeal. 
(b)	Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) ____________ of the Gladstone Code is amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)	If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) ____________ of the Gladstone Code is created to read as follows:...." 
(d)	All provisions of this Code which are desired to be repealed shall be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 10.14) 
Charter reference- Ordinances, ch. V. 
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be numbered so that they will fit properly into the Code, and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be prepared so that when they have been inserted the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)	Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)	Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to the Code. 
(4)	Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)	Change the words "this ordinance," or similar words, to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(6)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in the Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	In this section the term "violation of this Code" shall mean any of the following: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a misdemeanor or a municipal civil infraction by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section the term "violation of this Code" shall include causing, securing, aiding or abetting a violation of this Code as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)	In this section the term "violation of this Code" shall not include the failure of a city officer or employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by law, violations of this Code that are not declared to be misdemeanors are municipal civil infractions. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person found responsible for a municipal civil infraction shall be subject to a sanction of a civil fine in the following amount, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized by chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.8701 et seq.): 
(1)	Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular civil infraction, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)	Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeat offenses. In this subsection the term "repeat offense" shall mean a second or any subsequent municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision committed by the same person within any 24-month period and for which the person has admitted responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless specifically provided for a particular civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.	For the first repeat offense, a fine of not less than $250.00, plus costs. 
b.	For a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense, a fine of not less than $500.00, plus costs. 
(e)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is declared to be a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days; however, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this Code that substantially correspond to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and/or imprisonment for a term of not more than 93 days. 
(f)	A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be responsible for costs related to such violation. 
(g)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)	With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)	As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(h)	The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(i)	Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement. 
(Code 1976, §§ 10.15, 10.99) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 117.4(k); municipal civil infractions, MCL 117.4l, 600.8701 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-5(3); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-5(5); human rights, ch. 26; administration and enforcement of flood damage prevention, § 30-291 et seq.; administration of subdivisions and other divisions of land, § 30-345; administration and enforcement zoning regulations, § 30-501 et seq.; taxation, ch. 50; administration and enforcement of traffic and vehicle regulations, § 54-41 et seq.; utilities, ch. 58; administration of sewers and sewage disposal regulations, § 58-181 et seq. 
State Law reference- Home rule cities, MCL 117.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Administrative organization. 
    The administration of the city shall be divided as follows: 
(1)	Offices of the city manager, city clerk, assessor and treasurer; and 
(2)	Departments of parks and recreation, public safety, public works, engineering, purchasing and finance; 
(Code 1976, § 30.06) 
Sec. 2-2. - Notice. 
(a)	Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which, if performed by the city, may be assessed against the premises according to the Charter, shall be served: 
(1)	By personally delivering the notice to the owner, or leaving the notice at the owner's residence, office or place of business with a person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)	By mailing the notice by registered mail to the owner at his last known address; or 
(3)	If the owner is unknown, by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises for a period of five days. 
(b)	No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard which has been posted by a city officer, unless permission is given by the officer to remove the notice. 
(Code 1976, § 96.01) 
Sec. 2-3. - Issuance of appearance tickets and municipal civil infraction notices. 
(a)	Any public safety officer of the city may issue an appearance ticket. 
(b)	Any public safety officer or sworn nonelected city officer or employee may issue a municipal civil infraction citation or a civil infraction citation. 
State Law reference- Appearance tickets, MCL 764.9c et seq.; municipal civil infraction citations, MCL 600.8703 et seq. 
Secs. 2-4-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- City commission, ch. II. 

Secs. 2-31-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Appointed officers, ch. II, § 27 et seq. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-5(6); building inspector, § 30-291; zoning administrator, § 30-501; director of parks and recreation, § 38-42; water department superintendent, § 58-73. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-61. - Duties of clerk. 
    The city clerk shall be clerk of the commission and shall, with the mayor, sign and attest all ordinances, and the journal or record of the commission's proceedings shall be prepared kept and signed by the city clerk and approved in writing by the mayor. In addition, the city clerk shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by the Charter, the general laws of the state or by the commission. 
(Code 1976, § 30.10) 
Charter reference- City clerk, ch. II, §§ 13, 19. 
Sec. 2-62. - Duties of assessor. 
(a)	The city assessor is charged with annually estimating the value of all the taxable real and personal property in the city, with making the assessment and tax roll, and with spreading upon the roll any and all taxes duly certified to him by order of the commission or other proper authority. 
(b)	The city assessor is charged with making any special assessment ordered by the commission which is to be made upon the lots and premises in any special assessment district. 
(Code 1976, § 30.11) 
Sec. 2-63. - Duties of treasurer. 
(a)	The city treasurer is charged with the custody of all public money of the city, and all other public money coming into his hands as city treasurer. 
(b)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the city treasurer shall collect, receive and, upon warrant issued by the comptroller, disburse all public money of the city, and shall also receive and disburse all other public money coming into his hands as city treasurer, in pursuance of such regulations as may be prescribed by the authorities having lawful control over such funds. 
(c)	The city treasurer shall countersign all warrants before they are issued, and shall not countersign such warrants until he has ascertained that there is money in the treasury available for the payment of such warrants or until provision has been made for honoring such warrants upon presentation. 
(Code 1976, § 30.12) 
Secs. 2-64-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- City manager, ch. II, § 13 et seq. 

Sec. 2-81. - Duties. 
    The city manager shall have entire control and supervision of the administration of the city. All appointive officers and employees of the city shall be subordinate to the city manager, except the city clerk, city assessor, boards of election inspectors and their respective subordinates and employees. 
(Code 1976, § 30.01) 
Sec. 2-82. - Power to appoint subordinates. 
    The city manager shall appoint and at his discretion suspend or dismiss any of his subordinates, reverse any action taken by such subordinates or supercede them in the functions of their office or employment. He shall have power to investigate without notice the affairs of any office subordinate to him and he and any investigators appointed by him shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and other records. 
(Code 1976, § 30.02) 
Sec. 2-83. - Attendance at meetings. 
    The city manager shall attend all meetings of the commission and shall have the right to take part in any discussion, but shall not have the right to vote. He shall keep the commission fully informed of the condition and needs of the city and shall recommend to the commission any measures that he may think expedient. 
(Code 1976, § 30.03) 
Sec. 2-84. - Head of departments. 
(a)	The city manager shall be head of all departments of administration of the city. However, when the commission shall have authorized the appointment of an assistant manager, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter, the city manager may assign an assistant manager as head of one or more specific departments. Such assignment shall be terminable at the pleasure of the city manager. When so assigned, assistant managers shall have supervision and control of the departments to which they have been assigned. Such assistant managers shall be immediately responsible to the city manager for the administration of such departments and shall be subject to the supervision and control of the city manager in all matters. 
(b)	The city manager may: 
(1)	Require any department to perform work for another department; 
(2)	Assign to the head of a department the work of a subordinate position in his own or another department; 
(3)	Assign any officer or employee to several employments in one or more departments; and 
(4)	Add to the duties of any officer. 
(Code 1976, § 30.04) 
Secs. 2-85-2-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to establish departments, ch. II, § 12. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-121. - Department of parks and recreation; director. 
(a)	The department of parks and recreation is charged with the care and control of all real property owned by the city and dedicated to park purposes, including all properties, buildings and improvements connected with such property, together with all property that may be acquired for park purposes and all lawn extensions and shade trees. 
(b)	The department of parks and recreation shall consist of the director and such employees as the city manager may determine. The director shall be the executive head of the department of parks and recreation, and shall be charged with the care of the city parks and the enforcement of all laws and ordinances relating to such parks. 
(Code 1976, §§ 30.40, 30.41) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 38. 
Secs. 2-122-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Commission on Law Enforcement Standards Act, MCL 28.601 et seq.; Firefighters Training Council Act of 1966, MCL 29.361 et seq. 

Sec. 2-141. - Director of public safety. 
    The department of public safety shall be headed by the director of public safety and such other deputies as may be designated by the city manager from time to time. The director of public safety and his deputies shall direct the police and fire activities of the city, be responsible for the enforcement of law and order, the protection of life, persons and property against fire and the performance of other public services of an emergency nature assigned to the department of public safety. The director of public safety and his deputies shall be appointed by the city manager for an indefinite period to serve at the pleasure of the city manager pursuant to chapter 2, section 15, of the Charter. With the concurrence of the commission, the city manager may fill, leave vacant or name himself as director of public safety. 
(Code 1976, § 30.20) 
Sec. 2-142. - Responsibilities. 
(a)	The responsibilities of the department of public safety shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Provision of police protection to the public at large, where required. 
(2)	Operation of motor and foot patrol units for routine investigations, and the general maintenance and enforcement of law and order. 
(3)	Maintenance of the central complaint desk at the public safety building, the maintaining and supervising of police records, criminal and noncriminal identification, property identification and custody of property. 
(4)	Investigation of crimes, elimination of illegal liquor and/or drug traffic and vice and the preparation of cases for the prosecution of criminal offenses in violation of state laws and city ordinances. 
(5)	Prevention and control of juvenile delinquency, the removal of crime hazards and the coordination of community agencies interested in crime prevention. 
(6)	Control of traffic, traffic educational programs, school patrols, prosecution of traffic violations and policing and reporting traffic accidents. 
(7)	Efficient and prompt extinguishment of fires which endanger or are likely to endanger life, persons or property; the maintenance and operation of firefighting equipment and such other emergency equipment as may be assigned to the department. 
(8)	Investigation and inspection of potential fire hazards, and the abatement of existing fire hazards in accordance with the provisions of state laws and city ordinances. 
(b)	The city manager may assign other duties and responsibilities to the department of public safety as deemed necessary for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 30.21) 
Sec. 2-143. - Rules. 
    The city manager, subject to the provisions of the Charter, from time to time shall adopt such rules and regulations as he may deem expedient for the proper administration of the department of public safety and for regulating the activities of public safety officers of the city. Such rules may establish one or more divisions within the department of public safety, each of which divisions may be charged with performing one or more of the functions of the department of public safety enumerated in section 2-142. It shall be the duty of all members of the department of public safety to comply with such rules and orders while they are in effect. 
(Code 1976, § 30.22) 
Sec. 2-144. - Integration of public safety officers. 
    There shall be no distinction between public safety officers assigned to perform duties commonly performed by a police department and members of the department of public safety assigned to perform work commonly performed by a fire department. Every public safety officer shall perform either police work or fire work as such duties shall from time to time be assigned to him by the director of public safety. Whenever any duties, rights or privileges shall be imposed or extended upon a city police officer or firefighter by any state statute, the Charter or city ordinances, such duties, rights or privileges shall be imposed upon, and extended to, public safety officers of the city, and all public safety officers shall be peace officers within the meaning of such term as used in state statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 30.23) 
Sec. 2-145. - Acting director. 
    In case of the absence from the city of the director of public safety, or his disability or inability from any cause to act as director, the city manager may designate and appoint another member of the department of public safety to act as director during such absence or disability, or serve in such capacity himself. 
(Code 1976, § 30.24) 
Sec. 2-146. - Qualifications for appointment as police officer. 
    No person shall be appointed as a police officer unless such person: 
(1)	Has the qualifications required by state law; 
(2)	Is at least 21 years of age; 
(3)	Has an associate of arts degree or bachelor's degree. 
State Law reference- Minimum state standards, MCL 28.609 et seq. 
Secs. 2-147-2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-171. - Duties. 
    The public works department is charged with the: 
(1)	Construction and maintenance of all public works and improvements of the city, except those otherwise provided for; 
(2)	Collection and removal of wastes; and 
(3)	Impounding of animals unlawfully at large. 
(Code 1976, § 30.45) 
Sec. 2-172. - Director, employees and pound master; duties. 
(a)	The public works department shall consist of the director, such employees as the city manager may determine and the pound master. 
(b)	The public works director is charged with the construction, improvement, maintenance and repair of streets, sidewalks, alleys, bridges, viaducts and other public ways, sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, canals, streams and watercourses, public docks and wharves, boulevards, squares and other public places. 
(c)	The public works director is charged with the cleaning of sewers, the sprinkling and cleaning of streets and other public places and the removal of snow from such sewers, streets and public places. 
(Code 1976, § 30.46) 
Secs. 2-173-2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING 

Sec. 2-191. - Duties. 
    The department of engineering is charged with the civil engineering work of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 30.50) 
Sec. 2-192. - Director. 
(a)	The department of engineering shall consist of the director and such assistants and other subordinates as the city manager may determine. 
(b)	The director of the department of engineering shall cause to be made all necessary surveys, plats, maps, diagrams, estimates, plans and specifications and shall cause any other civil engineering work of the city to be done. 
(c)	The director may employ a registered civil engineer, who shall have and exercise within the city the like powers and duties as are conferred by law upon county surveyors, and the like effect and validity shall be given to his official acts, surveys and plats as are given by law to the acts and surveys of county surveyors. 
(Code 1976, § 30.51) 
Secs. 2-193-2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 590, adopted June 10, 2013, amended article V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article V, §§ 2-221-2-223, pertained to a similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 2-221. - Dollar limitations. 
    The dollar amount limit is set in the city commission adopted purchasing and bidding policy. 
(Ord. No. 590, 6-10-2013) 
Sec. 2-222. - Emergency purchases. 
    The dollar limit shall be suspended in cases where an emergency exists which affects public health and safety or which would significantly restrict the necessary operation of the city. In those instances, the city manager shall have an unlimited power of purchase. 
(Ord. No. 590, 6-10-2013) 
Secs. 2-223-2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 30-31 et seq.; zoning committee, § 30-502; board of zoning appeals, § 30-510; parks and recreation commission, § 38-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-251-2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Land development regulations, ch. 30. 
State Law reference- Downtown development authorities, MCL 125.1651 et seq. 

Sec. 2-271. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise indicated, the terms used in this division shall have the same meanings as given to them in Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 471, § I(C), 2-24-1992) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, MCL 125.1651. 
Sec. 2-272. - Determination of necessity; resolution of intent; public hearing. 
    The city commission has determined that it is necessary for the best interests of the city to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in its business district to eliminate the causes of such deterioration and promote economic growth. Therefore, the city commission, by resolution, has declared its intention to create and provide for the operation of a downtown development authority. Such matter has been discussed at public hearing with sufficient notice and opportunity to be heard pursuant to Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 471, § I(B), 2-24-1992) 
State Law reference- Resolution of intent, MCL 125.1653. 
Sec. 2-273. - Created. 
    There is created, pursuant to Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), a downtown development authority for the city. 
(Ord. No. 471, § I(D), 2-24-1992) 
State Law reference- Downtown development authority authorized, MCL 125.1652. 
Sec. 2-274. - Boundaries. 
    The downtown district in which the downtown development authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.) shall consist of the following described territory in the city, subject to such changes as may be made pursuant to this division and such Act No. 197: 
Starting at the corner section common to 20, 21, 28 and 29; thence east along the south line of section 21 368.6 feet to the west line of Wisconsin Central Railroad property; thence north along Wisconsin Central Railroad Company's west line to the north right-of-way of Third Avenue; thence east along the north right-of-way extended to the east right-of-way of U.S. 2 and U.S. 41; thence north along the east right-of-way of U.S. 2 and U.S. 41 to the north corporate line of the city; thence east along such corporate line to the shore of Little Bay de Noc; thence southerly along the shore of Little Bay de Noc to Saunders Point; thence westerly along the shore of Little Bay de Noc to the east property line of lots 4-13 and the west property line of the city sewage treatment plant property; thence northerly along such property line extended across Minneapolis Avenue to the north right-of-way of Minneapolis Avenue; thence easterly along the north right-of-way of Minneapolis Avenue to the east property line of lot 123 of Bay Park Addition No. 1; thence northerly along such property line to the northeast corner of such lot; thence westerly along the north property line of lot 123 to the southeast corner of lot 26 of Bay Park Addition; thence northerly along the east property line of lots 26-22 to a point common to lots 22 and 65; thence east along the south property line of lots 65-67; thence northerly along the east property line of lot 67 to the south right-of-way of Michigan Avenue; thence westerly along the south right-of-way of Michigan Avenue to the intersection of the west right-of-way line extension of Second Street; thence northerly along the west right-of-way of Second Street as extended to the north right-of-way line of Wisconsin Avenue; thence continuing along the west right-of-way of Second Street to the south right-of-way of Delta Avenue; thence westerly along the south right-of-way of Delta Avenue to the east right-of-way of Seventh Street; thence south along the east right-of-way of Seventh Street to the south right-of-way of Minnesota Avenue; thence west along the south right-of-way of Minnesota Avenue to the west right-of-way of Tenth Street; thence northerly along the west right-of-way of Tenth Street to the south right-of-way of the alley between Minnesota Avenue and Delta Avenue, in block 59 of the First Addition to the city; thence west along the south right-of-way of such alley to the east right-of-way of U.S. 2 and U.S. 41; thence southwesterly along the east right-of-way of U.S. 2 and U.S. 41 to the north right-of-way of Dakota Avenue; thence easterly along the north right-of-way of Dakota Avenue extended to the east right-of-way of 18th Street; thence south along the east right-of-way of 18th Street to the southerly right-of-way of Marble Avenue; thence west and south along the right-of-way of Marble Avenue to the north right-of-way of South Lake Shore Drive; thence easterly along the north right-of-way of South Lake Shore Drive to the south right-of-way of Minneapolis Avenue; thence east along the south right-of-way of Minneapolis Avenue to the east property line of the city park property (GL-4); thence southerly along such property line to the shore of Little Bay de Noc; thence following along the shore of Little Bay de Noc to the intersection of the west right-of-way of South Hill Road extended to Little Bay de Noc; thence westerly along the west right-of-way of South Hill Road to the southeast right-of-way of Blackwell Avenue; thence northerly along the southeast right-of-way of Blackwell Avenue to the northerly right-of-way of Avenue C; thence southeasterly along the northerly right-of-way of Avenue C to the west property line of the Wisconsin Central Railroad right-of-way; thence northerly along such right-of-way to the section line common to sections 28 and 29; thence north to the point of beginning, exempting Furnace Addition, Buckeye Addition, Cliffs Drive Parcels 2-1-2-11 of section 16, township 40 north, range 22 west and block 76, 77, 78 and lots 1-12 and 19-28 of block 79, First Addition to the city, and lots 1, 2, 7, 8 and 9 of block 9, South Gladstone Addition. 
(Ord. No. 471, § I(E), 2-24-1992) 
State Law reference- Boundaries of authority, MCL 125.1653. 
Sec. 2-275. - Powers and duties. 
    The downtown development authority and its governing board shall have the powers and duties granted under Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). Where indicated by such act, action on the part of the downtown development authority and its governing board shall require the prior approval of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 471, § I(F), 2-24-1992) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties, MCL 125.1657 et seq. 
Sec. 2-276. - Governing board. 
(a)	The downtown development authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board consisting of the mayor and ten members selected by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city commission. Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district. Not less than one of the members shall be a resident of the downtown district. Of the members first appointed, two shall be appointed for one year, two for two years, three for three years and three for four years. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. Thereafter, each member shall serve a term of four years. An appointment to fill a vacancy on the board shall be made by the mayor for the unexpired term only. Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual necessary expenses. The chairman of the board shall be elected by the board. 
(b)	The members of the board shall meet all qualifications and perform all necessary functions delineated in Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). The members of the board are subject to all conditions, sanctions and procedures delineated in such act. The board is empowered with all powers delineated in such act. 
(Ord. No. 471, § I(G), 2-24-1992) 
State Law reference- Governing board, MCL 125.1654. 
Sec. 2-277. - Adoption of budget; fiscal year. 
(a)	In addition to the duties, responsibilities and authority of the downtown development authority and its governing board delineated by Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 126.1651 et seq.), the governing board shall annually prepare a budget for the downtown development authority and shall submit it to the city commission on the same date that the proposed budget for the city is required by the Charter to be submitted to the city commission. The governing board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing revenue bonds. 
(b)	The downtown development authority shall submit financial reports to the city commission at the same time and on the same basis as city departments are required to submit reports. The downtown development authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city, and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the commission. 
(c)	The fiscal year of the downtown development authority shall begin on April 1 of each year and end on March 31 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may be adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 471, § I(H), 2-24-1992) 
Sec. 2-278. - Financing. 
    The activities of the downtown development authority may be financed in any manner which is allowed by Public Act No. 197 of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 471, § I(I), 2-24-1992) 
Sec. 2-279. - Instrumentality of city. 
    The downtown development authority shall be deemed an instrumentality of the city. 
(Ord. No. 471, § I(J), 2-24-1992) 
Secs. 2-280-2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOUSING COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Housing commission, MCL 125.651 et seq. 

Sec. 2-301. - Established. 
    A commission is created in and for the city to be known as the housing commission. 
(Code 1976, § 31.20) 
State Law reference- Housing commission authorized, MCL 125.653 et seq. 
Sec. 2-302. - Composition. 
(a)	The mayor is directed to appoint the members of the housing commission. 
(b)	The mayor shall appoint a commission consisting of five members. The term of office for the first commission shall be for one year, two years, three years, four years and five years, respectively, and for five years thereafter. Members of the housing commission shall serve without compensation and may be removed from office by the mayor. Any vacancy in office shall be filled by the mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1976, § 31.21; Ord. No. 515, § 1, 2-9-1998) 
State Law reference- Housing commission membership, MCL 125.654. 
Sec. 2-303. - Powers and duties. 
(a)	The housing commission is authorized to purchase, acquire, construct, maintain, operate, improve, extend and/or repair housing facilities and eliminate housing conditions within the city which are detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals and/or welfare; and to exercise any right, privilege or authority extended to the housing commission by statute, ordinance or law of the state, the United States or any other governing body having jurisdiction in the premises. 
(b)	Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the housing commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	To determine in what areas of the city it is necessary to provide proper sanitary housing facilities for families of low income and for the elimination of housing conditions which are detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals and/or welfare; 
(2)	To purchase, lease, sell, exchange, transfer, assign and mortgage any property, real or personal, or any interest in such property, or to acquire such property by gift, bequest or under the power of eminent domain; to own, hold, clear and improve property; to engage in or contract for the design and construction, reconstruction, alteration, improvement, extension and/or repair of any housing project, or parts thereof; to lease and/or operate any housing project; 
(3)	To control and supervise all parks and playgrounds forming a part of such housing development or to contract with existing departments of the city for operation or maintenance of parks and/or playgrounds; 
(4)	To establish and revise rents of any housing project, but the housing commission shall rent all property for such sums as will make them self supporting, including all charges for maintenance and operation for principal and interest on loans and bonds, and for taxes; 
(5)	To rent only to such tenants who are unable to pay for more expensive housing accommodations; 
(6)	To call upon other city departments for assistance in the performance of its duties, but such departments shall be reimbursed for any added expense incurred for such assistance; 
(7)	Such other powers relating to such housing facilities project as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the city commission or as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this division. 
(Code 1976, § 31.22) 
State Law reference- Housing commission powers, MCL 125.657 et seq. 
Sec. 2-304. - Eminent domain recommendations. 
    The housing commission may recommend to the city commission the institution and prosecution of proceedings under the power of eminent domain in accordance with the laws of the state and provisions of the Charter relative to condemnation. 
(Code 1976, § 31.23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.660. 
Secs. 2-305-2-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Local officers compensation commission, MCL 117.5c. 

Sec. 2-331. - Creation; membership. 
(a)	The local officers compensation commission is created. The commission shall determine the salaries and expense allowance of the members of the city commission, the mayor and other elective city officials. The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city commission. 
(b)	Each member of the local officers compensation commission shall be a registered elector of the city. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the commission. 
(c)	The members of the local officers compensation commission shall be appointed for a five-year term. Such term shall be staggered so that one member of the commission shall be appointed each year. Members of the commission shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. 
(d)	Vacancies on the local officers compensation commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by appointment by the mayor and confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 31.30(A)-(D)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a). 
Sec. 2-332. - Salary. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall determine the salaries of local elected officials, which determination shall be the salaries unless the city commission by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the legislative body reject such determination. The determination of the local officers compensation commission shall be effective 30 days following the filing of such determination with the city clerk unless it is rejected by the legislative body. In case of rejection, the existing salaries shall prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salaries shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 31.30(E)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(b). 
Sec. 2-333. - Meetings; quorum; action; chairman; compensation. 
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Session days mean any calendar day on which the local officers compensation commission meets and a quorum is present. 
(b)	The commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days every odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of the commission constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The commission will take no action or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. The commission shall elect a chairman from among its members. The members of the commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1976, § 31.30(F)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(c). 
Sec. 2-334. - Performance of business. 
    The business which the local officers compensation commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date and place of the meeting of the commission shall be given in the manner required by such act. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(d). 
Sec. 2-335. - Writing of official function. 
    A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained by the local officers compensation commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(e). 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 568, § 1, adopted Aug. 13, 2007, amended ch. 6, §§ 6-1-6-4, in its entirety as set out herein. The former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 95.01, 95.02, 95.07, 95.99(C). 

Sec. 6-1. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the public safety department, through its proper officials and agents, to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 8-13-2007) 
State Law reference- Livestock at large, MCL 433.51 et seq. 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any live creature, both domestic and wild, except humans, and "animal" includes fowl, fish and reptiles. 
    Domestic pet includes dogs, cats, or any animals customarily kept or housed as household pets. 
    Exotic animal means any live monkey, alligator, crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, venomous snake, member of the feline species other than domestic cat, member of the canine species other than domestic dog, or any other animal that would require a standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household pets sold by commercial pet shops. 
    Kennel shall mean any pen, coral, stable, cage or other place of confinement on any premises within the city where animals are kept for the propose of breeding, boarding, sale, training, trading or sporting purposes. Kennels shall not mean any establishment in properly zoned areas where animals are kept for the purpose of sale. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 8-13-2007) 
Sec. 6-3. - Keeping of animals. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, own or harbor animals within the city, except for domestic pets. It shall be unlawful for anyone to own or harbor any exotic animal. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain a kennel as described herein on any premise within the city limits except as a conditional use in an area designated as an industrial park in an I-2 industrial district. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 8-13-2007) 
Sec. 6-4. - Number of animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, shelter, keep or harbor more than four domestic pets over four months of age at any one time at any residence or address. For the purpose of this section only, "domestic pets" shall not include pets brought into a residence by visitors of the residence occupants for a temporary visit not to exceed two weeks, nor shall it include birds or small animals confined to a cage or tropical fish confined to an aquarium or pond. This section shall not apply to any establishment in a properly zoned area where animals are kept for the purposes of sale or treatment. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 8-13-2007) 
Sec. 6-5. - Dogs. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog within the city, which by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling causes a serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to people passing to and fro upon the streets. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to own a fierce of vicious dog or a dog that has been bitten by any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies. Any person who shall have in his possession any dog which has bitten any person, shall produce and surrender the dog to the public safety department to be held for observations. Any person who shall have in his possession any dog which has contracted or is suspected of having rabies, or which has been bitten by an animal known to have been afflicted with rabies, shall, upon demand of proper authorities, produce and surrender the dog to be held for observation and treatment. The cost of care and treatment of such dog shall be paid by the owner of the dog. It shall be the duty of any person owning or harboring a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or other animal showing the symptoms of rabies to immediately notify the public safety department that such person has the dog in his possession. Any duly authorized public safety officer may, if deemed necessary and advisable, and after holding the dog a sufficient length of time to meet the requirements of the state law governing communicable diseases, cause the dog to be destroyed as a vicious dog. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 8-13-2007) 
State Law reference- Dog Law of 1919, MCL 287-261 et seq.; dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq. 
Sec. 6-6. - County ordinance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the Delta County Animal Control ordinance which is hereby incorporated by reference, and as may hereby be amended, to the extent that such ordinance provisions are not in direct conflict with the provisions of this chapter 6 of the City Code. (Ordinance #44, 12-07-1984) 
(Ord. No. 568, § 8-13-2007) 
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Emergency services, ch. 18; B-1 district, § 30-547; B-2 district, § 30-548; O-S office service district, § 30-549; I-1 light industrial district, § 30-550; I-2 industrial district, § 30-551; taxation, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Registration. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession or business within the city unless such person first registers with the city clerk on forms provided by the city clerk. No fee shall be charged for such registration. 
(b)	The city clerk shall issue a registration card to each trade, profession or business registering within the city. No registrant shall fail to produce the registration card when requested to do so by any public safety officer, the city clerk or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1976, §§ 110.01, 110.02) 
Secs. 10-2-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES 

Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cause means and includes the doing or omitting of any act or permitting any condition to exist in connection with any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license or permit is granted under the provisions of this article, or upon any premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act of omission or condition is: 
(1)	Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; 
(2)	Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature; 
(3)	Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit granted; or 
(4)	Forbidden by this chapter or any duly established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license or permit has been granted. 
(Code 1976, § 110.12) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-32. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage, or be engaged in, the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is required by any provision of this Code without first obtaining a license from the city in the manner provided for in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 110.03) 
Sec. 10-33. - Application. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, every person required to obtain a license from the city to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall make application for such license to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city clerk and shall state under oath, or affirm in such a way as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of the license. 
(Code 1976, § 110.05) 
Sec. 10-34. - Conditions of issuance. 
    No business license shall be granted to any applicant within the city until the applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which application for a license is made. 
(Code 1976, § 110.04) 
Sec. 10-35. - State or federal license. 
    It shall be unlawful for a license to be issued within the city where a state or federal license is also required, unless the state or federal license is obtained first. 
(Code 1976, § 110.06) 
Sec. 10-36. - Moral character. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Good moral character means the propensity of a person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(b)	Judgment of guilt. A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or civil action shall not be used in and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. Such judgment may be used as evidence in the determination and, when so used, the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that: 
(1)	At the current time, he has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; and 
(2)	He is rehabilitated, or the substance of the former offense is not reasonable related to the occupation or profession for which he seeks a business license or permit. 
(c)	Criminal records. The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or requested by the city in a determination of good moral character when used as a requirement to obtain a business license or permit: 
(1)	Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction. 
(2)	Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction. 
(3)	Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(4)	Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 
State Law reference- Moral character, MCL 338.41 et seq. 
Sec. 10-37. - License year. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, a business license shall commence on May 1 each year and terminate on April 30 of the following year. Annual business licenses issued after May 1 in any year shall terminate on April 30 of the following year. In all cases where the provisions of this chapter permit the issuance of licenses for a period of less than one year, such license shall become effective on the date of issuance and shall terminate at the end of the period for which such license is issued. 
(Code 1976, § 110.07) 
Sec. 10-38. - Exemption from fee. 
    A business license shall not be issued by the clerk under this Code except upon the payment of the fee provided for such license in this chapter. A license fee shall not be required to be paid by any person who is exempt from the payment of the fee by state or federal law, and such person shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 110.09) 
Sec. 10-39. - Appeals. 
    An applicant for a business license who has been refused a license, for any reason, by the authorized issuing officer may appeal the refusal to the city commission by setting forth all of the facts in a written petition and filing such petition with the city clerk. The commission may act on the petition upon the facts in such petition, or may grant a further hearing to the applicant. The decision of the commission on the petition or hearing shall be final. 
(Code 1976, § 110.10) 
Sec. 10-40. - Renewal. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, an application for the renewal of a business license shall be considered to be, and shall be treated in the same manner as, an original application for the license. 
(Code 1976, § 110.08) 
Sec. 10-41. - Transferability. 
    A business license or permit issued under this chapter shall not be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this chapter. A business licensee or permittee shall not, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this chapter, transfer or attempt to transfer his license or permit to another person, nor shall he make or attempt to make any improper use of the such license or permit. 
(Code 1976, § 110.15) 
Sec. 10-42. - Exhibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a business license has been granted to fail to carry the license upon his person when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted. However, where the trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on fixed place or establishment, the license shall be exhibited at all times in a conspicuous place in such place or establishment. Every person shall produce his business license for examination when applying for a renewal of such license or when requested to do so by any city public safety officer or any person representing the issuing authority. 
(Code 1976, § 110.13) 
Sec. 10-43. - Displaying expired, invalid or duplicate license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display an expired or invalid business license or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1976, § 110.14) 
Sec. 10-44. - Record of application. 
    The city shall keep a record of all applications for business licenses made under this chapter and shall indicate in the record whether the license applied for in each case has been granted or withheld, and if withheld, the reasons for such withholding. 
(Code 1976, § 110.16) 
Sec. 10-45. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any business license issued by the city may be suspended by the city manager for cause, and any business permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the issuing authority for cause. The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city commission on any action of the city manager, provided that a written request is filed with the city clerk within ten days after the receipt of notice of the suspension. The commission may confirm the suspension or revoke or reinstate any license, and the action taken by the commission shall be final. Upon suspension or revocation of any business license or permit, the fee shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1976, § 110.11) 
Secs. 10-46-10-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MERRY-GO-ROUNDS OR SHOOTING GALLERIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-81-10-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-101. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any merry-go-round or shooting gallery within the city without first obtaining a license as provided in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 110.60) 
Sec. 10-102. - Application. 
    Applications for licenses under this division shall be made to the city clerk. All licenses issued shall be evidenced by a written certificate signed by the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 110.61) 
Sec. 10-103. - Rates. 
    The rates for licenses under this division shall be as follows: 
(1)	For the first day ..... $2.00 
(2)	For the second day ..... 1.00 
(3)	For each subsequent day ..... 0.50 
(Code 1976, § 110.62) 
Secs. 10-104-10-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAWKERS AND PEDDLERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.; veteran's license for peddler, MCL 35.441 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hawk and peddle mean and include the going from place to place within the city to sell, offer for sale or solicit orders for goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Code 1976, § 110.70) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-132. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person selling goods, wares or merchandise of any description which are raised, produced or manufactured by the individual offering them for sale, nor to persons handling vegetables, fruits or perishable farm products which are raised or produced by the individual offering them for sale. 
(Code 1976, § 110.73) 
Secs. 10-133-10-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-161. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hawk or peddle any goods, wares or merchandise within the city without first obtaining a license from the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 110.71) 
Sec. 10-162. - Application; fees. 
    The city clerk is authorized to license any person producing satisfactory evidence that he is of good moral character to hawk and peddle goods, wares and merchandise in the city upon such person executing a bond to the city in the penal sum of $200.00, with two or more sufficient sureties to be approved by the city manager, conditioned that he will pay all license fees due or to become due from him and will pay any judgment, costs and damages that may be obtained by reason of any fraud, misrepresentation or unlawful conduct in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and upon the payment to the city clerk by such person of the following license fees: 
(1)	For each day ..... $ 10.00 
(2)	For each week ..... 30.00 
(3)	For each month ..... 50.00 
(4)	For each year ..... 100.00 
(Code 1976, § 110.72) 
Secs. 10-163-10-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SALE OF PRODUCTS FROM TEMPORARY STRUCTURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-191. - Movement of stand. 
    After a license is issued for the sale of products from a temporary structure within the city, the stand or temporary structure shall not be moved from the location set forth as the licensee's business location as designated in his license application without the written consent of the city manager or his duly authorized agent. 
(Code 1976, § 110.82) 
Sec. 10-192. - Placement of stand. 
    A stand or temporary structure shall not be erected or maintained in any street, alley or other public place within the city except at the location specifically designated in writing by the city manager or his duly authorized agent. 
(Code 1976, § 110.83) 
Secs. 10-193-10-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-211. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any confections, food, tobacco or tobacco products from a portable stand or temporary structure in the city without having first obtained a license for such sales. 
(Code 1976, § 110.80) 
Sec. 10-212. - Application; fees. 
(a)	Any person desiring to sell confections, food, tobacco or tobacco products from a portable stand or temporary structure in the city for profit shall make application in writing to the city clerk for a license for such sales, stating his name and legal residence, the location of the stand or temporary structure from which he proposes to sell such articles and the length of time he desires a license to operate the portable stand or temporary structure in the sale of such products. Such person shall pay the following license fee as a condition of the issuance of such license: 
(1)	For one day ..... $ 2.00 
(2)	For a period not exceeding one week ..... 3.00 
(3)	For a period not exceeding one month ..... 10.00 
(4)	For a period not exceeding six months ..... 25.00 
(5)	For a period not exceeding one year ..... 35.00 
(b)	All licenses granted under this division shall expire May 1 of each year. 
(Code 1976, § 110.81) 
Sec. 10-213. - Exemption. 
    Any person complying with the provisions set forth in this division shall not be obliged to procure a license as a hawker, peddler, itinerant vendor or transient merchant if his business is confined to the sale of articles set forth in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 110.84) 
Secs. 10-214-10-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Operation of a temporary photographic gallery on a commercial basis means the operation of a temporary photographic gallery in a tent, temporary room or other place which is not a permanent place of business within the city, the products of which are to be sold or otherwise disposed of in the city for a lawful consideration. 
    Solicitation of photographic work or enlargement by transients means soliciting photographic work or enlargement of photographs within the city by persons not permanently residing in the city or not having a permanent established place of business in the city, for which a lawful consideration is to be paid. 
    Transient merchant means any person who, as principal or agent, conducts a temporary and transient business in the city selling goods, wares and merchandise and who, for the purpose of carrying on the business, hires, leases or occupies a lot, room, building, store, structure, railroad car, automobile or boat for the exhibiting or selling of goods, wares and merchandise. 
    Transient photographer means a person having no permanent place of business within the city who goes about the city taking photographs which are to be sold or otherwise disposed of in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 110.30) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-242. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons not selling at retail; to hawkers and peddlers as defined in section 10-131; to any person selling goods, wares or merchandise of any description, raised, produced or manufactured by the person offering them for sale; or to persons handling vegetables, fruit or perishable farm products that are raised or produced by the individual offering them for sale. 
(Code 1976, § 110.35) 
Sec. 10-243. - Interstate commerce. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any activity which would render such activity interstate commerce. 
(Code 1976, § 110.33) 
Secs. 10-244-10-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRANSIENT PHOTOGRAPHERS' LICENSE 

Sec. 10-261. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to act as a transient photographer, solicit photographic work or photograph enlargements as a transient, or operate a temporary photograph gallery, without having procured from the city clerk a license therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 110.31) 
Sec. 10-262. - Application; fees. 
    Any person desiring to procure a license from the city clerk for the purposes set forth in section 10-261 shall apply to the city clerk, giving his permanent residence and address and the name of his employer, if any, and shall pay to the following fees to the city clerk: 
(1)	For a period of one day ..... $ 3.00 
(2)	For each successive day, not exceeding a period of six months ..... 2.00 
(3)	For a period of six months ..... 35.00 
(4)	For a period of one year ..... 60.00 
(Code 1976, § 110.32) 
Secs. 10-263-10-280. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS' LICENSE 

Sec. 10-281. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal or agent, to engage in the conduct of business as transient merchant in the city without first having obtained a license in the manner set forth in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 110.34) 
Sec. 10-282. - Application; bond. 
    Any person desiring to engage in business within the city as a transient merchant shall make and file with the city clerk a written application stating the applicant's name, residence and place where he intends to transact business and the nature of the business to be transacted. If the applicant is acting as an agent for another person, he shall cause to be filed with the city manager a power of attorney appointing the city manager as the agent of the principal on which service of process may be made in any suit that may be commenced against him. The applicant shall, at the same time, file with the city manager a bond to the city in the sum of $2,000.00 with two sufficient sureties or a surety company bond, to be approved by the city manager, conditioned that he will pay all license fees due, or which become due, to the city and will pay any judgment that may be obtained against the person conducting the business or his duly authorized agents. 
(Code 1976, § 110.36) 
Sec. 10-283. - Fees. 
    When an applicant for a license under this division shall produce satisfactory evidence to the city manager that he is a person of good moral character and intends to conduct a legitimate transient merchant's business, the city manager shall be authorized to grant such person a transient merchant's license upon the payment of a license fee of $15.00 for the first day, and the license shall continue in force and effect as long as the person shall pay $15.00 per day, in advance, for each additional day he desires to continue the business. 
(Code 1976, § 110.37) 
Sec. 10-284. - Prima facie evidence of business. 
    Transaction of a transient merchant's business by a person within the city for a period of less than three consecutive months shall be prima facie evidence that such person was conducting business as a transient merchant within the intent and meaning of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 110.38) 
Secs. 10-285-10-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CIRCUSES, MENAGERIES, CARNIVALS AND MEDICINE SHOWS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-311-10-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-331. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or maintain in the city any circus, menagerie, carnival or medicine show without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 110.40) 
Sec. 10-332. - Application. 
(a)	Any person desiring to obtain a license to exhibit or maintain any circus, menagerie, carnival or medicine show within the city shall file with the city commission through the city clerk an application stating the dates and location where the exhibition is proposed to be held. If the city commission shall approve the application, the city clerk shall be authorized to issue a written license upon deposit with the city clerk the following fees for such license for the period the exhibition is proposed to be held: 
(1)	Circus and/or menagerie, per day ..... $75.00 
(2)	Carnival and/or medicine show, per day ..... 25.00 
(b)	All persons licensed under this division shall be exempt from obtaining a license as a hawker, peddler, itinerant vendor or itinerant merchant. 
(Code 1976, § 110.41) 
Secs. 10-333-10-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TAXICABS AND BUSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-361. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City bus means any motor vehicle, except taxicabs and intermunicipal buses, engaged in the business of transporting persons by accepting or discharging passengers as they may offer themselves for transportation along an established route and upon an established time schedule as provided for in this article, and for which service fares are charged, received or permitted to be donated. 
    Intermunicipal bus means a vehicle operated by any person carrying passengers for hire under any license to operate issued by the state public utilities commission. 
    Scheduled route means a route over designated streets in the city where the vehicle will be operated upon a fixed time schedule. 
(Code 1976, § 110.20) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-362. - Duty of licensee to report accident. 
    It shall be the duty of a licensee under this article or any employee of the licensee having knowledge of an accident resulting in injury to any person or property to promptly report such accident to the director of public safety, giving full information as to the accident and personal injury or damage to property. 
(Code 1976, § 110.28) 
Sec. 10-363. - Duty to maintain schedules, routes and accept suitable passengers. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a licensee under this article to: 
(1)	Fail, refuse and neglect to operate a city bus over any proposed route or maintain bus service according to the schedules set forth in the application for a license to operate the city bus, except for temporary deviations of the route due to street construction, repair or other causes beyond the control of the licensee. 
(2)	Fail to accommodate and carry any person presenting himself in a proper and suitable condition and tendering the necessary fare for service. 
(Code 1976, § 110.29) 
Secs. 10-364-10-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAXICAB LICENSE 

Sec. 10-391. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab or bus on any street in the city without first obtaining a license for such operation as provided in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 110.21) 
Sec. 10-392. - Application; deposit; insurance; indemnity bond. 
    Any person desiring to operate a taxicab upon any public street within the city shall make application in writing to the city clerk for a license for such operation. The application shall state the name and business address of the applicant and the number of taxicabs to be operated under such license. The applicant shall deposit with the city clerk the sum of $10.00 for each taxicab to be operated for which a license is desired, which sum shall be retained by the city if the license is granted. The applicant shall present to the city clerk evidence that a policy of insurance or indemnity bond has been issued to the applicant by a responsible company which is licensed to do insurance business in the state, which indemnity bond or insurance policy shall describe the vehicle to be licensed by motor number, factory number, if any, maker's name and number of passengers capable of being carried by such vehicle. Such bond or policy shall state that the issuing company shall be directly liable to pay all damages for injury to persons carried in the vehicle and shall be in the amounts of not exceeding $100,000.00 to any one person or $500,000.00 for any one accident, which may be recovered against the licensee of the vehicle described in such bond or policy by reason of the negligent or wrongful use or operation of the vehicle. The bond or policy shall continue in effect during the period for which the vehicles are licensed. If such person shall desire to put into service any other taxicab he shall comply with the same requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 110.22) 
Sec. 10-393. - Issuance; expiration. 
    The city commission, within a reasonable time after the filing of an application for a license to operate a taxicab within the city, shall act upon such application, and if the commission is satisfied that the person applying for a license under this article is responsible, the vehicle proposed to be operated is safe and suitable for such purpose and the applicant has procured suitable and proper insurance or indemnity with a proper and responsible company, the commission shall direct the city clerk, upon the payment of the fees required in this division, to issue a license to the applicant, which license shall expire May 1 next ensuing. 
(Code 1976, § 110.23) 
Secs. 10-394-10-410. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUS LICENSES 

Sec. 10-411. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to operate a city bus over any scheduled route within the city shall comply with the provisions of this article with respect to the licensing and the operation of taxicabs and shall make written application to the city clerk, designating the proposed route over which the licensee desires to operate the bus, the time schedules upon which the bus is proposed to be operated and the rates of fare to be charged by the licensee to passengers. 
(Code 1976, § 110.24) 
Sec. 10-412. - Issuance; denial. 
(a)	The city commission, within a reasonable length of time after the filing of an application to operate a city bus, shall act upon the application and, if it shall approve of the proposed routes, time schedules and rates of fare to be charged, and if the commission shall be satisfied, further, that the applicant is financially responsible and has sufficient and proper equipment to maintain the proposed bus service, that the proposed service will be adequate to meet the needs of the public, and that the proposed bus service is necessary and desirable, it shall approve the application. 
(b)	The city commission may make such application approval conditioned upon any change in the proposed routes, schedule and rates as the commission may deem necessary and reasonable under the circumstances. If the commission shall approve of the application, it shall direct the city clerk to issue a license to the applicant which shall expire May 1 next ensuing, and if the commission is not satisfied with respect to the conditions set forth in this section, it shall deny the application. 
(Code 1976, § 110.25) 
Sec. 10-413. - Preference for established licensee. 
    With respect to applications to operate city buses over a previously established route within the city, preference shall be given to any licensee having maintained a city bus service over a particular route in a satisfactory manner. 
(Code 1976, § 110.26) 
Sec. 10-414. - Intermunicipal bus exempt. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the operation of an intermunicipal bus under any license from the state. Intermunicipal buses shall not be allowed to carry passengers from place to place within the city without having obtained a license to operate a city bus. 
(Code 1976, § 110.27) 
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FERNWOOD CEMETERY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-31. - Continuation as established. 
    The city's Fernwood Cemetery is continued, as established. 
(Code 1976, § 91.01) 
Sec. 14-32. - Preservation. 
    This article is enacted for the preservation of Fernwood Cemetery, a municipally owned cemetery maintained by the city as part of its municipal functions. 
(Code 1976, § 91.30) 
Sec. 14-33. - Duties of city manager. 
(a)	The city manager is empowered, subject to the approval of the city commission, to make rules and regulations relating to action in and utilization of the city cemetery which are necessary for the effective administration of such rules and regulations, to protect the public property or to maintain the public welfare, peace, safety or health. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such rules or regulations. 
(b)	The city manager or his designee shall establish the grade of all lots, lawns and avenues within the city cemetery and shall generally direct all improvements within the grounds and upon all lots, before as well as after interments have been made. He will have charge of the planting, sodding, surveying and general improvements of the cemetery. 
(Code 1976, §§ 91.06, 91.31) 
Sec. 14-34. - Duties of sexton. 
    The sexton shall, under the direction of the city manager or his designee, have the general care and custody of the grounds of the city cemetery. All improvements and work done on the avenues, paths and grounds of the city cemetery shall be under his supervision and care. He shall engage and discharge all laborers and other employees on the cemetery grounds and order and arrange their respective duties. He shall keep such books and register and make such reports to the city manager or his designee and generally perform such duties as the city manager or his designee may require. 
(Code 1976, § 91.14) 
Sec. 14-35. - Observance of rules. 
(a)	Keys of the driveways of the cemetery shall be placed in the hands of the sexton and city clerk, who shall receive instructions from the city manager or his designee as to the use of such keys. All visitors shall be expected to respect the solemnity of the cemetery, and strictly observe the rules which have been established by the city manager or his designee for the purpose of securing quiet and good order at all times within the cemetery grounds. 
(b)	The sexton shall have the power to expel from the cemetery any person who is disturbing its sanctity by noisy, boisterous or other improper conduct. 
(Code 1976, §§ 91.15, 91.22) 
Sec. 14-36. - Notice of interment. 
    Whenever an interment is to be made in the city cemetery, timely notice must be given to the sexton of the cemetery grounds, and a permit must be obtained from the city clerk, specifying the name of the person to be interred, the size of the coffin and designating the number of the lot in which the grave is to be opened. 
(Code 1976, § 91.02) 
Sec. 14-37. - Record of interment. 
    In order for a proper record to be made of each burial within the grounds of the city cemetery, the person applying for an interment permit shall give the following information: 
(1)	Owner of the lot. 
(2)	Section. 
(3)	Number of the lot. 
(4)	Number of the grave. 
(5)	Place of birth of the person to be interred. 
(6)	Residence of the person to be interred. 
(7)	Age of the person to be interred. 
(8)	Date of death of the person to be interred. 
(9)	Date of burial of the person to be interred. 
(10)	Cause of death of the person to be interred. 
(11)	Place of death of the person to be interred. 
(12)	Parents or children of the person to be interred. 
(13)	Whether the person to be interred was single or married. 
(14)	Occupation of the person to be interred. 
(15)	Name of the sexton. 
(16)	Whether or not the person to be interred was removed from another cemetery. 
(Code 1976, § 91.03) 
Sec. 14-38. - Sale of lots. 
    A sale, transfer or assignment of the certificate of ownership for any lot within the city cemetery shall not be valid without the consent of the city manager or his designee, and such approval shall be endorsed on the conveyance. 
(Code 1976, § 91.04) 
Sec. 14-39. - Lot deeds. 
    A city cemetery lot shall not be regarded as sold, nor will any interment be permitted, until a contract or deed for such lot has been obtained. 
(Code 1976, § 91.05) 
Sec. 14-40. - Landmarks for boundaries; fences. 
    The landmarks indicating the boundaries of city cemetery lots shall be established by the city manager or his designee and shall not be altered or removed. No fences within the cemetery, either of wood, iron or brick, shall be permitted. 
(Code 1976, § 91.07) 
Sec. 14-41. - Monuments and headstones. 
    The proprietor of any city cemetery lot will be permitted to erect one or more monuments or headstones, provided the foundation is made of solid masonry and constructed in accordance with the specifications established by the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1976, § 91.08) 
Sec. 14-42. - Shrubs and trees. 
    Shrubs and trees shall be planted within the city cemetery in accordance with the general plan for the ornamentation of the cemetery grounds. Additional plantings by the proprietors of the lots will be permitted only if the city manager or his designee approves of the trees and shrubs proposed to be planted and designates the planting location. 
(Code 1976, § 91.09) 
Cross reference- Vegetation, ch. 62. 
Sec. 14-43. - Enclosures. 
    Hedges, wooden trellises, iron fences and posts and chains for the purpose of enclosure are prohibited in the city cemetery grounds. 
(Code 1976, § 91.11) 
Sec. 14-44. - Injurious trees. 
    If any tree or shrub standing on any city cemetery lot shall, by means of its roots, branches or otherwise, become detrimental, dangerous or inconvenient to adjacent lots or avenues, or for any other reason the removal of such tree or shrub shall be deemed necessary, the city manager or his designee shall have the right, and it shall be his duty, to cause the tree or shrub, or any part thereof, to be removed as in his judgment may seem best. 
(Code 1976, § 91.12) 
Sec. 14-45. - Vaults above ground. 
    Vaults above ground shall not be allowed without the architectural plans and full explanations of the location of such vaults being first submitted to and approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1976, § 91.13) 
Sec. 14-46. - Children. 
    Children shall not be admitted to the city cemetery unless they are attended by a person who will be responsible for their conduct. 
(Code 1976, § 91.16) 
Sec. 14-47. - Reckless driving. 
    No person on any part of the city cemetery shall drive in a reckless manner or at an excessive rate of speed or cause excessive noise while driving. 
(Code 1976, § 91.17) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 54. 
Sec. 14-48. - Persons prohibited. 
    Persons with possession of refreshments, firearms or dogs shall not be admitted to the grounds of the city cemetery. 
(Code 1976, § 91.18) 
Sec. 14-49. - Destroying property. 
    All persons shall be prohibited from plucking any flower, whether wild or cultivated, breaking or injuring any tree or shrub, or defacing any tree or landmark within the city cemetery. 
(Code 1976, § 91.19) 
Sec. 14-50. - Driving on lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over the lots or upon the lawns of the city cemetery under any pretense. 
(Code 1976, § 91.21) 
Secs. 14-51-14-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERPETUAL MAINTENANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Cemetery perpetual care, MCL 128.1. 

Sec. 14-71. - Deposit; cemetery maintenance fund. 
    Any person who desires to have cemetery lots in the city cemetery cared for perpetually may deposit with the city treasurer an amount set by the city commission, which amount shall be deposited and maintained in a fund separate and distinct from the other funds of the city and which shall be known as the cemetery maintenance fund. Depositors shall designate the particular cemetery lot to be cared for from the trust fund. 
(Code 1976, § 91.23) 
Sec. 14-72. - Receipt to depositor. 
    The city treasurer, under the corporate seal of the city, shall issue a receipt to the depositor desiring perpetual maintenance of a city cemetery lot for the amount deposited, upon which shall be noted the description of the lot requested to be cared for. The receipt shall be attested by the city clerk, and the amount deposited shall be recorded in the cemetery maintenance fund, together with a description of the lot to be maintained. The city treasurer and the surety on his bond shall be liable for the safe keeping of the fund deposited. 
(Code 1976, § 91.24) 
Sec. 14-73. - Investment of funds. 
    The city commission shall, at all times, be trustees of the cemetery maintenance fund and from time to time shall by resolution direct the investment of the principal, provided that the funds shall not be invested in other accounts than savings accounts guaranteed by the United States government or by a corporation created by the United States government or bonds of the United States, the state or the city, for which the full faith and credit of the city shall be pledged. 
(Code 1976, § 91.25) 
Sec. 14-74. - Separate accounts. 
    The city commission shall cause a separate account to be kept of each deposit to the cemetery maintenance fund and of the income from each deposit, which shall be accounted for in the annual city audit. 
(Code 1976, § 91.26) 
Sec. 14-75. - Allocation from earnings. 
    At the first meeting of the city commission in the month of May each year, the commission shall allocate the earnings from the cemetery maintenance fund to the maintenance of the respective lots in proportion to the respective amounts deposited for their respective maintenances, which allocation shall be recorded annually, provided that no allocation shall be made with respect to any deposits which have been made less than one year prior to such allocation. 
(Code 1976, § 91.27) 
Sec. 14-76. - Manner of expenditures. 
    The proportionate allocated income from deposits to the cemetery maintenance fund shall be expended annually for the care and maintenance of the respective lots for which deposit was made in such a manner as the city commission shall direct from time to time. 
(Code 1976, § 91.28) 
Sec. 14-77. - Contracts. 
    This division shall stand as a continuing contract between the city and its successors and all persons who shall make the required deposits to the cemetery maintenance fund. Any willful diversion or misappropriation of the funds deposited under the provisions of this article shall constitute a breach of trust and shall subject the offender to the penalties provided by state law. 
(Code 1976, § 91.29) 
Chapter 18 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Emergency Management Act, MCL 30.401 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Recovery of costs-Public safety or fire emergencies. 
(a)	Purpose. In order to protect the city from extraordinary expenses resulting from the use of city resources in response to certain public safety or fire emergency incidents, this section authorizes the imposition of charges to recover actual costs/or partial costs incurred by the city in responding to such incidents. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bomb threat means the verbal or written threat of a bomb or other explosive device which, if discharged as threatened, would violate a federal, state or local law. 
    Costs and expenses of response means reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city in making a response to a fire, rescue and bomb threat. This shall include the costs and expenses of hourly wages of personnel, costs and expense of materials and equipment, disposal costs, administrative costs and the costs and expenses of any special personnel and/or companies called to the scene to assist in the response. Hazardous material incidents are covered under section 18-2. 
    Fire incident means an actual fire incident or gas leak. The term "fire incident" does not include false alarms unless more than three false alarms are received within one year. 
    Illegal fire means a fire which is set, or determined to have been set, in violation of a federal, state or local law, and includes an arson fire and a fire set in violation of a no-burning ban or burning without a permit. Such term does not include an unintentional fire or a fire caused by an act of God, e.g., a lightning storm. 
    Rescue incident includes a fire truck and personnel being dispatched to a vehicle accident for the safety of the victims and emergency personnel, or threat of fire. 
(c)	Charge against liable person; collection of debt. The costs and expenses of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person responsible for the incident, or any owner, tenant, occupant or party in control of the real or personal property involved in the incident. 
(1)	Charges shall be a minimum of $250.00 for an emergency response up to $1,000.00 for an accidental fire. Charges shall be levied on a fourth false alarm within a one-year period. 
(2)	Charges for illegal fires or bomb threats shall be the actual charges, with a minimum charge of $250.00. 
(3)	The responsible party shall have an opportunity to meet with the city manager to request a modification of assessable costs. The responsible party shall request in writing such a meeting within ten calendar days of the date of invoice. 
(d)	Submission of bill. The city treasurer shall submit an itemized bill for the costs and expenses incurred for the emergency response by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as set forth in this section. 
(e)	Failure to pay. A person liable for the costs and expenses of an emergency response shall pay the bill submitted by the city treasurer as set forth in subsection (d) of this section within 30 days of receipt of the bill. The city attorney or his designee may commence civil suit on behalf of the city to recover the expenses, court costs and attorney fees for the collection of such debt. 
(Ord. No. 517, §§ 1-5, 3-23-1998) 
Sec. 18-2. - Same-Hazardous materials incidents. 
(a)	Purpose. In order to protect the city from extraordinary expenses resulting from the use of city resources in response to certain public safety or fire emergency incidents, this section authorizes the imposition of charges to recover actual costs incurred by the city in responding to such incidents. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Costs and expenses of response means the reasonable costs and expense incurred by the city in making a response to a hazardous materials fire, explosion, spill, leak, accident or related occurrence, including the costs and expenses of the hourly wages of personnel, costs and expenses of materials and equipment, disposal costs, administrative costs and the costs and expenses of any special personnel and/or companies called to the scene to assist in the response. 
    Hazardous materials means explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable gas, flammable compressed gas, nonflammable compressed gas, flammable liquid, combustible liquid, oxidizing material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid, irritation material, etiologic material, radioactive material, corrosive material or liquefied petroleum gas or other hazardous material as defined under the Fire Prevention Code (MCL 29.1 et seq.) and part III of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.11101 et seq.). 
    Hazardous materials incident means a fire, explosion, spill, leak, accident or related occurrence involving the transportation, storage, handling, sale, use or processing of hazardous materials by a firm, person or vehicle. 
(c)	Charge against person liable. The costs and expenses of a hazardous materials response shall be a charge against the person in possession of the hazardous material at the time of the incident. 
(d)	Submission of bill. The city treasurer shall submit an itemized bill of the costs and expenses incurred by a hazardous materials response by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses of such response as set forth in this section. 
(e)	Failure to pay. A person liable for the costs and expenses of a hazardous materials response shall pay the bill submitted by the city treasurer as set forth in subsection (d) of this section within 30 days of receipt of such bill. The city attorney or his designee may commence civil suit on behalf of the city to recover the expenses, court costs and attorney fees for the collection of the debt. 
(Ord. No. 516, §§ 1-5, 3-23-1998) 
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6; land development regulations, ch. 30; flood damage prevention, § 30-261 et seq.; zoning, § 30-471 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 58; vegetation, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public nuisances, MCL 600.3801 et seq.; nuisance abatement, MCL 600.2940. 

Sec. 22-31. - Statement of purpose. 
    The city has a valid interest in protecting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of its citizens. The interest in protecting the general welfare of the citizens includes an interest in protecting property values and promoting aesthetic considerations. 
(Code 1976, § 90.01(A)) 
Sec. 22-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance means whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends the public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, alley, public place, highway, navigable lake or stream; unreasonably lowers property values; offends the aesthetic sensibilities of the public; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property. Public nuisances shall include, but shall not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 90.01(B), (C)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-33. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, create or maintain any nuisance within the city. Each day a nuisance shall remain unabated shall be construed as a separate violation. 
(Code 1976, § 90.02) 
Sec. 22-34. - Abatement. 
    The city manager may, at his option, enforce the provisions of this article by one or more of the following methods: 
(1)	Prosecution. The city manager may prosecute the person committing, creating or maintaining a nuisance for a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(2)	Removal. The city manager may cause a nuisance to be abated immediately, provided the nuisance involves the public health and safety or injury to property. 
(3)	Notice. The city manager may give notice in the manner provided in section 2-2 to the person committing, creating or maintaining a nuisance to abate the nuisance within a reasonable length of time. 
(Code 1976, § 90.03) 
Sec. 22-35. - Abatement by city. 
    If the owner, possessor or occupier of any property within the city which is subject to an order of abatement of a public nuisance issued by the city commission or city manager shall fail or refuse to abate the nuisance within the length of time prescribed by the notice, the city manager shall abate the nuisance after the date prescribed in the notice of abatement. 
(Code 1976, § 90.04) 
Sec. 22-36. - Recovery of expense. 
    The cost of abatement of a public nuisance by the city may be collected by the city in an action of law from the owner, possessor or occupier of the property upon which the nuisance was committed, created or maintained. 
(Code 1976, § 90.05) 
Sec. 22-37. - Special assessment. 
    In all cases where the city shall incur any expense for improving a lot, place or premises, or for removing an unsafe building or structure, or for removing or abating any nuisance found upon any lot or premises, the city commission may, in addition to all other remedies provided for the recovery of such expense, charge such expense, or any part of such expense they deem proper, upon the lot or premises upon or because of which such expense was incurred, or from which the nuisance was removed or abated, and cause such expense to be assessed upon the lot or premises and collected as a special assessment. 
(Code 1976, § 90.06) 
Sec. 22-38. - Cesspools. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to construct, cause to be constructed or suffer with his consent to be constructed upon his own land or land under his control any cesspool or privy vault where the land, or any portion thereof, abuts upon any street in which a sanitary sewer is laid. The construction of such cesspool or privy vault is declared to be a public nuisance and may be dealt with as such. 
(Code 1976, § 90.08) 
Sec. 22-39. - Radio interference. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, use or operate any electrical wiring, machine, device, apparatus or instrument within the city, the operation of which shall cause unnecessary, unreasonable or preventable interference with radio reception, except as follows: 
(1)	Time. It shall not be unlawful to cause such radio interference between 12:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(2)	Wavelength. It shall not be unlawful to cause radio interference of wavelengths of more than 600 meters. 
(3)	Medical devices. It shall not be unlawful to operate violet ray machines, diathermal or any other electrical medical devices causing radio interference, provided such interference is reduced as much as is reasonably possible, and such device shall be used only when reasonably necessary and provided, further, that all such devices, so far as is reasonably possible, shall be equipped with filters, condensers, shields, grounds and other standard equipment which shall eliminate or reduce such interference to a minimum. 
(4)	X-ray machines. It shall not be unlawful to operate X-ray machines for the purpose of taking X-ray pictures, or to use such machines in a case of emergency whether or not such machines are equipped as provided in subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(b)	This section shall not be held or construed to embrace or cover the regulations of any transmitting, broadcasting or receiving instrument, apparatus or device used in interstate commerce, the operation of which instrument, apparatus or device is licensed or authorized by or under the provisions of federal law. 
(c)	The city, through its city manager and his duly authorized agents and servants, shall have the right to inspect all private wiring, devices, machines or apparatus connected with the wiring system of the city to determine whether or not any such private wiring or any apparatus, device or machine connected therewith is causing, or is capable of causing, unnecessary, unreasonable or preventable interference with radio reception. Refusal by the consumer of current furnished by the city to permit such inspection shall authorize the city manager to discontinue service to the consumer. 
(d)	If any officer, agent or employee of the city shall discover that the use, maintenance or operation of any electrical machine, device, apparatus or transmission system by a consumer of electrical current from the city is causing unnecessary, unreasonable or preventable interference with radio reception, he shall give notice in writing to the consumer to correct the unnecessary, unreasonable and/or preventable interference within a reasonable time, but not less than seven days, nor more than 15 days. 
(e)	If any consumer of electrical energy from the city shall maintain, use and operate any transmission system, device, apparatus or machine after the time limit for correction as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the city manager, through his duly authorized agents, shall be authorized to discontinue furnishing current to such consumer. 
(f)	If any unnecessary, unreasonable or preventable interference with radio reception shall be caused by any device, machine and/or apparatus which is not supplied with current from the transmission lines of the city and the operation of such device, machine and/or apparatus shall be a continuing nuisance, the city may also apply to the circuit court in chancery for a writ of injunction to abate the maintenance, use and operation of the device, machine and/or apparatus as a nuisance. 
(Code 1976, §§ 90.11-90.16) 
Secs. 22-40-22-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SAND PITS, GRAVEL PITS AND SIMILAR EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-71. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of the city commission to protect the public health and safety, and to preserve property values through the regulation and licensing of persons operating sand pits, gravel pits, clay pits and similar excavations within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 94.01) 
Sec. 22-72. - Right of entry. 
(a)	For the purposes of ascertaining violations of this article and conducting routine inspections, the right of entry onto any premises within the city where any clay, sand or gravel pit or hole, or other similar excavation exists during business hours and other times in which activity is evident is granted to the city manager, his authorized representatives and all law enforcement officers to conduct a reasonable inspection or investigation. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, prevent or refuse to permit any lawful inspection or investigation authorized in pursuance of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 94.08) 
Sec. 22-73. - Basic requirements for excavations, rules and regulations. 
    The city manager, as a condition of issuance of an excavation license, shall issue the license subject to the following basic requirements, and such other requirements as he shall deem necessary for the general health and safety of the residents of the city: 
(1)	Any portion of an excavation which is no longer being excavated shall be filled to a depth of not more than four feet below the surface of the undisturbed ground under it, and the banks to be graded to a pitch of not more than a one-foot drop to each four feet of surface, and the city manager may set standards for drainage from or around the excavation directly into a natural stream so as to eliminate overloading public drains, watercourses and storm sewers. 
(2)	Upon the abandonment of the operations in the excavation, the excavation shall be filled and the banks graded, as provided in subsection (1) of this section, and shall be drained so that no stagnant water stands in the excavation, and no bond of any permittee shall be released or discharged until the excavation is filled, graded and drained. 
(3)	All excavations shall be safely guarded by a sturdy fence not less than five feet in height, of a design approved by the city manager and of such construction and in such location as approved by the city manager. There shall be posted on such fence, not more than 100 feet apart, "NO TRESPASSING" signs warning of the dangers of such excavation. 
(4)	All stockpiles of material from the excavation, if any, shall be within the enclosure of the fence. 
(Code 1976, § 94.06) 
Secs. 22-74-22-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXCAVATION LICENSE 

Sec. 22-101. - Required; transferability. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate, or cause to be excavated, below the natural or established grade of the nearest street, alley, riverbank or public way or place adjacent thereto any clay, sand or gravel pit or hole, or other similar excavations, except as provided in and authorized by this article and without first having obtained a license from the city manager. Every separate excavation covered by the terms of this article shall require a separate license, and such license shall not be transferable from one excavation to another, and such license shall be required as long as the excavation remains. 
(Code 1976, § 94.02) 
Sec. 22-102. - Fee. 
    The annual license fee for owning, operating or maintaining a clay, sand or gravel pit or hole, or other similar excavation, shall be ten dollars. However, only one such license shall be required for each excavation. 
(Code 1976, § 94.03) 
Sec. 22-103. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to make, or having made, any excavation within the city shall make application to the city manager, which application shall contain full information regarding the proposed excavation, including the following: 
(1)	Date of application; 
(2)	Name and address of applicant; 
(3)	Location of the proposed excavation; 
(4)	Proposed depth, area and extent of such excavation, and the time of proposed excavation; 
(5)	Name and address of the owner of any fee or leasehold interest in the land; 
(6)	Manner of proposed excavating; 
(7)	Manner of storing, using and disposing of the materials excavated, including the refuse and unused materials excavated; 
(8)	Proposed safeguards for the protection of the public from dangers created by the excavation; 
(9)	Proposed use of the public streets, highways and alleys of the city in connection with the excavation; and 
(10)	Proposed drainage and discharge of water from the land, including surface water diverted from the land. 
(Code 1976, § 94.04) 
Sec. 22-104. - Bond required. 
    If an excavation license is authorized, no actual excavation or other operation shall commence or continue until the licensee shall file with the city clerk a bond in the amount set by the city manager, conditioned upon full compliance with the requirements set forth in this article and performance of the requirements of the city manager for the health, safety and general welfare of the city and the general public. The bond is to be executed by a corporate surety company, or be guaranteed by a first mortgage on real estate of the value double the amount of the bond. 
(Code 1976, § 94.05) 
Sec. 22-105. - Failure to maintaining excavations. 
    If any licensee under this article shall default on any of the requirements set forth in this article, or other persons shall maintain excavations in violation of the provisions of this article, the city may perform the obligations of the licensee at the expense of the licensee, and may collect costs thereof from the licensee and the surety on the bond in any court action as may be available to the city at that time. The city may assess the costs or any unpaid part thereof upon the lands of the licensee within the city, or the city may resort to an equitable action to compel performance of the obligations or to restrain violations of this article. The city may further act to rectify violations of this article by persons maintaining excavations within the city who have not complied with the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 94.07) 
Chapter 26 - HUMAN RIGHTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Civil rights, MCL 37.2101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Housing discrimination, MCL 37.2501 et seq. 

Sec. 26-31. - Policy. 
    It is declared to be the official policy of the city that all persons are entitled to obtain housing and other real estate without discrimination because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status, height, weight or familial status as prohibited by article 5 of the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act (MCL 37.2501 et seq.). 
(Code 1976, § 156.01) 
Sec. 26-32. - Incorporation of standards of conduct mandated by state law. 
    The city incorporates by reference the standards of conduct set forth in article 5 of the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act (MCL 37.2501 et seq.) with respect to persons engaged in activities relative to housing as set forth in such statute. 
(Code 1976, § 156.02) 
Sec. 26-33. - Complaints to be referred to the housing commission. 
    Any person within the city aggrieved by discrimination in obtaining housing because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, marital status, height, weight or familial status, as defined by article 5 of the Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act (MCL 37.2501 et seq.), may secure the city's assistance by contacting the housing commission. 
(Code 1976, § 156.03) 
Sec. 26-34. - Relief. 
    After a discrimination complaint is filed with the housing commission, the commission may informally attempt to resolve the dispute between the parties, or refer the matter to the city attorney or the appropriate state agency. 
(Code 1976, § 156.04) 
Sec. 26-35. - Remedies cumulative. 
    The remedy provided by this article is cumulative rather than exclusive and shall in no way diminish any citizen's right to seek redress in the courts or from any state or federal agency. 
(Code 1976, § 156.05) 
Chapter 30 - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Downtown development authority, § 2-271 et seq.; environment, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 58; vegetation, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 577, § 2, adopted May 11, 2009, amended art. II, §§ 30-31-30-42 in its entirety as set out herein. The former art. II, §§ 30-31-30-42 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 31.01-31.14; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007. 

Sec. 30-31. - Created. 
    There is created a commission, here in after referred to as the planning commission, pursuant to Public Act No. 33 of 2008 as amended (MCL 125.3801 et seq.) with the powers and duties as therein set forth and as here in after provided. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 30-32. - Membership. 
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, the planning commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval by a majority vote of the members elect of the city commission. The membership of the planning commission shall be representative of important segments of the community, such as economic, governments, educational and social development of the city in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the city. The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the city to the extent practicable. 
(b)	The term of each planning commission member shall be three years; terms shall be staggered so that as nearly as possible, the terms of one-third of all the planning commission members will expire each year. All members shall hold office until their successors are appointed and qualified. The city commission shall provide for the removal of a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(c)	Members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation. Vacancies occurring in office shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for an original appointment. 
(d)	An elected official of the city, the city manager or any other official or employee of the city shall not serve simultaneously as a member or employee of the planning commission; provided that one member of the planning commission may serve as a member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(e)	Members of the planning commission shall be qualified electors of the city, except that one member may be an individual who is not a qualified elector. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 30-33. - Officers; advisory committees; meetings. 
(a)	The planning commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson/secretary from its members and create and fill such other offices, as it considers advisable. The term of each officer shall be one year with opportunity for re-election as specified in the adopted bylaws. 
(b)	The planning commission may appoint advisory committee/s whose members are not members of the planning commission. 
(c)	The planning commission shall hold a regular meeting each month for which there is business to be conducted but shall hold at least four regular meetings each year. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 30-34. - Appointment of employees. 
    The planning commission may appoint such employees as it deems necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding employees of the city. The planning commission may also contract with city planners, engineers, architects, and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amount appropriated for such purpose by the city commission, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the planning commission's work. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 30-35. - Master plan; preparation. 
(a)	It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the city, including any area outside of its boundaries, which, in the planning commission's judgment, bears relation to the planning of the city. The master plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the planning commission's recommendations for the development of such territory, including, but not limited to, the general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds and open spaces; the general location of public buildings and other public property and the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes; the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals; the general location, character, layout and extent of community centers and neighborhood units; the general character, extent and layout of the replanning and redevelopment of blighted districts and slum areas; and the zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and the use of buildings and premises. As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, the planning commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part of the master plan, which part shall cover one or more major sections or divisions of the city or one or more of the matters set forth in this section or other functional matters to be included in the plan. The planning commission may from time to time amend, extend or add to the master plan; provided, that the planning commission at least every five years after adoption of a master plan shall review the master plan and determine whether to commence the procedure to amend the master plan or adopt a new master plan. 
(b)	Before preparing a master plan, the planning commission shall send notice to all the entities described in section 39 Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3839). A notice in the manner prescribed therein explaining that the planning commission intends to prepare such a plan and requesting the recipient's cooperation and comment. 
(c)	After preparing a proposed master plan, the planning commission shall submit the proposed plan to the city commission for review and comment. The process of adopting such plan shall not proceed further unless the city commission approves the distribution of the proposed plan. 
(d)	Once the city commission approves the distribution of the proposed plan, the planning commission shall submit the plan for review and comments to the entities identified in Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3801 et seq.), and in the manner provided therein. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 30-36. - Master plan; adoption. 
    A master plan may be adopted as a whole or by successive parts corresponding with major geographical areas of the city or with functional subject matter areas of the master plan. 
(1)	Before approving a proposed master plan, the planning commission shall hold not less than one public hearing on the plan, which hearing shall be held after the expiration of the deadline for comment under section 41(3) of Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3841). The planning commission shall give notice of the hearing not less than 15 days before the hearing and in the manner provided in section 43(1) of Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3843). 
(2)	The approval of the proposed master plan shall be by resolution of the planning commission upon the affirmative votes of not less than two-thirds of the members of the planning commission. The resolution shall be in the form required by section 43(2) of Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3843). Following approval the planning commission shall submit a copy of the master plan to the city commission. 
(3)	Approval of the proposed master plan by the planning commission is the final step for adoption of the master plan, unless the city commission by resolution has asserted the right to approve or reject the plan. In that case the procedure for final approval shall be as set forth in section 43 of Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3843). Upon final adoption of the master plan, the planning commission shall submit the adopted plan to the same entities to which copies of the proposed plan were required to be submitted. (Resolution 5/11/09) 
(4)	An extension, addition, revision, or other amendment to a master plan shall be adopted by following the procedure under sections 39, 41 and 43 of Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3839, 125.3841 and 125.3843) subject to the further provisions of section 45(1) of Public Act No. 22 of 2008 (MCL 125.3845). 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 30-37. - Subplan; adoption. 
    The planning commission may, by a majority vote of the members, adopt a sub plan for a geographic area less than the entire city if because of the unique physical characteristics of that area more intensive planning is necessary for the purposes set forth in section 7 of Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCL 125.3807. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 30-38. - Construction of certain projects; rescission. 
(a)	A street; square, park, playground, public way, ground, or other open space; or public building or other structure shall not be constructed unless the location, character, and extent have been submitted to the planning commission by the city commission and has been approved by the planning commission. If the planning commission disapproves the body having jurisdiction may overrule the planning commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. If the planning commission fails to act within 35 days after submission of the proposal to the planning commission, the project shall be considered to be approved by the planning commission. 
(b)	For the purpose of furthering the desirable future development of the city under the master plan, the planning commission, after the planning commission may have adopted a master plan, may prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of public structures and improvements. The planning commission may annually prepare such a program for the general order of their priority, which, in the planning commission's judgment, will be needed or desirable and can be undertaken within the six-year period. The comprehensive coordinated programs shall be based upon the requirements of the city for all types of public improvements, and, to that end, each agency or department of the city concerned with such improvements shall upon request furnish the planning commission with lists, plans and estimates of the time and cost of public structures and improvements within the purview of such department. 
(c)	If the opening, widening, or extension of a street, or the acquisition or enlargement of any square, park, playground, or other open space has been approved by the planning commission and authorized by the city commission as provided under section (a) above, the city commission shall not rescind its authorization unless the matter has been resubmitted to the planning commission and the rescission has been approved by the planning commission. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the matter. The planning commission shall submit its reasons for approval or disapproval of the rescission to the legislative body. If the planning commission disapproves the rescission, the legislative body may overrule the planning commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. If the planning commission fails to act within 63 days after submission of the proposed rescission to the planning commission, the proposed rescission shall be considered for approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 30-39. - Capital improvements program. 
    The planning commission is hereby exempted from the responsibility of annually preparing a capital improvements program of public structures and improvements. However, the planning commission may recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. Further, each agency or department of the city with authority for public structures or improvements shall upon request furnish the planning commission with lists, plans and estimates of time and cost of those public structures and improvements. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Sec. 30-40. - Annual report; budget. 
(a)	The planning commission shall make an annual report to the city commission concerning its operations and the status of planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the city commission related to planning and development. After preparing this annual report, the planning commission may submit a detailed budget to the city commission for approval or disapproval. 
(b)	The planning commission may accept gifts for the exercise of its functions. 
(c)	To promote public interest in and understanding of the master plan, the planning commission may publish and distribute copies of the master plan, or of any report, and employ other means of publicity and education. 
(d)	The planning commission may adopt bylaws relative to authorizing travel expenses for its members and employees when in attendance at conferences, workshops, educational and training programs and meetings in the performance of activities authorized by the city commission. 
(e)	In general, the planning commission has such lawful powers as may be necessary to enable it to promote local planning and otherwise carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Secs. 30-41-30-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING NUMBERING 

Sec. 30-71. - Street numbers required. 
    The owner of each residence, store, office, factory or other building where business is carried on within the platted subdivisions of the city set forth in this article shall provide and place upon the front of the building the proper number of such building as prescribed in such a manner that such number shall be plainly visible from the abutting street. 
(Code 1976, § 97.01) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
Sec. 30-72. - Original plat numbering. 
    In the original plat of the city, in the first addition to the city, the Central Avenue Addition to the city and the South Shore Addition to the city, beginning at First Street and running in a westerly direction on all streets in the subdivisions, the number "1" shall be allotted to the first 28 feet of frontage on the south side of the streets in each block, the number "2" shall be allotted to the first 28 feet of frontage on the north side and the consecutive odd and even numbers to each following 28 feet of frontage on the south and north sides, respectively. To each of the numbers allotted shall be added the number 100 of the street immediately to the east of the block plus 100. To the name of all streets running north of Delta Avenue shall be prefixed the word "North," and to the name of all streets running south from Delta Avenue shall be prefixed the word "South." On all of north and south streets one number shall be allotted to each 28 feet of frontage, except where lots fronting on such streets are less than 28 feet in width; then, in such case, one number shall be given to each lot. Running north and south from Delta Avenue the number "1" shall be the first number in each block on the east side, the number "2" shall be given to the first number in each block on the west side; then, the consecutive odd and even numbers shall be allotted on the east and west side, respectively. From Superior and Minnesota Streets, 100 shall be added for each additional block. 
(Code 1976, § 97.02) 
Sec. 30-73. - South Gladstone numbering. 
    In the part of the South Gladstone Addition to the city lying south and east of the bluff, commencing at Avenue A and running northeasterly, the number "1" shall be allotted to the first 25 feet of frontage on the east side of streets, the number "2" shall be allotted to the first 25 feet of frontage on the west side of streets and the consecutive odd and even numbers on the east and west side of the streets, respectively. Commencing one block northeasterly from Avenue A, 100 shall be added to the numbering at the beginning of each block. All streets north of Blackwell Avenue shall have the word "North" prefixed to their names. Beginning at Blackwell Avenue and running north and south from such avenue, the number "1" shall be allotted to the first 25 feet of frontage on the east side of the street, the number "2" shall be allotted to the first 25 feet of frontage on the west side of the street and the consecutive odd and even numbers on the east and west sides of streets, respectively. Commencing in the second block south of Blackwell Avenue, 100 shall be added to the numbering for each additional block south of Blackwell Avenue. 
(Code 1976, § 97.04) 
Sec. 30-74. - Buckeye, Marble and Goodman numbering. 
    In the Buckeye, Marble and Goodman Additions to the city, 100 shall be allotted to each 28 feet of frontage, except where the width of the lots fronting on any street are less than 28 feet in width; then, in such case, one number shall be given to each lot. Commencing with the north side of Third Avenue and the southern boundary of the additions and running north, the number "551" shall be allotted to the first 25 feet of frontage on the east side of the street, the number "552" shall be allotted to the first 25 feet of frontage on the west side of streets and the consecutive odd and even numbers following on the east and west sides of streets, respectively. Beginning with the north side of Fourth Avenue and running north, the numbering shall begin with "601" on the east and "602" on the west sides of streets, respectively, and 100 shall be added to the numbering for each block north of thereof. To the property fronting on North Ninth Street south of Third Avenue, the number "549" shall be allotted to the first 28 feet of frontage on the east side and the consecutive odd numbers below such number to each additional 23 feet of frontage south of Third Avenue. Commencing at North Ninth Street, all streets running east from North Ninth Street shall have the word "East" prefixed to their names, and all streets running west from North Ninth Street shall have the word "West" prefixed to their names. Beginning with North Ninth Street and running east and west from such street, the number "1" shall be allotted to the first 28 feet of frontage on the south side, the number "2" shall be allotted to the first 28 feet of frontage on the north side of each block and the consecutive odd and even number on the south and north side of the streets, respectively, and 100 shall be added to the numbering at the beginning of each block east and west of North Ninth Street, respectively. 
(Code 1976, § 97.05) 
Sec. 30-75. - Numbers on main entrances. 
    The number to be allotted to any building shall be ascertained from the position of the building's main entrance, and it shall be necessary to place only one number on each building, except in case of a building which has several main entrances, in which case, the proper number shall be placed on each main entrance. 
(Code 1976, § 97.06) 
Sec. 30-76. - Failure to display street number. 
    If the owner of any building set forth in section 30-71 shall fail or neglect to place its proper number upon the building for 30 days after the building has been constructed, it shall be the duty of the city manager, or such other person as the city commission may appoint, to provide such number and place it upon the building, doing no unnecessary damage, and to report the cost of such placement to the city commission, and a record of such placement and cost shall be kept in the office of the city clerk, who shall collect such amount from the owner of the building, together with a penalty of $0.25 for each number placed upon the building. 
(Code 1976, § 97.07) 
Sec. 30-77. - Removal of building numbers. 
    Any person who shall maliciously deface or remove any number placed upon a building within the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not apply to owners, their agents or employees who may remove numbers temporarily for the purpose of making necessary repairs to the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 97.99) 
Secs. 30-78-30-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-111. - Special permit required. 
    Before a building shall be moved over any public streets, alleys or grounds in the city, application shall be made by a licensed house mover to the city manager, stating the size of the building proposed to be moved and the desired route over which such building is to be moved. No building shall be moved until the city manager shall have approved such move, and designated in a special permit the route and time during which the moving operations shall be conducted. If the city manager refuses to approve the special permit, an appeal of such refusal may be made to the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 110.94) 
Sec. 30-112. - Payment of damages. 
    Within ten days after a building has been moved, the house mover shall pay to the city treasurer all costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the moving of wires, poles or other parts of the city's power line and lighting equipment, and all other damages, if any, for injuries done to any pavement, gravel or macadam streets, curbing or sidewalks by the moving operation. 
(Code 1976, § 110.95) 
Sec. 30-113. - Safety requirements. 
    Each house mover is required, during moving operations, to carefully guard such operation by keeping children far enough away from the operation so as not to be in danger; using all due care and caution to keep the streets, alleys or other public grounds safe during the operation; keeping lighted red warning lights upon the building from sundown until sunrise the following day; and moving the building promptly and within the time limited by the special permit. Any delay in moving for each day, or part thereof, shall constitute a separate offense under this article, unless the special permit has been extended in writing by the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 110.96) 
Secs. 30-114-30-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 30-131. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to move a house, garage, shed, mercantile building or any other building upon or across any public street, alley or other public grounds in the city unless such person shall have first obtained a license from the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 110.90) 
Sec. 30-132. - Application, bond and deposit. 
    Any person desiring to move a house, garage, shed, mercantile building or any other building within the city, on behalf of himself or for another person, shall make application to the city clerk for a license as a house mover. The application shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in the amount established by resolution and by a bond running to the city in the amount established by resolution, conditioned that he will save harmless and indemnify the city against any expense and damage that the city may sustain by reason of such operation. 
(Code 1976, § 110.91) 
Sec. 30-133. - Liability of mover. 
    Each house mover, as a condition of obtaining a license, shall be liable for any damage occasioned by his operations in any street, alley or other public place to any property or person within the city, and shall save the city harmless from all claims, demands, causes of action or suits arising in regard to such move, and as a condition to obtaining a license, shall satisfy the city manager that he is insured or indemnified by a surety company licensed to do business in the state in the sum of $5,000.00 against such contingencies; provided, if any such bond or policy shall expire before May 1 next ensuing, the license shall be limited to the term of the policy. Thereafter, if another policy shall be presented for the remainder of the current year, the license shall be extended until the next ensuing May 1 without any additional license fees. 
(Code 1976, § 110.92) 
Sec. 30-134. - Issuance. 
    Upon the approval by the city manager of the bonds or insurance as provided in sections 30-132 and 30-133, the city clerk shall issue licenses for house moving for the then ensuing year ending on the following May 1, under the same conditions as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 110.93) 
Secs. 30-135-30-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION AND OTHER TECHNICAL CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-171. - Enforcement of state construction code. 
    In accordance with Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), the city building official is designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under such act. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of such act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 1, 9-24-2001) 
State Law reference- Local enforcement of state construction code, MCL 125.1508b. 
Sec. 30-172. - Building permits; fees 
(a)	The city building official is responsible for issuing building permits for any work to be done on a building or structure, for which work a building permit is required under the provisions of the state construction code which is adopted by reference into this City Code. 
(b)	Fees for building permits shall be as established by resolution of the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 577, § 2, adopted May 11, 2009, amended § 30-172 in its entirety and enacted a new § 30-172 as set out herein. The former § 30-172 pertained to fees. 
Sec. 30-173. - License to install. 
    Except as permitted by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to install any electrical wiring, device, appliance or apparatus for the generation, distribution and utilization of electrical energy within or on any premises within the city without being duly licensed under the provisions of state law. 
(Code 1976, §§ 51.07, 51.08) 
State Law reference- Licensing and regulation of electricians, MCL 338.881 et seq. 
Sec. 30-174. - Use of city utilities required; conditions. 
(a)	Any improvements to real property located within the corporation limits of the city, which requires the issuance of a building permit, which improvements involve the initial installation of new service, or improvements to a water system, shall utilize city water and sanitary sewer services for said improvements. 
(b)	The requirement of subsection (a) shall not apply to improvements to existing principal residences, commercial or industrial buildings, or accessory building. 
(c)	Any property owners seeking to make such improvements may appeal to the planning commission for a waiver of this requirement if adherence to the subsection will cause an undue financial burden to the property owner. 
(d)	The planning commission is hereby authorized to recommend waiver of the requirement to the city commission, to subsection (a), upon application and showing by a property owner that adherence to the subsection will constitute an undue financial burden in the development and improvement of their real property. 
(e)	The city commission has final approval on any/or all waivers of this requirement after recommendation by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 532, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2000; Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Secs. 30-175-30-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- State fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-201. - Adopted; enforcement. 
(a)	The International Fire Code, 2000 edition, is adopted by reference. 
(b)	This fire code shall be enforced by the director of the public safety department. 
(Code 1976, § 93.01) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 30-202. - Storage of explosives and flammable liquids. 
    Limits of districts within the city in which the storage of explosives and blasting agents, storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks, and the bulk storage of liquified petroleum gases are established. Such district limits shall be as determined by the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 93.02) 
Sec. 30-203. - Modifications. 
    The director of the public safety department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire code adopted in section 30-201 upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of the modifications, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the director of the public safety department on such modifications shall be entered upon the records of the public safety department, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Code 1976, § 93.03) 
Sec. 30-204. - Appeals. 
(a)	The planning commission shall sit as a board of appeals and consider each appeal under this division, and shall render its decision on any appeal in writing. 
(b)	In making a decision on an appeal, the planning commission shall first consider the safety of the proposed change, the hardship to the individual, the need for uniformity and the good of the public. 
(c)	Whenever the director of the public safety department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the fire code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the director of the public safety department to the planning commission within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. All such appeals shall be in writing. 
(Code 1976, § 93.04) 
Secs. 30-205-30-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 30-231. - Adopted. 
    The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, 1996 edition, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 1, 6-14-1999) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 30-232. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
    The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised as follows: 
Section PM-101.1 Title. These regulations shall be know as the "Property Maintenance Code of the City of Gladstone" and shall be referred to in this division as "this code." 
Section PM-101.8 Inspection fees. The fees for inspection or a reinspection shall be set by the city commission by resolution. The fee shall be paid by the owner within ten days of notification of compliance. 
Section PM-105.1. Every multiple dwelling or leased dwelling unit shall be inspected at least every two years. The code official is also empowered to make similar inspections of all dwellings as frequently as may be necessary or convenient. 
Section PM-105.9 Exception. An official or employee connected with the administration and enforcement of city funded rehabilitation projects can engage in assisting the property owner with bid specifications, material specifications and the awarding of city funded rehabilitation contracts. 
Section PM-106.2. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
Section PM-107.3 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner personally; or (b) sent by first class mail addressed to the owner at the last known address; or (c) a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner. 
Section PM-111.1 Application for appeal. Any person affected by a decision of the code official or a notice of order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the board of appeals. The petition requesting a hearing shall be in writing, and shall specify the name, address and telephone number of the petitioner, and a brief statement of the grounds for appeal, and shall be accompanied by an appeal fee in the amount established by resolution. Such petition shall be filed within ten days after the day the notice and order are served. Upon receipt of such a petition, the building official shall set a time for a hearing before the board, and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. 
Section PM-111.2 Members of the board. The board of appeals shall consist of five members of the city appointed by the mayor for the city with the advice of the city commission. The city commission shall act as the board of appeals in the absence of a board of appeals. 
Section PM-111.2.1. Deleted. 
Section PM-111.2.2. Deleted. 
Section PM-111.2.6. Deleted. 
Section PM-111.3. The board of appeals shall meet upon notice from the chairman, or at stated periodic meetings. 
Section PM-111.4.1. Deleted. 
Section PM-111.5. Deleted. 
Section PM-111.6 Board decision. The board of appeals shall sustain, modify or reverse the decision of the code official by a concurring vote of a majority. 
Section PM-111.7 Court review. All applications for writs of certiorari to correct errors of law shall comply with section 111.1. 
Section PM-301.2.1 Registration. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of rental property located within the city to register all rental property, owned or controlled, with the property maintenance code official. Failure to register constitutes a violation of this code. New owners are required to register within seven days after obtaining legal possession of the property. When a property has been owner-occupied and becomes vacant and intended to be used as rental property it must be registered within seven days. Whenever there are changes in the information that was submitted on the registration, the property maintenance code official must be notified of the changes within seven days, such as, but not limited to, change of ownership, whether or not it will be occupied, or change of manager or operator. Registration forms are available through the office of the property maintenance code official. The registration fee shall be set by the city commission. 
Section PM-302.1. 
Fence: a barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion or to mark a boundary. 
Hedge: a fence of boundary formed by a dense row of shrubs or low trees. 
Section PM-303.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of six inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
Section PM-303.5 Birds, rodents and skunk harborage. All structures shall be kept free from bird, rodent and skunk infestation. Where birds, rodents and skunks are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
Section PM-303.7 Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating materials such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
Section PM-303.7.1 Fences and hedges. No person shall construct or cause to be constructed any fence or hedge upon any property within the city without first having obtained a permit therefore in the manner hereinafter provided. Any person desiring to build or to cause to be built a fence, or grow a hedge or cause to be grown a hedge upon property in the city shall first apply to the building inspector or the code official for a permit. Such application shall contain any and all information required by the inspector necessary for the determination of whether the erection of such fence or growing of such hedge will violate any ordinance of this city or law of this state. Fences and hedges created in the front yard area shall not exceed four feet in height. The front yard area shall consist of the open area on the street side of a building, including the area from the street to the building then to a line from the building to the lot line on either side. Corner lots shall be considered from the street on both sides of the property. Fences and hedges erected on side and rear yards shall not exceed six feet in height. Side and rear yards shall include all of the remainder of the property not described as front yard area. 
Material used for the construction of fences shall be approved by the building inspector and shall consist of wood, such as cedar, redwood or pressure-treated wood, metal, and plastic or other approved fencing material. Preconstructed components such as pallets, etc., shall not be used as fencing material. Barbed wire and all of the other restricted fencing material mentioned in section 30-582 shall not be used in the city. 
Section PM-303.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no unregistered or inoperable motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. 
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes. 
Section PM-304.12 Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating materials such as paint or similar surface treatment. All firewood shall be neatly stacked so that it does not create a safety hazard. Such stacked wood shall not exceed six feet in height. For purposes of this section, stacked wood shall be considered an accessory structure for open space and ground cover purposes. 
Section PM-304.15 Insect screens. During the period from June 1 to November 1, every door, window and other outside opening utilized or required for ventilation purposes serving any structure containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch, and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
Section PM-304.4.1 Yards. Yards will be covered with grass or ground cover, with no bare spots, including dog runs. Grass or ground cover must be planted or installed no more than 30 days after final inspection for new construction. If the final inspection occurs during winter months, it shall be done at the earliest possible date in the spring. The grasses will be neatly cut and trimmed at all times. All vines, bushes and shrubs will be trimmed so as not to extend over sidewalk or alley areas; all trash and debris will be removed and properly disposed of. There will be no indoor furniture stored or used in the yard. All dog feces will be removed daily. Fallen tree limbs and dead trees will be removed. It is a violation of this code to keep any refuse or waste on any property. The term "refuse and waste" means any rubbish, refuse, trash or debris of any kind, including without limitation: rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil, building materials, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal or other pieces of metal, trimmings from plants or trees, cans, bottles or barrels. 
Exception: A dog run area totally enclosed with fencing material and designed and used specifically for that purpose, such as a kennel. 
Section PM-306.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
Section PM-307.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect, bird, rodent and skunk infestation. All structures in which insects, birds, rodents and skunks are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
Section PM-405.3 Area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by two or fewer occupants shall contain at least 90 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than two persons shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 ml) of additional floor area for each occupant thereof. 
Section PM-602.2 Residential buildings. Every dwelling shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit (22 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the outside design temperature required for the locality by the mechanical code listed in chapter 8. 
Section PM-602.2.1 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitory or guest rooms on terms, either express or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply sufficient heat during the period from October 31 to May 31 to maintain the room temperatures specified in section 602.2 during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and not less than 60 degrees Fahrenheit (16 degrees Celsius) during other hours. 
Section PM-602.3 Nonresidential structures. Every enclosed occupied work space shall be supplied with sufficient heat during the period from October 31 to May 31 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) during all working hours. 
Exceptions: 
1.	Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.	Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
Section PM-605.1 Installation. A person shall not alter, maintain, service or repair or cause to permit the installation, altering, maintaining, servicing or repairing of electrical equipment in or on any building, structure, or part thereof, or on any premises, if by the person's actions, the work does not conform with state standards. Every owner or operator shall be responsible for identifying all circuits in each electrical circuit panel. 
Section PM-605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded type receptacle. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. All 125 volt, single phase, 15 and 20 ampere receptacles installed within six feet of any water supply fixtures shall have ground fault interrupt protection. 
Section PM-605.3 Lighting fixtures. At least one wall switch controlled lighting fixture shall be installed in every habitable room, in bathrooms, hallways, stairways, attached garages and detached garages with electric power, and at outdoor entrances or exits. Receptacle outlets controlled by a wall switch in lieu of ceiling light fixture are acceptable in living rooms, bedrooms and dining rooms. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 3, 6-14-1999; Ord. No. 530, § 1, 1-24-2000) 
Secs. 30-233-30-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 58. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-261. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1976, § 153.01) 
Sec. 30-262. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in property, health and safety hazards, loss of life, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	Such flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
(Code 1976, § 153.02) 
Sec. 30-263. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health; 
(2)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas prone to flood in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)	Ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1976, § 153.03) 
Sec. 30-264. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building inspector's interpretation of any provisions of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and the construction of streets, is completed before October 15, 1977. 
    Expansion to an existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the mobile homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads or the construction of streets. 
    Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)	Overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood hazard boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Habitable floor means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not an habitable floor. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. 
    Mobile home means a structure which is transportable in one or more sections and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. Such term does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after October 15, 1977. 
    New mobile home park or mobile home subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more mobile home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the mobile home is to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and the construction of streets, is completed on or after October 15, 1977. 
    Start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure, other than a mobile home, on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure, other than a mobile home, without a basement or poured footings, the term "start of construction" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure, or any part thereof, on its piling or foundation. For mobile homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, the term "start of construction" means the affixing of the mobile home to its permanent site. For mobile homes within mobile home parks or mobile home subdivisions, the term "start of construction" means the date on which the construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads and installation of utilities, is completed. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, as well as a mobile home. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term does not, however, include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
(Code 1976, § 153.04) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-265. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 153.10) 
Sec. 30-266. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land within the city shall be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 153.13) 
Sec. 30-267. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration through a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Gladstone," dated July 8, 1976, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps and any revisions thereto are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The principal map to follow would be the curvilinear line map rather than the blocking map. 
(Code 1976, § 153.11) 
Sec. 30-268. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1976, § 153.14) 
Sec. 30-269. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the city commission; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 153.15) 
Sec. 30-270. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, or by any officer or employee of the city, for any flood damage that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 153.16) 
Secs. 30-271-30-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 30-291. - Building inspector. 
(a)	The building inspector, or such person appointed by the city manager, is appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Duties of the building inspector shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review permits for proposed development to assure that all permits have been obtained from the federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
(3)	Notify adjacent communities and the department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(4)	Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)	Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures. 
(6)	Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed. 
(7)	Obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect when floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure. 
(8)	Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section. 
(9)	Obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article when base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 30-267. 
(10)	Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this article in the office of the building inspector and such records shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1976, §§ 153.20, 153.21) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 30-292. - Development permit. 
(a)	A development permit shall be required within the city in conformance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)	Application for a development permit shall be made to the building inspector on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill and storage of materials, drainage facilities and their location. Specifically, the following information shall be required: 
(1)	Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all structures. 
(2)	Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential structure has been floodproofed. 
(3)	A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect stating that the nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria set forth in section 30-312(2). 
(4)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Code 1976, §§ 153.12, 153.22) 
Sec. 30-293. - Variances. 
(a)	The zoning appeal board, as established by the city, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)	The zoning appeal board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(d)	In passing upon such applications, the zoning appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article and: 
(1)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the city; 
(5)	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)	The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters, and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(e)	Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided the provisions set forth in subsections (d)(1)-(11) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance shall increase. 
(f)	Upon consideration of the factors listed in subsection (e) of this section and the purposes of this article, the zoning appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this article. 
(g)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)	Conditions for variances shall be as follows: 
(1)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)	Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
a.	Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.	Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation one foot below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The building inspector shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration, upon request. 
(Code 1976, § 153.23) 
Secs. 30-294-30-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 30-311. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions shall be required: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(5)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(6)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1976, § 153.25) 
Sec. 30-312. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 30-267 or 30-291, the following shall be required: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 30-292(b)(3). 
(3)	Mobile homes. 
a.	All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall include the following: 
1.	Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, and mobile homes less than 50 feet long shall require one additional tie per side; 
2.	Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the mobile home, with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, and mobile homes less than 50 feet long shall require four additional ties per side; 
3.	All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and 
4.	Any additions to the mobile home shall be similarly anchored. 
b.	New mobile home parks and subdivisions; expansions to existing mobile home parks and subdivisions; existing mobile home parks and subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement has commenced; and mobile homes not placed in a mobile home park or subdivision shall require the following: 
1.	Stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level; 
2.	Adequate drainage and access for a hauler shall be provided; and 
3.	In the instance of elevation on pilings: 
i.	Lots shall be large enough to permit steps; 
ii.	Piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and 
iii.	Reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six feet above the ground level. 
(Code 1976, § 153.26) 
Sec. 30-313. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(Code 1976, § 153.27) 
Secs. 30-314-30-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat saved from repeal, § 1-5(12); streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 58; vegetation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-341. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Access point means the point at which the road system within a proposed subdivision intersects with an existing public road, typically a county primary road. 
    Alley means a service way providing a secondary means of public access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(2). 
    As-built plan means a revised construction plan in accordance with all approved field changes. 
    Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets or roads, other than alleys, and/or the exterior boundary of the subdivision. 
    Bufferyard means a strip of land, including any specified type and amount of plantings or structures which may be required to protect one type of land use from another or minimize or eliminate conflicts between them. 
    Caption means the name by which a plat is legally and commonly known. 
    Conservation subdivision means a residential development in which a significant portion of the site is set aside as undivided, permanently protected open space with dwellings clustered on the remainder of the site. the open space consists of natural features such as woodlands, meadows, wetlands, community gardens or farmland. 
    County plat board means the Delta County Plat Board which is made up of the chairperson of the Delta County Board of Commissioners, who serves as chairperson, the county clerk, who acts as secretary, and the county treasurer. 
    Cul-de-sac means a turnaround at the end of a dead-end street which is typically circular. 
    Cul-de-sac street means a street with a single common ingress and egress and with a turnaround at the end of the street. 
    Dedication means the intentional appropriation of land to public use by the owner of such land. 
    Department heads means the heads of the water, wastewater, electric, public works, public safety and parks and recreation departments of the city. 
    Engineer means a civil engineer who is a professional engineer licensed under article 20 of the occupational code (MCL 339.2001 et seq.). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(w). 
    Greenbelt means an open area, which may be cultivated or maintained in a natural state, surrounding a development or used as a buffer between land uses or to mark the edge of an urban or developed area. 
    Improvement means any structure incidental to furnishing or servicing facilities for a subdivision, including, but not limited to, streets and roads, sidewalks, streetlights, signs, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, manholes, hydrants, culverts, utility lines, etc. 
    Local street means any street that is currently designated as a local street, or any street that will be designed and built with the intent that it will be designated as a local street by the state department of transportation. 
    Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot depth means the average distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot that fronts upon two parallel streets or that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. 
    Lot line means a line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front setback line. 
    Major street means any street that is currently designated as a major street, or any street that will be designed and built with the intent that it will be designated as a major street by the state department of transportation. 
    Outlawn means the portion of the right-of-way between the property lines and the improved roadways. 
    Outlot means a lot included within the boundary of a recorded plat that is set aside for purposes other than a development site, park or other land dedicated to public use or reserved for private use. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(n). 
    Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land that can be described as provided for in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(g). 
    Parkway means any residential, low speed street that utilizes a divided roadbed. 
    Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(a). 
    Plat, final, means a drawing in accordance with section 30-374 which depicts the layout, etc., of a subdivision that has received tentative and final approval of a preliminary plat and which depicts the public improvements that have been or will be constructed in accordance with division 3 of this article. 
    Plat, preliminary, means a drawing in accordance with section 30-372 that contains detailed information regarding the layout, use, public improvements, etc., for a proposed subdivision. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(c). 
    Plat, pre-preliminary, means a drawing in accordance with section 30-371 that shows the general layout of a proposed subdivision. 
    Proprietor means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination thereof which may hold any recorded or unrecorded ownership interest in land. The proprietor is also commonly referred to as the owner, developer or subdivider. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(o). 
    Public sewer means a sewerage system as defined in the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, § 4101 (MCL 324.4101). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(bb). 
    Public utility means all persons, firms, corporations, copartnerships or municipal or other public authorities providing gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, cable television, sewer or other services of a similar nature. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(s). 
    Public water means a system of pipes and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes, cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used, or intended for use, for the purpose of furnishing water to the public for household or drinking purposes. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(cc). 
    Reserve strip means a strip of land, typically at the boundary of a subdivision, which is retained by a proprietor in order to control future access. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land dedicated for use as a road, street, alley, railroad, sidewalk, walkway, utility corridor or other public purpose. 
    Road, private, means a road serving more than one residential, commercial or industrial establishment and which is not part of the city road system. 
    Road, street and roadway mean any vehicular way which is: 
(1)	An existing state, county or municipal roadway; 
(2)	Shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law; 
(3)	Approved by other official action; or 
(4)	Shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board of the power to review plats; 
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved. 
    State trunkline means a highway maintained as part of the state highway system and designated as either a state highway (e.g., M-35) or a federal highway (e.g., U.S. 2). 
    Street plan means the master plan of highways, major and local streets and parkways adopted by the city planning commission. 
    Street, stub, means a right-of-way constructed street which extends to the boundary of a subdivision but does not connect to other subdivisions or to existing roads. The purpose of a stub street is to provide for access between subdivisions as adjacent parcels are developed. 
    Subdivide and subdivision mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres, or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements of this article by sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.108, 560.109). Such terms do not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of state law or this article. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(f). 
    Surveyor means a professional surveyor who is licensed under article 320 of the occupational code (MCL 339.2001 et seq.). 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.101(v). 
    Topographical map means a map showing existing physical characteristics, with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit the determination of proposed grades and drainage. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(dd). 
    Tract means two or more parcels of land that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(h). 
    Traffic study means a study of the impacts of proposed new development, based on the level of development, the type, number and location of roads proposed for construction, etc., and prepared in accordance with the standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
    Used and occupied include the words "intended," "designed" or "arranged" to be used or occupied. 
(Ord. No. 536, §§ 2.1, 2.2, 2-26-2001; Ord. No. 562, § 2, 11-27-2006) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-342. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the subdivision of land within the city in order to promote the safety, public health and general welfare of the city. The regulations set forth in this article are specifically designed to: 
(1)	Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of the city consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and other local plans and policies. 
(2)	Secure adequate traffic circulation and safety through adequately designed and coordinated street systems with proper relationship to existing roads, streets, driveways, major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public facilities. 
(3)	Achieve the maximum utility and livability of individual property owners. 
(4)	Ensure adequate provisions for water, sewage disposal, drainage and other health requirements. 
(5)	Provide for adequate recreational areas, open space, educational facilities, lighting, pedestrian access and other amenities. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1.1, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 30-343. - Compliance. 
    Each landowner, tenant, proprietor, contractor, public official or any other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains a violation of this article shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 6.1, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 30-344. - Scope. 
    This article shall not apply to any lot forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to March 14, 2001, except for the further dividing of lots, provided that such lot and subdivision was created in compliance with the ordinances and regulations in effect at the time the subdivision was created and recorded; nor is it intended by this article to appeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances or regulations, or with private agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by such existing provision of any other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1.3, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 30-345. - Administration. 
    The provisions of this article, where applicable, shall be administered by the city planning commission acting in lieu of the city commission. Before recommending an ordinance or rule governing the subdivision of land, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance or rule. The planning commission shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing not less than 15 days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the local unit of government. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1.5, 2-26-2001; Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 30-346. - Schedule of fees. 
    The city commission shall establish the filing fee for the tentative and final review of the preliminary plat, review of detailed engineering plans and review of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1.5, 2-26-2001) 
State Law reference- Fees, MCL 560.246. 
Secs. 30-347-30-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLATTING PROCEDURE AND DATA REQUIRED 

Sec. 30-371. - Pre-preliminary plat review. 
    Prior to submission of a preliminary plat for tentative approval from the planning commission, the proprietor shall meet with the city manager and department heads to review the proposed subdivision development scheme. The pre-preliminary plat review is intended to provide guidelines to the proprietor concerning development and design standards of the city. There shall be no implied approval associated with the pre-preliminary plat review process. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 3.1, 2-26-2001) 
State Law reference- Pre-preliminary plat authorized, MCL 560.107. 
Sec. 30-372. - Tentative approval of preliminary plats. 
(a)	Purpose. In order for subdivisions to be prepared in conformity with the general standards of the city, the proprietor or developer shall prepare a preliminary plat. After receipt of appropriate fees, the process of obtaining tentative approval or denial of the preliminary plat shall be completed within 63 days of the plat being submitted to the planning commission, in accordance with subsection (b) of this section and section 30-346. The preliminary plat shall contain all of the information set forth in subsection (b) of this section in sufficient detail to enable a determination of whether the proposed subdivision meets requirements for lots, streets, roads, sidewalks, open spaces, etc., as required by this Code. 
(b)	Requirements. The proprietor shall prepare a preliminary plat on paper not less than 24 inches by 36 inches, at a scale of at least one inch to 100 feet, showing the date and north arrow. The preliminary plat shall clearly show and meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Proposed plat or development name, name and address of the proprietor, the name and address of the engineer or surveyor of the proprietor's developer and the seal of the engineer or surveyor preparing the plat. 
(2)	Information relating to the location and names of adjoining subdivisions, property descriptions, public highways, railroads, rivers, lakes, utilities, parks, cemeteries and any other features. 
(3)	Existing and proposed streets, street names, rights-of-way and widths, including streets which link the proposed subdivision with other subdivisions or adjacent developed areas. 
(4)	A legal description, approximate lot and boundary dimensions and bearings. 
(5)	Topography, including the location of existing natural watercourses, drainage ditches, culverts or bridges, and other features affecting drainage. Contour lines shall be shown at intervals close enough to permit the determination of proposed gradients. Drainage arrows shall be shown on proposed roads. 
(6)	Easements to provide for public access for construction and maintenance of drains, public utilities, etc., in, over and across private property within the plat or development. Easements affecting road drainage shall be dedicated to the public or provisions shall be shown in the dedication reserving them for the use indicated and vesting the control in local governmental authorities. 
(7)	The current land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts shown on the plat. 
(8)	Location of any proposed sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, bicycle paths and other provisions for no motorized transportation, if any. 
(9)	Location of proposed and existing storm and sanitary sewers and water mains. 
(10)	Location and type of existing and proposed utilities, including, but not limited to, electrical power, natural gas, telephone, cable television, etc. 
(11)	Location and design of all lighting fixtures, including, but not limited to, street lighting, lighted signs, recreational area lighting, pathway lighting, etc. 
(12)	Location of any proposed signs, all of which shall be in compliance with article VIII, division 5, of this chapter and any other applicable ordinances. 
(13)	Location of proposed recreation areas, open spaces or other deeded lands. 
(14)	The following items shall be submitted with each plat: 
a.	Statement of the intended use of the proposed plat. 
b.	A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the proposed subdivision is a portion of a larger holding for subsequent development. 
c.	A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the surrounding area. 
d.	A wetland delineation and determination conducted by either a qualified consultant or the MDEQ, if potential or known wetlands exist. 
e.	All proposed protective covenants and deed restrictions, or a statement in writing that none are proposed. 
f.	A traffic study in accordance with the standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, if required by the planning commission. 
(c)	Examination of submitted preliminary plat. The proprietor shall submit ten copies of the preliminary plat along with an application form not less than ten business days before a regular meeting of the planning commission. The zoning administrator or his designee shall examine the preliminary plat to ensure that all information required by subsection (b) of this section has been submitted. If all required information is not included on the preliminary plat, the zoning administrator shall notify the proprietor by first-class mail, specifying what additional information is required, and informing the proprietor that the preliminary plat shall not be accepted for review until the required information is submitted. If all required information has been submitted, the zoning administrator shall compute the fee for review of the plat in accordance with section 30-346 and shall notify the proprietor in writing of the required fee within five business days. 
(d)	Public hearing. The planning commission shall provide for a public hearing on the preliminary plat, giving due notice of such hearing to all interested parties. 
(1)	A notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than 15 calendar days prior to the hearing. The public notice shall contain the date, time and location of the hearing, the purpose of the hearing, the location of the proposed subdivision, the address to which written comments may be sent and the location where a copy of the preliminary plat may be reviewed. 
(2)	A notice of the public hearing, containing the information set forth in subsection (d)(1) of this section, shall be sent to the proprietor at the address contained in the preliminary plat by mail and shall be published in a general circulation of the city. A similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the plats in the county records office and their addresses appear in the directory of the city or on the tax records of the city or county. 
(e)	Planning commission review and approval. The planning commission shall review the preliminary plat for consistency with all approved plans and policies of the city and whether the proposed subdivision meets the requirements of division 3 of this article. The planning commission shall review and consider staff comments and recommendations. The planning commission may seek the input of other agencies and individuals, including, but not limited to, the county drain commissioner, the Delta-Menominee District Health Department, the state department of environmental quality and any consulting engineer employed by or under contract to the city. 
(1)	If applicable standards under the Land Division Act, 1967, Public Act No. 288, MCL 560.101 to 560.293, and this Code or published rules governing the subdivision of land authorized under section 105 of that Act, MCL 560.105, are met, the planning commission shall recommend approval of the plat. If the planning commission fails to act within the required period, the plat shall be considered to have been recommended for approval, and the planning commission upon request of the proprietor to that effect shall issue a certificate. However, the proprietor may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of the 63-day period. The grounds for any recommendation of disapproval of a plat shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission. 
(f)	Variations and exceptions. In cases where variations and exceptions to dimensional standards, public improvement requirements and/or open space requirements are deemed necessary, variations may be recommended by the planning commission to the city commission. Such variations shall be included as part of the tentative approval granted by the planning commission. Variations and exceptions may be recommended upon a finding that: 
(1)	There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property that strict application of one or more of the provisions of this article would clearly be unreasonable. 
(2)	The variation and exception that will not be detrimental to the public welfare, or result in substantial adverse effects on adjacent properties. 
(3)	The variation and exception shall not violate provisions of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(4)	The variation and exception is not inconsistent with the public interest and policies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 3.2, 2-26-2001; Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
State Law reference- Preliminary plat approval and contents, MCL 560.105 et seq.; tentative approval of preliminary plat, MCL 560.112. 
Sec. 30-373. - Final approval of preliminary plats. 
(a)	General requirements. Following tentative approval of a preliminary plat by the planning commission, the proprietor shall prepare and submit to the zoning administrator ten copies of a preliminary plat for final approval. The preliminary plat submitted for final approval shall incorporate all required changes resulting from review by the city and other authorities. The preliminary plat shall be drawn on paper which is not less than 24 inches by 36 inches, at a scale of at least one inch to 100 feet, showing the date and north arrow. The preliminary plat shall clearly show and meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Proposed plat or development name, name and address of proprietor, name and address of the engineer or surveyor of the proprietor's developer and the seal of the engineer or surveyor preparing the plat. 
(2)	Information relating to the location and names of adjoining subdivisions, property descriptions, public highways, rivers, lakes, utilities, parks, cemeteries and any other features. 
(3)	Existing and proposed streets, street names, rights-of-way and widths, including streets which link the proposed subdivision with other subdivisions or adjacent developed areas. 
(4)	A legal description, approximate lot and boundary dimensions and bearings. 
(5)	Topography, including the location of existing natural watercourses, drainage ditches, culverts or bridges and other features affecting drainage. Contour lines shall be shown at intervals close enough to permit the determination of proposed gradients. Drainage arrows shall be shown on proposed roads. 
(6)	Easements to provide for public access for construction and maintenance of drains, public utilities, etc., in, over and across private property within the plat or development. Easements affecting road drainage shall be dedicated to the public or provisions shall be shown in the dedication reserving them for the use indicated and vesting the control in local governmental authorities. 
(7)	The current land use and existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and adjacent tracts shown on the plat. 
(8)	Location of any proposed sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, bicycle paths and other provisions for nonmotorized transportation, if any. 
(9)	Location of proposed and existing storm and sanitary sewers and water mains. 
(10)	Location and type of existing and proposed utilities, including, but not limited to, electrical power, natural gas, telephone, cable television, etc. 
(11)	Location and design of all lighting fixtures, including, but not limited to, street lighting, lighted signs, recreational area lighting, pathway lighting, etc. 
(12)	Location of any proposed signs, all of which shall be in compliance with article VIII, division 5, of this chapter and any other applicable ordinances. 
(13)	Location of proposed recreation areas, open spaces or other deeded lands. 
(14)	The following items shall be submitted with each plat: 
a.	Statement of the intended use of the proposed plat. 
b.	A map of the entire area scheduled for development if the proposed subdivision is a portion of a larger holding for subsequent development. 
c.	A location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the surrounding area. 
d.	All proposed protective covenants and deed restrictions, or a statement in writing that none are proposed. 
e.	A traffic study in accordance with the standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, if required by the planning commission. 
(b)	City commission review and approval. 
(1)	The city commission shall hold a public hearing on the final preliminary plat at its next regularly scheduled meeting. A notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation not more than 15, nor less than five, calendar days prior to the hearing. The public hearing notice shall contain the date, time and location of the hearing, the purpose of the hearing, the location of the proposed subdivision, the address to which written comments may be sent and the location where a copy of the preliminary plat may be reviewed. 
(2)	Following the public hearing, the city commission shall approve the final preliminary plat if the proprietor has met all of the conditions for approval of the preliminary plat. The city clerk shall notify the proprietor in writing of such approval or rejection within five working days, and the reasons for rejection of the plat, if applicable, shall be specified in such notice. 
(3)	Final approval of the preliminary plat under this section shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of two years from the date of approval the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which preliminary approval was granted will not be changed. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city commission. Written notice of the extension shall be sent by the city clerk to other approving authorities. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 3.3, 2-26-2001) 
State Law reference- Final approval of preliminary plat, MCL 560.120. 
Sec. 30-374. - Final plat. 
(a)	General requirements. 
(1)	The proprietor shall prepare a final plat following final approval of the preliminary plat, approval of detailed engineering plans and completion of a survey. A final plat shall contain all of the information specified in sections 132-141 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.131-560.141) and shall be clearly identified as a final plat. In addition, the final plat shall contain a certificate of marketable title prepared by an attorney-at-law. 
(2)	The city commission shall require that all improvements and facilities, such as roads, streets, water, storm and sanitary sewers, sidewalks, etc., be completed or that financial guarantees be in place before the final plat is approved. 
(3)	A final plat shall not be accepted for review by the city commission after the date of expiration of the final approval of the preliminary plat. 
(b)	Procedure. 
(1)	The final plat shall be submitted for approval in accordance with the requirements of the state department of consumer and industry services and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(2)	Following approval by the other authorities as required by the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the proprietor shall submit all copies of the final plat to the city clerk, together with the filing and recording fee and state plat review fee as required by section 241 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.241). The state plat review fee shall be paid by check or money order and made payable to the state. 
(3)	Within 20 calendar days of the date of submission of the final plat, the city commission shall: 
a.	Approve the plat if it conforms to all of the provisions of this article and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), and instruct the city clerk to certify on the plat the city's approval, showing the date of the approval; or 
b.	Reject the plat, instruct the city clerk to give the reasons for such rejection in writing as set forth in the minutes of the meeting, and return the plat to the proprietor; The city commission shall instruct the city clerk to record all proceedings in the minutes of the meeting, which shall be open for inspection. 
(4)	Following approval of the final plat by the city commission, the city clerk shall promptly forward all copies of the final plat to the clerk of the county plat board, together with filing and recording fees and state plat review fees as specified in section 241 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.241 et seq.). 
(c)	[Plat approval.] A plat approved by a city and recorded under section 172 of the Land Division Act, 1967 Public Act No. 288, MCL 560.172, shall be considered to be an amendment to the master plan and a part thereof. Approval of a plat by a city does not constitute or affect an acceptance by the public of any street or other open space shown upon the plat. 
(d)	Regulation and control of the division of sub-divided plat lots. 
(1)	Planning commission and city commission approval. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) below, the division of a lot in a recorded plat is prohibited unless approved following application to the city planning commission. The application shall be filed with the city manager or his duly authorized agent and shall state the reason(s) for the proposed division. After approval of the division of a subdivided lot is given by the city planning commission, the proposed division is forwarded to the city commission for final approval. Approval of the division of a subdivided lot does not relieve the requirement upon the owner and/or developer of the need to seek the necessary permits and approval of the appropriate agencies which grant permits for building construction, private wells, and private septic systems. No lot within a recorded plat shall be divided into more than four parts, and the resulting lots shall not be less than permitted by the city zoning ordinance. The division of a lot resulting in a smaller area than prescribed herein by the city zoning ordinance may be permitted but only for the purpose of adding to an existing building site or sites. 
(2)	Zoning administrator approval. The division of a lot resulting in a smaller area than prescribed herein by the city zoning ordinance may be permitted but only for the purpose of adding to an existing building site or sites. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to review and give final approval or disapproval to such a division, without further action by the planning commission and/or the city commission. However, if the proposed division involved more than three contiguous lots, then the application shall be submitted to the planning commission for action pursuant to the provisions of subsection (1) above. 
(3)	The city acknowledges that divisions of subdivision lots have been made since the Michigan Subdivision Control Act of 1967 was passed. Upon written request and documentation, the city will consider these divisions on an individual basis. The city reserves the right to approve and/or deny any of these requests. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 3.5, 2-26-2001; Ord. No. 577, § 1, 5-11-2009; Ord. No. 589, 6-25-2012) 
State Law reference- Final plats, MCL 560.132 et seq.; local approval of final plats, MCL 560.182. 
Sec. 30-375. - Detailed engineering plans. 
(a)	Submittal. Following final approval of the preliminary plat in accordance with section 30-373, the proprietor shall submit to the city manager three sets of detailed engineering plans for streets, storm drainage, sidewalks and other required public improvements. The engineering plans shall contain the name, address, telephone number and seal of the engineer who prepared the plans, and shall be of sufficient detail to determine conformance of the proposed improvements to applicable city regulations and standards, including the subdivision design standards set forth in divisions 3 and 4 of this article. The engineering plans shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Proposed and existing storm and sanitary sewers, water mains and their respective profiles, including the size and type of material proposed to be used. 
(2)	Location, width, profile, radii of curves and culs-de-sac, surface material and profiles of proposed and existing streets, roads and alleys. 
(3)	Location, width and surface material of sidewalks and/or pedestrian or bicycle paths, if any. 
(4)	Location and type of existing and proposed utilities, including, but not limited to, electrical, natural gas, telephone, cable television, etc., and showing whether such utilities are located overhead or underground. 
(b)	Review. The city manager shall review the detailed engineering plans for conformance with applicable regulations and standards contained in this article and other ordinances of the city. If the detailed engineering plans are found to be adequate, an agreement between the proprietor and the city shall be made to provide for periodic and final inspection of public improvements to ensure conformity to the submitted plans. The agreement shall be a condition of approval of the final plat. Following approval of the detailed engineering plans, the proprietor may begin construction of roads and streets, public utilities and other improvements. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 3.4, 2-26-2001) 
Secs. 30-376-30-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 30-401. - Street and roads. 
(a)	Public roads. All roads and streets within a subdivision in the city shall be dedicated to public use. Private roads shall not be allowed. 
(b)	Road standards. 
(1)	Road construction. All roads within a subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with city road construction procedures and standards. 
(2)	Minimum widths of street rights-of-way. 
a.	Parkways, 100 feet. 
b.	Major street, 80 feet. 
c.	Local streets, 60 feet. 
d.	Alley and service drives, 20 feet. 
e.	Culs-de-sac, 60-foot radius. 
f.	Easements, 12 feet. 
(3)	Minimum pavement widths of streets. 
a.	Major streets, 36 feet face to face of the curb. 
b.	Local streets, 32 feet face to face of the curb. 
c.	Parkways, 24 feet face to face of the curb. 
d.	Culs-de-sac, 32 feet face to face of the curb. The pavement of the turning circle of culs-de-sac shall have a 30-foot radius to the inside curb and a pavement width of 20 feet face to face of the curb. 
(4)	Local roads and streets. Streets shall be arranged and designed so as to discourage their use by through traffic. Local roads and streets shall be designed to discourage high speed traffic through residential areas. 
(5)	Street layout. If a tentative layout for an area has been made by the public works director, the street layout shall be in general conformance. 
(6)	Continuation. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into new subdivisions. Where areas adjacent to the proposed plat are not subdivided, the streets in new subdivisions shall be arranged in a way so as to connect to adjacent properties if development occurs. Street rights-of-way, other than cul-de-sac streets, shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract to make provision for the future projection of streets into adjacent areas. If lots in the subdivision are provided access by a stub street, such street shall be constructed and paved. 
(7)	Border line streets. Whenever there exists, adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, a dedicated or platted and recorded half-width street or alley, the other half width shall be platted. When a plat dedicates half of the width of a street on a boundary line separating two or more parcels of property, the proprietor shall enter into an agreement with the city so that the proprietor shall be responsible for the installation of improvements on his half of the street at the time the adjacent tract is developed. 
(8)	Relationship to physical site constraints. Streets shall be arranged in proper relation to the physical features of the site so as to result in usable lots, safe streets and reasonable gradients, while avoiding unnecessary development in areas of steep slopes, unstable, shallow or hydric soils, wetlands, etc. Streets located over areas of unstable material shall be excavated to solid footing and backfilled with materials suitable to the public works director. 
(9)	Alleys. Alleys shall be platted in all business districts. Alleys shall not be permitted in any residential district unless required by the planning commission. 
(10)	Cul-de-sac streets. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be 500 feet. The terminal shall be a circular area with a minimum diameter of 120 feet. 
(11)	Blocks. 
a.	A block along a local street or parkway shall not be more than 1,000 feet in length, except where the planning commission determines conditions justify a departure from such maximum length. In blocks over 900 feet in length, the planning commission may require, at or near the middle of the block, a walkway or easement for public utilities. 
b.	The number of intersecting streets along highways and major streets shall be held to a minimum. Blocks along highways and major streets shall not be less than 1,320 feet in length. 
(12)	Access. Every subdivision shall have a dedicated means of ingress and egress. 
(13)	Intersections. Subdivision streets shall intersect one another at right angles or as nearly at right angles as conditions permit. Intersections shall be designed, as conditions permit, to ensure adequate sight distance and to reduce conflict points. 
(14)	Street names. Subdivision street names shall not duplicate the name of any existing street in the city, except where a new street is a continuation of an existing street. Street names that may be spelled differently but sound the same shall be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 4.1, 2-26-2001) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
Sec. 30-402. - Sidewalks. 
    Installation of sidewalks within a subdivision in the city shall be required when curbs and gutters are installed. Sidewalks shall run parallel to roads or streets, be within the right-of-way, and be separated from the roadway surface by a grass strip, trees, etc. Trees, landscaping, structures, etc., which are used to separate sidewalks from roads or streets shall be located and designed so as not to interfere with plowing or storage of snow or other routine road maintenance activities. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 4.2, 2-26-2001) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
Sec. 30-403. - Lot size and orientation. 
(a)	Arrangement of lots so as to facilitate the provision of public services, etc. Subdivision lots within the city shall be arranged in such a way as to facilitate provision of public services, allow for safe and efficient traffic patterns, protect valuable environmental resources and not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(b)	Conformity to zoning. All subdivision lots shall conform to the minimum lot size, width, depth and area requirements set forth in article VIII of this chapter. 
(c)	Lot lines. Subdivision side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the right-of-way line of the street the lot faces, unless a variation from such requirement will produce a more desirable street or lot plan. 
(d)	Double frontage lots. Double front lots, sometimes called "through lots," shall be avoided in subdivisions. 
(e)	Access. All subdivision lots shall have direct access to a publicly dedicated street or road. 
(f)	Future division. When a subdivision would result in the creation of lots large enough to be split at a future time into two or more lots which would comply with the minimum size requirements set forth in article VIII of this chapter, such lots shall be arranged in a way so as to minimize potential adverse effects of future lot division. A lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat shall not be further partitioned or divided unless it shall be in conformity with this article and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(g)	Physical site constraints. Subdivision lots developed in wetland areas, in areas subject to flooding or upon steep slopes shall be arranged in a manner so as to provide for adequate and suitable building area. Development which retains natural vegetation along shorelines shall be encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 4.3, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 30-404. - Public utilities and easements. 
    Public utilities within a subdivision in the city may be installed underground. Easements for public utilities shall be provided in accordance with applicable city ordinances. Utility rights-of-way along rear or side lot lines shall be discouraged. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 4.4, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 30-405. - Compatibility with adjacent sites. 
(a)	In general. It is appropriate for the city to consider the relationship of proposed subdivisions within the city to existing and potential development in the area where the subdivision is proposed. It is also necessary to examine the relationship of proposed development to existing facilities such as schools, parks, shopping centers, health care facilities, etc. Adequate provision shall be made to protect residential development from incompatible uses, and to ensure an orderly arrangement of residential subdivisions. 
(b)	Bufferyards or greenbelts. Bufferyards or greenbelts may be required at the boundary of a proposed subdivision within the city to screen incompatible uses or potentially undesirable features, such as highways, railroads, commercial or industrial uses, from the view of adjacent residential properties. Street rights-of-way and utility easements may not be used to meet the requirement for bufferyards or greenbelts. 
(c)	Dimensions of bufferyards or greenbelts. A bufferyard or greenbelt shall generally be a minimum of 20 feet in width. Natural features, such as ridges, rock outcrops, etc., which serve as natural barriers may provide natural screening which may be used to replace a bufferyard or greenbelt. Bufferyards or greenbelts shall contain trees, shrubs or structures which block the view of adjacent uses, and such trees, shrubs or structures shall be maintained on the bufferyard in perpetuity. Provisions for perpetuity may include dedication of lands to the city, recorded deed restrictions or conservation easements. 
(d)	Access to community. A subdivision design shall consider the relationship of the subdivision to the surrounding community. The subdivision shall be designed in a way so as to maximize access to parks and recreation facilities, schools, public buildings such as libraries and community centers, health care facilities, shopping, etc. Such access shall include streets, sidewalks, pedestrian walkways and open spaces which allow residents to travel between neighborhoods. 
(e)	Relationship to other subdivisions. A subdivision design which provides lot sizes and layouts similar to adjacent development shall be encouraged. Connection of one subdivision to another through streets, sidewalks, pedestrian walkways and open spaces shall also be encouraged to promote a sense of neighborhood and facilitate the provision of public services. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 4.5, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 30-406. - Open space. 
    When it is deemed appropriate by the planning commission, open space of adequate size shall be located within a subdivision in the city for parks or other public use dedicated to the city. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 4.6, 2-26-2001) 
Secs. 30-407-30-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS IN SUBDIVISIONS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to require improvements and assurances for same, MCL 560.182. 

Sec. 30-431. - Responsibility. 
(a)	The proprietor of a subdivision within the city shall be required to install the improvements set forth in this division with the conditions and specifications set forth in this division and in an agreement as a condition of approval of the preliminary plat. The proprietor may install the required improvements under private contract, in which case the proprietor shall enter into a legal agreement for the guarantee of completion of the improvements in accordance with section 30-433. 
(b)	The proprietor may petition the city commission to complete the installation of the required improvements. The city may install all or any of the required improvements under city contract with any conditions the city commission may impose and assess the proprietor for the costs of such improvements. 
(c)	The subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city containing a restriction upon the plat where the city will not issue a building permit for any structure upon any lot within the subdivision until the improvements as set forth in section 30-432 have been completed or a written contractual agreement has been made with the city for the completion of such improvements. Construction of the improvements shall not begin until the preliminary plat has received final approval and the detailed plans have been approved. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 5.1, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 30-432. - Required public improvements. 
(a)	Monuments. If, during the process of installation of improvements within a subdivision in the city, it is necessary to remove any monuments or benchmarks, the proprietor shall obtain permission from the city manager prior to such removal. All monuments or benchmarks removed, relocated or destroyed shall be replaced in the proper location by the proprietor at his expense. 
(b)	Streets and roads. All streets and roads shall be constructed in accordance with design standards established by the public works director. 
(c)	Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections in accordance with the requirements of the public works director. 
(d)	Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements set forth in chapter 46 of this Code. 
(e)	Sanitary sewer and water service. 
(1)	All new subdivisions shall be connected to the city sanitary sewer and water system. 
(2)	If water and/or sanitary sewer lines are extended to a new subdivision, adjacent property owners may tap into the water and/or sanitary sewer line by paying to the city its regular access fee. If the adjacent property owner taps into such an extended water and/or sanitary sewer line within ten years of its completion date, such property owner shall pay to the city a portion of the cost of the water and/or sanitary sewer line extension, which shall be refunded to the developer who paid for the extension to the subdivision. The refund shall be calculated at one month's average household water and/or sanitary sewer bill within the city. Total cumulative refunds shall not exceed the original cost to the developer of extending water and/or sanitary sewer lines to the subdivision and shall cease after ten years from the date of completion of the water and/or sanitary sewer line project. 
(f)	Storm drainage. A storm drainage system, including, but not limited to, storm pipes, catchbasins, manholes, culverts, retention ponds, etc., shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the public works director. When facilities (storm drains) become available in areas that are being proposed for platting, then the requirement for such facilities will be enforced if deemed necessary by the city public works director. 
(g)	Other public improvements. Where greenbelts, bufferyards or other improvements are shown on the preliminary plat as approved by the city in accordance with section 30-373, such improvements shall be in place before the final plat may be approved by the city commission or until financial guarantees as described in section 30-433(a) are in place. If an open space or park area is shown on the preliminary plat as approved by the planning commission, dedication of the land to the city shall be made prior to approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 5.2, 2-26-2001) 
Sec. 30-433. - Guarantee of completion. 
(a)	Financial guarantee arrangements. In lieu of the actual installation of improvements as set forth in section 30-432, the city commission shall require the proprietor to provide a financial guarantee of performance which shall be in one of the following forms: 
(1)	Performance or surety bond. 
a.	Accrual. The bond shall accrue to the city, covering construction of the public improvement. 
b.	Amount. The bond shall be in an amount equal to the total estimated cost for completing construction of the specified public improvements, including contingencies, as estimated by the public works director. If the estimated cost is based on figures provided by the proprietor, the source of all estimated costs shall be identified. 
c.	Term length. The bond shall be in force for a period specified by the city commission for the specific public improvement, but shall not extend beyond the actual completion date of the improvement. 
d.	Bonding or surety company. The bond shall be with a surety company authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the city commission. 
e.	Escrow agreement. The escrow agreement shall be drawn and furnished by the city commission. 
(2)	Cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit. 
a.	Accrual. A cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall accrue to the city. The deposits shall be made with the city treasurer or deposited with a mutually acceptable escrow agent or trust company, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
b.	Amount. The dollar value of the cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be equal to the total estimated cost for completing construction of the specified public improvements, including contingencies, as estimated by the public works director. If the estimated cost is based on figures provided by the proprietor, the source of all estimated costs shall be identified. 
c.	Escrow time. The escrow time for the cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be for a period to be specified by the city commission for the specific public improvements. 
d.	Progressive payment. The city commission and the proprietor may enter into an agreement to provide for progressive payment out of the cash deposit or reduction of the certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit to the extent of the cost of the completed portion of the public improvements. 
(b)	Inspection of public improvements. An agreement between the proprietor and the city commission shall be made to provide for periodic and final inspection of public improvements to ensure conformity with the submitted plans. Such agreement shall be a condition of approval of the preliminary plat. Final inspection and acceptance of the public improvements as being in compliance with the approved detailed engineering plans shall take place prior to final payment or release of any performance or surety bond, cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit. 
(c)	Approval of final plat. The city commission shall not approve any final plat until all public improvements have been completed, inspected and accepted, or until financial guarantees are in place. 
(d)	Penalty for failure to complete construction of public improvements. If the proprietor fails to complete all public improvements within the period of time required by the conditions of the guarantee for completion, it shall be the responsibility of the city commission to have such work completed. In order to accomplish the completion of such work, the city manager shall retain qualified contractors to complete the public improvements and shall reimburse the cost of completion of the improvements by appropriating the necessary funds from the cash deposit, certified check, negotiable bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit. The cost of reimbursement shall include any costs associated with advertising for bids, project monitoring and inspection, etc., which would not have been incurred by the city commission if the proprietor had completed the public improvements as required by the conditions of the guarantee. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 5.3, 2-26-2001) 
Secs. 30-434-30-440. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 562, § 3, adopted Nov. 27, 2006, set out provisions intended for use as div. 5, §§ 30-434-30-449. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as div. 5, §§ 30-441-30-449. 

Sec. 30-441. - Purpose. 
(a)	To allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential developments; 
(b)	To encourage the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural land, forestry land, wildlife habitat, other natural resources, including aquifers, water bodies and wetlands, and historical and archeological resources in a manner that is consistent with the goals and policies of the city's master plan and open space plan, if any; 
(c)	To encourage a less sprawling and more efficient form of development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features better than a conventional or grid subdivision; 
(d)	To minimize the total amount of disturbance on the site; 
(e)	To facilitate the construction and maintenance of housing, streets, utilities, and public service in a more economical and efficient manner; 
(f)	To preserve and enhance the community character; 
(g)	To preserve and protect agriculturally significant land; 
(h)	To protect the value of real property; 
(i)	To protect community water supplies; 
(j)	To provide for a diversified housing stock. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 30-442. - Eligibility. 
(a)	Zoning classification. Only those tracts located in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and B-2 zoning districts shall be eligible for consideration as a conservation subdivision. 
(b)	Contiguous parcels. To be eligible for consideration as a conservation subdivision, the tract shall consist of a parcel or set of contiguous parcels. 
(c)	Minimum size of tract. Minimum tract size for a conservation subdivision is 20 acres. 
(d)	Application submission. Any development where a conservation subdivision is planned, an application shall be submitted to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 30-443. - Special permit required. 
    The planning commission may authorize a conservation subdivision through the granting of a special permit. Such special permits shall be acted upon in accordance with the provisions of article VII of this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code to the extent that such other provisions do not conflict with the provisions of this division V. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 30-444. - Pre-application. 
(a)	Conference. The applicant must request a pre-application review at a regular business meeting of the planning commission. When a pre-application review is requested, the planning commission shall invite the city manager and all the department supervisors or their representative and whoever else they deem necessary to attend. At the pre-application review, the applicant shall outline the proposed conservation subdivision, discuss design process and criteria and seek preliminary feedback from the planning commission and/or its technical experts, and set a timetable for submittal of a formal application. At the request of the applicant, and at the expense of the applicant, the planning commission may engage technical experts to review the informal plans of the applicant and to facilitate submittal of a formal application for a conservation subdivision special permit. 
(b)	Submittals. In order to facilitate review of the conservation subdivision at the pre-application stage, applicants must submit the following information: 
(1)	Site context map. This map must illustrate the parcel in connection to its surrounding neighborhood. Based upon existing data sources and field inspections, it must show various kinds of major natural resource areas or features that cross parcel lines or that are located on adjoining lands. This map should enable the planning commission to understand the site in relation to what is occurring on adjacent properties. 
(2)	Existing conditions/site analysis map. This map should familiarize officials with existing conditions on the property. Based upon existing data sources and field inspections, this base map locates and describes noteworthy resources that should be left protected through sensitive subdivision layouts. These resources include wetlands, riverfront areas, floodplains and steep slopes, but may also include mature undegraded woodlands, hedgerows, farmland, unique or special wildlife habitats, historic or cultural features (such as old structures or stone walls), unusual geologic formations and scenic views into and out from the property. By overlaying this plan onto a development plan, the parties involved can clearly see where conservation priorities and desired development overlap or conflict. 
(3)	Additional information. Any other information available that will assist the planning commission in making a good decision. 
(c)	Site access. The applicant may be required to permit access to the site by the planning commission, city commission or their representatives for the purpose of gathering information deemed helpful in making a decision. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 30-445. - Design process. 
(a)	At the time of the application for a special permit for a conservation subdivision design applicants are required to demonstrate to the planning commission that the following design process was performed by a certified engineer and considered in determining the layout of proposed streets, house lots, and open space. 
(1)	Step one: Identify conservation areas. Identify preservation land by two steps. First, primary conservation areas (such as wetlands, riverfront areas, and floodplains regulated by state or federal law) and secondary conservation areas (including unprotected elements of the natural landscape such as steep slopes, mature woodlands, prime farmland, meadows, wildlife habitats and cultural features such as historic and archeological sites and scenic views) shall be identified and delineated. Second, the potentially developable area will be identified and delineated. To the maximum extent feasible, the potentially developable area shall consist of land outside identified primary and secondary conservation areas. 
(2)	Step two: Locating dwelling sites. Locate the approximate sites of individual buildings within the potentially developable area and include the delineation of private yards and shared amenities, so as to reflect an integrated community, with emphasis on consistency with the city's historical development patterns. The number of homes enjoying the amenities of the development should be maximized. 
(3)	Step three: Aligning the streets and trails. Align streets in order to access the dwelling lots. Additionally, new trails should be laid out to create internal and external connections to existing and/or potential future streets, sidewalks, and trails. 
(4)	Step four: Lot lines. Draw in the lot lines. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 30-446. - Procedures. 
(a)	An application for a special permit for a conservation subdivision development shall be submitted on the form(s) provided by the planning commission in accordance with the rules and regulations of the commission. Applicants for conservation subdivision development shall also file with the planning commission 18 copies of the following: 
(1)	Concept plan. The concept plan shall include a sketch plan, yield plan site context map and existing conditions/site analysis map. Additional information reasonably necessary to make the determinations and assessments cited herein shall be provided, including existing site contour maps and existing current soil maps. 
(2)	Sketch plan. The sketch plan shall be prepared by a certified landscape architect, or by a multi-disciplinary team of which one member must be a certified landscape architect, and shall address the general features of the land and give approximate configurations of the lots, open space, and roadways. The sketch plan shall incorporate the design process, and the design standards when determining a proposed design for the development. 
The sketch plan shall include the following: 
a.	The subdivision name, boundaries, north point, date, legend, title "concept plan," and scale. 
b.	The names of the record owner and the applicant, and the name of the landscape architect that prepared the plan. 
c.	The names, approximate location, and widths of adjacent streets. 
d.	The proposed topography of the land shown at a contour interval no greater than ten feet. Elevations shall be referred to mean sea level. 
e.	The location of existing landscape features including forests, farm fields, meadows, wetlands, riverfront areas, water bodies, archeological and historic structures or points of interest, rock outcrops, boulder fields, stone walls cliffs, high points, major long views, forest glades, major tree groupings, noteworthy tree specimens, and habitats of endangered or threatened wildlife, as identified as primary and secondary resources. Proposals for all site features to be preserved, demolished, or moved shall be noted on the sketch plan. 
f.	All on-site local, state, and federal regulatory resource boundaries and buffer zones shall be clearly identified and all wetland flag locations shall be numbered and placed upon the sketch plan. 
g.	Lines showing proposed private residential lots, with approximate areas and frontage dimensions. 
h.	All existing and proposed features and amenities including trails, recreation areas, pedestrian and bicycle paths, communities buildings, off-street parking areas, and any others shall be shown on the plan and described in a brief narrative explanation where appropriate. 
i.	The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, common driveways, easements and any parcel of land intended to be dedicated for public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all property owners in the subdivision, or parcels of land or lots to be used for any purpose other than private residential shall be so designated within the subdivision in a general manner. 
j.	Proposed roadway grades. 
k.	A narrative explanation shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer detailing how the proposed wastewater and drinking water systems will be connected to the city sanitary sewer and water systems. 
l.	A narrative explanation prepared by a certified professional engineer proposing systems for storm water drainage and its likely impacts on-site and to any abutting parcels of land. For example, the narrative will specify whether soft or hard engineering methods will be used and the number of any detention/retention basins or infiltrating catch basins; it is not intended to include specific pipe sizes. Any information needed to justify this proposal should be included in the narrative. The approximate location of any stormwater management detention/retention basins shall be shown on the plan and accompanied by a conceptual landscaping plan. 
m.	A narrative explanation of the proposed quality, quantity, use and ownership of the open space. Open space parcels shall be clearly shown on the plan. 
n.	All proposed landscaped and buffer areas shall be noted on the plan and generally explained in a narrative. 
o.	A list of all legal documents necessary for implementation of the proposed development, including any conservation restrictions, land transfers, and master deeds, with an accompanying narrative explaining their general purpose. 
p.	A narrative indicating all requested waivers, reductions, and/or modifications as permitted consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(b)	Yield plan. Applicant shall submit a narrative explanation detailing the results of the determination of any proposed allocation of yield of basic maximum number of lots. 
(c)	The planning commission may authorize modification of lot size, shape and other bulk requirements for lots within a conservation subdivision, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)	Lots having reduced area or frontage shall not have frontage on a street other than a street created by a subdivision involved, provided, however, that the planning commission may waive this requirement where it is determined that such reduced lot(s) are consistent with existing development patterns in the neighborhood. 
(2)	Lot frontage shall not be less than 50 feet. The planning commission may waive this requirement where it is determined that such reduced frontage will further the goals of this division. 
(3)	Minimum lot size shall be not less than 9,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 30-447. - Open space. 
(a)	A minimum of 50 percent of the tract shown on the development plan shall be open space, which shall be open to the general public. Any proposed open space shall be subject to a recorded conservation easement enforceable by the city providing that such land shall be perpetually kept in an open state, that it shall be preserved exclusively for the purposes set forth herein, and that it shall be maintained in a manner in which will ensure its suitability for its intended purposes. The easement documents shall be submitted to the planning commission for prior approval. 
(b)	The percentage of the open space that is wetlands shall not normally exceed the percentage of the tract that is wetlands; provided, however, that the applicant may include a greater percentage of wetlands in such open space upon a demonstration that such inclusion promotes the purpose of this division. 
(c)	The open space shall be contiguous. Contiguous shall be defined as being connected. Open space will still be considered connected if a roadway or an accessory amenity separates it. The planning commission may waive this requirement for all or part of the required open space where it is determined that allowing noncontiguous open space will promote the goals of this division and/or protect identified primary and secondary conservation areas. 
(d)	The open space shall be used only for the purposes set forth in this division. The planning commission may permit up to ten percent of the open space to be paved or built upon for structures accessory to the dedicated use or uses of such open space (i.e., pedestrian walks and bike paths). 
(e)	Stormwater management systems serving the conservation subdivision may be located within the open space. Surface systems, such as retention and detention ponds, shall not qualify towards the minimum open space required. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 30-448. - Design standards. 
    The following design standards shall apply to all conservation subdivision developments and shall govern the development and design process: 
(1)	Generic design standards. 
a.	The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of the neighboring developed areas. The orientation of individual building sites shall be such as to maintain maximum natural topography and cover. Topography, tree cover, and natural drainageways shall be treated as fixed determinants of road and lot configuration rather than as malleable elements that can be changed to follow a preferred development scheme. 
b.	Streets shall be designed and located in such a manner as to maintain and preserve natural topography, significant landmarks, and trees; to minimize cut and fill; and to preserve and enhance views and vistas on or off the subject parcel. 
c.	Mixed-use development shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and the use, scale, and architecture of existing buildings in the vicinity that have functional or visual relationship to the proposed buildings. Proposed buildings shall be related to their surroundings. 
d.	The removal or disruption of historic, traditional or significant uses, structures, or architectural elements shall be minimized insofar as practicable. 
(2)	Site specific design standards. 
a.	Mix of housing types. The conservation subdivision development may consist of any combination of single-family, two-family and multifamily residential structures. A multifamily structure shall not contain more than eight dwelling units. Residential structures shall be oriented toward the street serving the premises and not the required parking area. 
b.	Parking. Each dwelling unit shall be served by two off-street parking spaces. Parking spaces in front of garages may count in this computation. All parking areas with greater than four spaces shall be screened from view with perimeter landscaping as described in Ordinance 558. 
c.	Buffer areas. A buffer area of 30 feet shall be provided at the following locations: 
1.	Perimeter of the property where it abuts residentially zoned and occupied properties; 
2.	Certain resource areas on or adjacent to the tract like points, wetlands, streams and riverfront areas, rock outcrops, ledge, agricultural or recreational fields, and land held for conservation purposes; and 
3.	Existing public ways. 
Driveways necessary for access and egress to and from the tract may cross such buffer areas. No vegetation in this buffer area will be disturbed, destroyed or removed, except for normal maintenance of structures and landscapes approved as part of the project. The planning commission may waive the buffer requirement in these locations when it determines that a smaller buffer (or no buffer) will suffice to accomplish the objectives set forth herein. 
d.	Drainage. The planning commission may in its discretion require the use of "soft" (nonstructural) stormwater management techniques (such as swales) and other drainage techniques that reduce impervious surface and enable infiltration where appropriate. 
e.	Screening and landscaping. All structural surface stormwater management facilities shall be accompanied by a conceptual landscape plan. 
f.	On-site pedestrian and bicycle circulation. Walkways and bicycle paths shall be provided to link residences with parking areas, recreation facilities (including parkland and open space) and adjacent land uses where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 30-449. - Approval standards. 
    The planning commission may grant a special permit for a conservation subdivision development if it determines that the proposed conservation subdivision development has less detrimental impact on the tract than a conventional development proposed for the tract, and that it satisfies all the following standards: 
(1)	That it achieves greater flexibility and creativity in the design of residential developments than a conventional plan; 
(2)	That it promotes permanent preservation of open space, agricultural land forestry land, other natural resources including water bodies and wetlands, and historical and archeological resources; 
(3)	That it promotes a less sprawling and more efficient form of development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing topography and natural features better than a conventional subdivision; 
(4)	That it reduces the total amount of disturbance on the site; 
(5)	That it furthers the goals and policies of the master plan; 
(6)	That it facilitates the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities, and public service in a more economical and efficient manner; 
(7)	That all the requirements of this division 5 have been satisfactorily met. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 30-450. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DIVISIONS OF LAND 

Sec. 30-451. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division 6 is to carry out the provision of the State Land Division Act (1967 PA 288, as amended, formerly known as the Subdivision Control Act), to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with applicable ordinances and said Act, to minimize potential boundary disputes, to maintain orderly development of the community, and otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the municipality by establishing reasonable standards for prior review and approval of land divisions within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 30-452. - Definitions. 
    Accessible, in reference to a parcel, means that the parcel meets one or both of the following requirements: 
(1)	Has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access to an existing road or street and meets all applicable location standards of the state transportation department or county road commission under Act No. 200 of the Public Acts of 1969, being sections 247.321 to 247.329 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and of the city, or has an area where a driveway can provide vehicular access to an exi[s]ting road or street and meet all such applicable location standards. 
(2)	Is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access to an existing road or street and that meets all applicable location standards of the state transportation department or country road commission under Act No. 200 of the Public Acts of 1969 and the city, or can be served by a proposed easement that will provide vehicular access to an existing road or street and that will meet all such applicable location standards. 
    Applicant means a person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
    Development site means any parcel or lot on which exists, or which is intended for, building-development other than the following: 
(1)	Agricultural use involving the production of plants and animals useful to humans, including forages and sod crops; grains, feed crops, and field crops; dairy and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including breeding and grazing of cattle, swine, and similar animals; berries; herbs; flowers; seeds; grasses; nursery stock; fruits; vegetables; Christmas trees; and other similar uses and activities. 
(2)	Forestry use involving the planting, management, or harvesting of timber. 
    Divided or division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, for the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of Sections 108 and 109 of the State Land Division Act. Division does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of this Act or the requirements for the applicable city Code provisions for building sites. 
    Exempt split or exempt division means the portioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent; provided all resulting parcels are accessible for vehicular travel and utilities from existing public roads through existing adequate roads or easements, or through areas owned by the owner of the parcel that can provide such access. For a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the applicable city Code provisions for building sites. 
    Forty acres or the equivalent means either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than 30 acres. 
    Governing body means the legislative body of a city. 
    Parent parcel or parent tract means a parcel or tract, respectively, lawfully in existence on March 31, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 30-453. - Designation of official and scope of authority; exemptions from approval. 
(a)	The zoning administrator is hereby designated as the city official authorized to review and approve or disapprove applications for proposed divisions of land under the provisions of this division 6. 
(b)	Land in the municipality shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of the zoning administrator in accordance with this division and the State Land Division Act; provided that the following shall be exempted from this requirement: 
(1)	A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to the city's subdivision ordinance and the State Land Division Act. 
(2)	A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with the city's subdivision ordinance and the State Land Division Act. 
(3)	A partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract that only results in parcels of 20 acres or more in size, if the parcel or tract being split or partitioned is not accessible, and one of the following applies: 
a.	The parcel or tract being split or portioned was in existence on March 31, 1997. 
b.	The parcel or tract being split or portioned resulted from an exempt split or other portioning or splitting under this division. 
(4)	The proprietor shall provide the purchaser of a parcel resulting from a split or other partitioning under subsection (3) above with the following written statement before closing: "This parcel is not accessible as defined in the Land Division Act, 1967 PA 288, MLC 560.101 to 560.293". 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 30-454. - Application. 
    An applicant shall file all of the following with the zoning administrator for review and approval of a proposed land division before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year, or for building development: 
(a)	A completed application form provided by the city. 
(b)	Proof of ownership of the land proposed to be divided. 
(c)	A survey map of the land proposed to be divided, prepared pursuant to the survey map requirements of 1970 Public Act 132, as amended, (MCL 54.211) by a land surveyor licensed by the State of Michigan, and showing the dimensions and legal descriptions of the existing parcel and the parcels proposed to be created by the division(s), the location of all existing structures and other land improvements, and the accessibility of the parcels for vehicular traffic and utilities from existing public roads. 
    In lieu of such survey map, at the applicant's option, The applicant may waive the 45-day statutory requirement for a decision on the application and submit a tentative preliminary parcel map drawn to scale of not less than that provided for on the application form including an accurate legal description of each proposed division, and showing the boundary lines, dimensions, and the accessibility of each division from existing or proposed public roads for automobile traffic and public utilities, for preliminary review, approval, and/or denials by the zoning administrator prior to a final application under this section at which time a survey map as required in subsection (c) above shall be submitted with the final application. 
    The zoning administrator may waive the survey map requirement where the foregoing tentative parcel map is deemed to contain adequate information to approve a proposed land division considering the size, simple nature of the divisions, and the undeveloped character of the territory within which the proposed divisions are located. An accurate legal description of all the proposed divisions, however, shall at all times be required. 
(d)	Proof that all standards of the State Land Division Act, including the provision of Section 108 of the Act, and this division have been met. 
(e)	The history and specifications of any previous divisions of land of which the proposed division was a part sufficient to establish that the parcel to be divided was lawfully in existence as of March 31, 1997, the effective date of the State Land Division Act. 
(f)	Proof that all due and payable taxes or installments of special assessments pertaining to the land proposed to be divided is paid in full. 
(g)	If transfer of division rights is proposed in the land transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer. 
(h)	Unless a division creates a parcel which is acknowledged and declared to be "not buildable" under section 30-457 of this division, all divisions shall result in buildable parcels containing a sufficient buildable area outside of unbuildable wetlands, flood plains and other areas where buildings are prohibited therefrom, and provide sufficient area to comply with all required sewage disposal and water well locations (where public water and sewer service may not be available), and comply with density requirements (maximum allowed area coverage of buildings and structures on the site). 
(i)	The fee as established by resolution by the governing body to cover the costs of the review of application and administration of the provisions of this division and the State Land Division Act. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 30-455. - Procedure for review of applications for land division approval. 
(a)	Upon receipt of a land division application package, the zoning administrator shall: approve, approve with reasonable conditions to assure compliance with applicable ordinances and protection of public health, safety and general welfare, or disapprove the land division applied for within 45 days after receipt of a complete application, and shall notify the applicant of the decisions and the reasons for any denial. If the application package does not conform to requirements of this division and the State Land Division Act, the zoning administrator shall return the same to the applicant for completion and refiling in accordance with this division and the State Land Division Act. 
(b)	Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the zoning administrator may, within 30 days of said decision appeal the decision to the zoning board of appeals which shall consider and resolve such appeal by a majority vote at its next regular meeting or session. 
(c)	A decision approving a land division is effective for 90 days, after which it shall be considered revoked unless within such period a document is recorded with the Delta County Register of Deeds office and filed with the zoning administrator accomplishing the approved land division or transfer. 
(d)	The city assessor shall maintain an official record of all approved and accomplished land divisions or transfers. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 30-456. - Standards for approval of land divisions. 
    A proposed land division shall be approved if all the following criteria are met: 
(1)	All the parcels to be created by the proposed land division(s) fully comply with the applicable lot (parcel), yard and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to: minimum lot area and width, and maximum lot coverage and minimum set-backs for existing buildings and/or structures. 
(2)	The proposed land division(s) complies with all requirements of the State Land Division Act and this division. 
(3)	All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate accessibility, or an area available therefore, to a public road for public utilities and emergency vehicles not less than the requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance. In determining adequacy of accessibility, any ordinance standards applicable to plats shall also apply as a minimum standard whenever a parcel or tract is proposed to be divided to create four or more parcels. 
(4)	Each resulting parcel that is a development site has adequate easements for public utilities from the parcel to existing public utility facilities. 
(e)	Approval of a division is not a determination that the resulting parcels comply with other ordinances and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 30-457. - Allowance for approval of other land division. 
    Notwithstanding disqualification from approval pursuant to this division, a proposed land division which does not fully comply with the applicable lot, yard, accessibility and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance or this division may be approved in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)	Where the applicant executes and records an affidavit or deed restriction with the county register of deeds, in a form acceptable to the municipality, designating the parcel as "not buildable". Any such parcel shall also be designated as "not buildable" in the municipal records, and shall not thereafter be the subject of a request to the zoning board of appeals for variance relief from the applicable lot and/or area requirements, and shall not be developed with any building or above ground structure exceeding four feet in height. 
(2)	Where, in circumstances not covered by paragraph (a) above, the zoning board of appeals has, previous to this division, granted a variance from the lot, yard, ratio, frontage and/or area requirements with which the parcel failed to comply. 
(3)	Where the proposed land division involves only the minor adjustment of a common boundary line or involves a conveyance between adjoining properties, which does not result in either parcel violating this division, any applicable zoning ordinance, or the State Land Division Act. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 30-458. - Depth to width ratio; determination; exception. 
(a)	The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by a land division shall not exceed a four to one ratio, except as otherwise provided in this section, exclusive of access roads, easements, or non-buildable parcels created under section 30-457 and parcels added to contiguous parcels that result in all involved parcels complying with said ratio. 
The permissible depth of a parcel created by a land division shall be the average depth determined by measuring the depth of each parcel at not fewer than two points from the abutting road right-of-way to the opposite boundary line. On irregularly shaped parcels the points shall be selected so as to permit the calculation of the best representation of the average depth of the parcel. The measurements shall be taken at points selected on lines which connect the road right-of-way boundary line to the opposite back boundary line and which said lines shall run perpendicular to the abutting road right-of-way of the parcel. 
The permissible width of a parcel created by a land division shall be the average width of the parcel determined by measuring the width of each parcel at not fewer than two boundary line points. On irregularly shaped parcels, the boundary line points shall be selected so as to permit the calculation of the best representation of the average width of the parcel. The measurements shall be taken at the points selected on lines which connect one side boundary line to the opposite side boundary line and which said lines shall parallel the abutting road right-of-way of the parcel. 
(b)	A proposed land division may be approved with a depth ratio greater than four to one if the resulting division would be compatible with surrounding lands and if each parcel of the proposed division meets all the criteria set forth in section 30-456. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 30-459. - Consequence of noncompliance. 
(a)	Any parcel created in noncompliance with the requirements of this division, shall not be eligible for any building permits, zoning approvals, variances, or site plan approval, and shall not be recognized as a separate parcel on the assessment roll. 
(b)	It is a violation of this division to create, but not apply for and receive prior approval for, a land division, even though the land division would otherwise have been legal. 
(c)	Any parcel created in violation of the provision of this division shall be deemed a "public nuisance" and subject to abatement. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Sec. 30-460. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)	Any person who violates any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)	Any person who violates any of the provision of this division shall also be subject to a civil action seeking invalidation of the land division and appropriate injunctive or other relief. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1, 11-22-2010) 
Secs. 30-461-30-470. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ZONING[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance rezoning property or amending the zoning map saved from repeal, § 1-5(17); environment, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; vegetation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- City and Village Zoning Act, MCL 125.581 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-471. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory and accessory use mean a use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and, except in case of accessory off-street parking spaces or loading, located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is related. Any accessory building shall be compatible in design and appearance to the principal use of the zoning lot on which it is located. 
    Agricultural land means substantially undeveloped land devoted to the production of plants and animals useful to humans, including, but not limited to, forage and sod crops, grains, feed crops, field crops, dairy products, poultry and poultry products, livestock, herbs, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, fruits, vegetables, Christmas trees, and other similar uses and activities. 
    Airport means an airport licensed by the Michigan Department Of Transportation, Bureau of Aeronautics under section 86 of the Aeronautics Code of the State Of Michigan, 1945 Public Act No. 327, MCL 259.86. 
    Airport approach plan and airport layout plan means a plan, or an amendment to a plan, filed with the zoning commission under section 151 of the Aeronautics Code of the State of Michigan, 1945 Public Act No. 327, MCL 259.151. 
    Airport manager means the term as defined in section 10 of the Aeronautics Code of the State of Michigan, 1945 Public Act No. 327, MCL 259.10. 
    Airport zoning regulations means airport zoning regulations under the Airport Zoning Act, 1950 (Excess) Public Act No. 23, MCL 259.431 to 259.465, for an airport hazard area that lies in whole or part in the area affected by a zoning ordinance under this Act. 
    Alley means a dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of use, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to in this article as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Apartment means a suite of rooms in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a place of residence for a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Apartment, efficiency means a dwelling unit in a multiple-family building consisting of not more than one room in addition to a kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities. 
    Automobile repair, general means the general mechanical repair, including overhaul and reconditioning of motor vehicle engines, transmissions and other mechanical repairs, but not including collision services, such as body, frame and fender straightening and repair, overall painting and undercoating of automobiles. 
    Automobile repair, major means the general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles and collision services, such as body, frame and fender straightening and repair, overall painting and undercoating of automobiles. 
    Automobile service station means a place where gasoline or other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale at retail to the public, including the sale of accessories, oiling and light motor service on the premises, but in no case providing general or major vehicle repairs. 
    Awning and canopy means a covered structure made of cloth, metal or other material with supporting frames attached to a building which projects beyond the building wall and/or is carried by a frame supported by the building, ground or sidewalk below. 
    Block means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or stream, or between any such street, railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or stream and any other barrier to the continuity of development or corporate boundary lines of the city. 
    Boardinghouse means a building, other than a hotel or motel, where lodging and/or meals for three or more persons are served for compensation. 
    Building means a structure erected onsite, a mobile home or mobile structure, a premanufactured or precut structure, above or below ground, designed primarily for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the established grade of a building to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs and to the average height between eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
    Carwash means a lot on which motor vehicles are washed and waxed, either by the patron or other persons, using machinery specially designed for such purpose. 
    Childcare center means a facility providing for the care and keeping of displaced children, such as orphans. 
    Child day care center means a nursery facility intended to provide for the temporary care of children during the day. 
    Church means a building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship, which is used only for such purpose and accessory activities that are customarily associated therewith. 
    Clinic means an establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by medical specialists practicing as a group. 
    Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, etc., but which is not operated for profit. 
    Conservation easement means that term as defined in section 2140 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1944 Public Act No. 451, MCL 324.2140. 
    Convalescent or nursing home means a structure with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and limited medical care. 
    Development means the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another lot or the use of open land for a new use. 
    Development rights means the rights to develop land to the maximum intensity of development authorized by law. 
    Development rights ordinance means an ordinance which may comprise part of a zoning ordinance adopted under Section 507 of Public Act No. 110 of 2006. 
    District means a portion of the incorporated area of the city within which certain regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this article. 
    Drive-in means a business establishment developed so that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure, or to provide self-service for patrons and food carry-out. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or overhead gas; electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems; collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes; traffic signals and hydrants in connection with such utilities, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing or adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety and/or welfare. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Family means an individual, or a group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, together with not more than three additional persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Family child-care home and group child-care home means those terms as defined in section 1 of 1973 Public Act No. 116, MCL 722.111, and only apply to the bona fide private residence of the operator of the family or group child-care home. 
    Farm means the carrying on of any agricultural activity or the raising of livestock or small animals as a source of income. 
    Fast-food carryout means a business establishment where food and/or beverages are prepared on the premises to be sold at retail to patrons, provided the food and/or beverages are not intended to be consumed on the premises or within a motor vehicle parked on the site. 
    Fence means a structure of definite height and location used to serve as a barrier or screen in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
    Floor area, gross means the sum of gross horizontal areas of the several stories of the building measured from the outside surfaces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls, but shall not include porches, breezeways or garages. 
    Floor area ratio means the percentage of lot area to the floor area of all buildings, excluding the floor area of garages, carports and breezeways, and excluding the area of any floor more than four feet below average grade where no part of such basement is used for sleeping rooms or quarters. 
    Floor space means the floor area of all floors, as measured from the inside surfaces of the walls enclosing the part of a building occupied by a single occupant or shared by a distinct group of occupants, excluding common halls, stairwells, sanitary facilities, storage and other areas to which patrons do not have regular access. 
    Front lot line means a line dividing a lot from any public easement or right-of-way of any public street or highway except a limited or controlled access highway to which the lot has no access. In the case of a corner lot or double frontage lot, the line separating such lot from the same street on which adjacent interior lots face shall be the front lot line. 
    Garage means a fully-enclosed building used for the storage of motor vehicles, but not including buildings in which fuel is sold or repair or other services are performed. All garages shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance to other buildings already located in the same zoning district. 
    Grade means the ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the heights of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building. 
    Greenbelt means a strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip in carrying out the requirements of this article. 
    Greenway means a contiguous or linear open space, including habitats, wildlife corridors, and trails that links parks, nature reserves, cultural features, or historic sites with each other, for recreation and conservation purposes. 
    Ground coverage ratio means the percentage of lot area included within the outside lines of the exterior walls of all buildings located on the lot, except garages and carports, and including the area of porches, decks, breezeways, balconies and patios, except patios less than six inches above grade. 
    Group facility means a building, structure or institution owned or operated by a governmental unit or agency, or a nonprofit corporation or foundation, which is used for the care and treatment of: 
(1)	Abused persons on a temporary basis not to exceed 30 days; or 
(2)	Physically, mentally or emotionally impaired persons. 
The number of such persons entitled to 24-hour residence in a group facility shall be limited, not including full-time residential staff, to six persons if such persons are physically, mentally or emotionally impaired, or 12 persons if such persons are abused. 
    Hospital means a building, structure or institution in which sick or injured persons, primarily inpatients, are given medical or surgical treatment and which operates under a license by the state health department. 
    Home occupation means a use conducted entirely within an enclosed single-family dwelling. Such uses include, but are not limited to, instruction in a craft or fine art, barbershops and beauty shops, dressmaking shops, real estate and insurance sales, bookkeeping and accounting services or the professional offices of physicians, dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, attorneys, engineers, architects and similar recognized professions. 
    Hotel means a structure designed, used or offered for residential occupancy for any period less than one month, including tourist homes, resorts and motels, but not including hospitals and nursing homes. 
    Housing for elderly means a dwelling unit specifically designed for the needs of an elderly person, and conforming to the requirements of the state and/or federal programs providing for the housing for the elderly. 
    Improvements means those features and actions associated with a project that are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval to protect natural resources or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of a local unit of government and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage. Improvements do not include the entire project that is the subject of zoning approval. 
    Intensity of development means the height, bulk, area, density, setback, use and other similar characteristics of development. 
    Junkyard means an area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking yards and any open area of more than 200 square feet, which is used for storage or keeping or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
    Kennel means any activity involving the permanent or temporary keeping or treatment of animals as a business other than ordinary agricultural operations. 
    Laundromat means a place where patrons wash, dry or dry clean clothing and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
    Legislative body means the county board of commissioners of a county, the board of trustees of a township or, the council or other similar [boards or council] of a city or village, or other similar duly elected governing body of a city or village. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Local unit of government means a county, township, city or village. 
    Lot means the contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by a public highway or alley, including any part of such lot subject to an easement for any purpose, other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part which is severed from another lot where the severance creates a nonconformity of use or structure. 
    Lot area means the area of land within the boundary of a lot, excluding any part under water. 
    Lot, corner means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersections of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting on a curved street shall be considered a corner lot for the purpose of this article if the arc is of a radius less than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line means a line marking the boundary of a lot. 
    Lot, through means an interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double-frontage lots, all yards of such lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front-yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 
    Mental health center means a hospital or clinic where the primary activity is the treatment and care of persons suffering from mental or emotional disorders. 
    Mobile home means a movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed on its own chassis and designed for permanent year-round living as a single-family dwelling. This term shall not include motor homes, campers, recreational vehicles or other transportable structures designed for temporary use and which are not designed primarily for permanent residence and connection to sanitary sewage, electrical power and portable water utilities. 
    Mobile home park means a plot of ground upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located. 
    Multiple dwelling means a structure designed or used for residential occupancy by three or more families, with or without common or separate kitchen or dining facilities, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, rooming houses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, townhouses and similar housing types, but not including hotels, hospitals or nursing homes, and shall conform in all other respects to the standards set forth in this article for single-family dwellings. 
    Municipality means the City of Gladstone, Michigan. 
    Nuisance means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeated invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being; the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things such as, but not limited to, noise, dust, smoke, odor, glare, fumes, flashes, vibrations, objectionable effluent or the congregation of people, especially at night, passenger traffic or invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic. 
    Nursery and plant materials means a space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants, flowers or related items offered for retail sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or landscaping. The term "nursery," as used in this article, does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    Nursing home means a structure designed or used for residential occupancy that provides limited medical or nursing care on the premises for occupants, but does not include a hospital or mental health center. 
    Off-street parking lot means a facility providing vehicular parking spaces, with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of vehicles. 
    Open front store means a business establishment developed so that service to patrons may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. This term shall not include automobile repair or gasoline service stations. Such services shall be wholly contained within the parcel and behind the required front-yard setback. 
    Other eligible land means land that has a common property line with agricultural land from which development rights have been purchased and is not divided from that agricultural land by a state or federal limited access highway. 
    Parking space means an area of definite length and width, which shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access to such parking space and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, governmental entity or other legal entity. 
    Population means the population according to the most recent federal decennial census or according to a special census conducted under section 7 of the Glen Steil State Revenue Sharing Act of 1971, 1971 Public Act No. 140, MCL 141.907 whichever is the more recent. 
    Pre-existing, nonconforming, two-family dwelling means an existing structure in the R-1 district constructed as a two-family building that has off-street parking, a private entrance for both families, separate utilities and separate bathroom facilities. 
    Principal use means the main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Public utility means a person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish to the public under federal, state or municipal regulations gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telephone, telegraph, cable television, transportation or water. 
    Rear lot line means the lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, but not less than ten feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle designed or constructed for the transportation of people, primarily for recreational purposes, and which may permit occupancy of such vehicle as a sleeping place, including, but not limited to, motor homes, campers, camper trailers, off-road vehicles, boats and utility trailers. 
    Restaurant means a lot upon which food or beverages are cooked or prepared and offered for sale and where consumption is permitted on the premises, whether or not entertainment is offered, and includes establishments commonly known as bars, grills, cafes, taverns, nightclubs, drive-ins and any fast-food establishment permitting consumption on the premises. 
    Schools includes public schools owned and operated by the Gladstone Area Public School District, private and/or parochial educational institutions, when operated primarily for the purpose of giving preparatory education similar in character to that provided in public schools or kindergartens, and public school academies, as defined by MCL 380.501 et seq. 
    Setback means the distance required to obtain the minimum front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this article. 
    Side lot line means any lot lines other than the front lot line or rear lot line. 
    Single-family dwelling means a building containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use that complies with the following standards: 
(1)	It complies with the minimum square footage requirements of this article for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(2)	It has a minimum width across any front, side or rear elevation of 20 feet. 
(3)	It is firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site. 
(4)	If such dwelling is a mobile home as defined in this section, such mobile home shall be installed with the wheels removed. Additionally, no dwelling shall have an exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage or chassis. 
(5)	The dwelling is connected to a public sewer and water supply, or to such private facilities approved by the local health department. 
(6)	The dwelling contains a storage capability area in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling, or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
(7)	The dwelling is aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity, with either a roof overhang of not less than six inches on all sides or, alternatively, with window sills and roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the dwelling; has no fewer than two exterior doors with the second door being located in either the rear or side of the dwelling; and contains permanently-attached steps connected to the exterior door areas or to porches connected to such door areas where required by a difference in elevation. The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by the zoning administrator upon review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling subject to appeal by an aggrieved party to the zoning board of appeals within a period of 15 days from the receipt of notice of the zoning administrator's decision. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the standards set forth in this definition, as well as the character, design and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks within 2,000 feet of the subject dwelling, where such area is developed with dwellings to the extent of not less than 20 percent of the lots situated within such area or, where such area is not so developed, by the character, design and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks throughout the city. Such dwellings shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour or relief from the common or standard designed home. 
(8)	The dwelling contains no additions, rooms or other areas which are not constructed with similar quality workmanship as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a foundation as required in this definition. 
The standards set forth in subsections (1)-(8) of this definition shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in the ordinance of the city pertaining to such parks. All construction required in this definition shall be commenced only after a building permit has been obtained. The dwelling shall comply with all pertinent building and fire codes. 
    Site plan includes the documents and drawings required by the zoning ordinance to insure that a proposed land use or activity is in compliance with local ordinances and state and federal statutes 
    State-licensed residential facility means a structure constructed for residential purposes that is licensed by the state under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, 1979, Public Act No. 218, MCL 400.701 to 400.737, or 1973 Public Act No. 116, MCL 722.111 to 722.128, and provides residential services for six or fewer individuals under 24-hour supervision or care. 
    Street means a dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structure means any constructed, erected or placed material or combination of materials in or upon the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, mobile homes, radio towers, satellite dishes or earth stations, sheds, signs, storage bins, but excluding sidewalks and paving on streets, driveways, parking areas and patios. 
    Swimming pool, private means any artificially constructed, nonportable pool or structure erected in connection with or appurtenant to one or more private residences, either above or below or partly above or partly below grade, located either in part or wholly outside of a permanently-enclosed and roofed building, designed to hold water to a depth greater than 24 inches at any place in the structure when filled to capacity, and intended to be used for swimming or wading. 
    Temporary building and use means a structure or use permitted by the zoning board of appeals to exist during periods of construction of the main use, or for special events. 
    Two-family dwelling means a building containing two separate dwelling units designed for residential use and conforming in all other respects to the standards set forth in this article for single-family dwellings. 
    Yard means the open space on the same lot with a main building, as follows: 
(1)	Front yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest projection of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the front yard may be opposite either street frontage. 
(2)	Rear yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest projection of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage. 
(3)	Side yard means an open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest projection on the side lot line to the nearest projection of the main building. 
    Undeveloped state means a natural state preserving natural resources, natural features, scenic or wooded conditions, agricultural use, open space, or similar use of condition. Land in an undeveloped state does not include a golf course but may include a recreational trail, picnic area; children's play area, greenway, or linear park. Land in an undeveloped state may be, but is not required to be, dedicated to the use of the public. 
    Zoning commission means a planning commission exercising the authority of a zoning board as appointed by the legislative body. 
    Zoning jurisdiction means the area encompassed by the legal boundaries of a city or village or to the area encompassed by the legal boundaries of a county or township outside the limits of incorporated cities and villages. The zoning jurisdiction of a county does not include the areas subject to a township zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 150.02; Ord. No. 453, § 102, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 459, § 102, 8-8-1988; Ord. No. 462, § 1(150.02), 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 506, § 1, 6-24-1996; Ord. No. 514, § 1, 8-25-1997; Ord. No. 547, § 1(102), 10-27-2003; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 574, 10-27-2008) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-472. - Application of this article. 
    The construction, placement or maintenance of any structure and the commencement or continuance of any use of land within the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article. Parcels of land which have been described in a recorded plat or by a recorded deed prior to December 8, 1986, shall be exempt from the lot size and lot width regulations of this article. Where a parcel of land is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures shall be allowed if both subordinate and incidental to the principal use and if such use or structure does not alter the character of the district where located. Accessory uses to a residence shall include home occupations as defined herewith. 
(Code 1976, § 150.03; Ord. No. 453, § 103, 12-8-1986) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 453, § 103, adopted Dec. 8, 1986, changed the title of § 30-472 from "Applicability" to "Application of this article". This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 30-473. - Exemptions. 
    The location of pipes, wires, poles and generating and transmission equipment of public utilities or railroad tracks regulated by the state or the United States are exempt from regulation under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 150.04; Ord. No. 453, § 104, 12-8-1986) 
Sec. 30-474. - Relationship to other laws. 
    Whenever regulations or restrictions imposed by this article are either more or less restrictive than regulations or restrictions imposed by any governmental authority through legislation, rules or regulation, the regulations, rules or restrictions which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. Regardless of any other provision of this article, no land shall be used and no structure shall be erected or maintained in violation of any state or federal pollution control or environmental protection law or regulation. 
(Code 1976, § 150.43) 
Sec. 30-475. - Amendments. 
(a)	Proposals for amendments to the text or zoning maps of this article shall be presented to the zoning committee, which shall hold a public hearing to discuss the proposals. The zoning committee shall be guided in its decisions by the plan and the provisions and zoning maps of this article. Any decision of the zoning committee relating to proposed amendments shall be set forth in writing and in detail and shall be transferred to the city commission as the recommendation of the zoning committee. The city commission shall, in accordance with the enabling statute, make the final decision regarding proposed amendments. Any amendment shall be set forth as an ordinance amending this article, and all amendments rezoning land shall include legal descriptions of the land involved, provided, however, that an amendment to conform a provision of the zoning ordinance to the decree of a court of competent jurisdiction as to any specific lands may be adopted by the city commission and the notice of the adopted amendment published without referring the amendment to the planning commission or any other board. 
(b)	After receiving a zoning ordinance or an amendment thereto the city commission may hold a public hearing if it considers it necessary or if otherwise required, as provided in MCL 125.3401. 
(c)	The city commission shall grant a hearing on a proposed ordinance provision to an interested property owner who requests a hearing by certified mail, addressed to the city clerk. A hearing under this subsection is not subject to the requirements of section 30-513, except that notice of the hearing shall be given to the interested property owner in the manner required in subsections 30-513(b)(3) and (4). 
(Code 1976, § 150.34; Ord. No. 453, § 508, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 574, 10-27-2008) 
State Law reference- Amendments, MCL 125.3202. 
Sec. 30-476. - Protest petition. 
    An amendment to a zoning ordinance is subject to a protest petition as required by this section. If a protest petition is filed, approval of the amendment to the zoning ordinance shall require a two-thirds vote of the city commission, unless a larger vote, not to exceed a three-quarters vote, is required by ordinance or Charter. The protest petition shall be presented to the city commission before final legislative action on the amendment and shall be signed by one or more of the following: 
The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included in the proposed change. 
The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included within an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change. 
Publicly-owned land shall be excluded in calculating the 20 percent land area requirement. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007) 
Secs. 30-477-30-500. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 30-501. - Zoning administrator. 
    The office of zoning administrator is established. The zoning administrator shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at his pleasure. The zoning administrator shall receive compensation as the city commission may, from time to time, determine. The zoning administrator may have additional duties and responsibilities. The zoning administrator shall administer the provisions of this article and shall have all administrative powers in connection therewith which are not specifically assigned to some other officer or body. He shall have no power to vary or waive the requirements set forth in this article. The enforcement of the zoning ordinance shall be carried out by the department of public safety pursuant to MCL. 125.3407. 
(Code 1976, § 150.27; Ord. No. 453, § 501, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 574, 10-27-2008) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 30-502. - Zoning committee. 
    The planning commission has carried out the responsibilities of the zoning committee in preparing this article. It is hereby determined that the planning commission shall provide continuing overall direction in the administration of this article and shall be the first city body reviewing actions, including proposed amendments, planned unit developments, conditional use permits, and site plan appeal procedures. 
(Code 1976, § 150.32; Ord. No. 453, § 506, 12-8-1986) 
Sec. 30-503. - Zoning compliance permits. 
(a)	Any land use within the city shall not be commenced or changed, and no structure shall be erected or enlarged, until the person conducting such use or erecting or enlarging such structure has obtained a zoning compliance permit from the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall issue such permit upon the furnishing in writing, over the signature of the applicant, of such information as may be necessary to establish that the proposed use, structure or addition is in full compliance with all provisions of this article, including site plan review if required, a finding by the zoning administrator that such compliance has been met, and payment of a permit fee, when a fee has been set by the city commission. A zoning compliance permit shall not be issued where it appears that any land area required to conform to any provision of this article is also required as a part of any adjoining property to keep the development or use of such land in conformity with this article, or to keep it from becoming more nonconforming, if such land area was, at any time, subsequent to the commencement of development or use of such adjoining property, in common ownership with such adjoining property, and any zoning compliance permit shall be absolutely void ab initio and shall be revoked. A zoning compliance permit shall not remain valid if the use or structure it authorizes becomes nonconforming. 
(b)	Performance guarantee. 
(1)	To ensure compliance with a zoning ordinance and any conditions imposed under a zoning ordinance, the city may require that a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city covering the estimated cost of improvements be deposited with the clerk of the legislative body to insure faithful completion of the improvements. The performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. The city may not require the deposit of the performance guarantee until it is prepared to issue the permit. The city shall establish procedures by which a rebate of any cash deposits in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements shall be made as work progresses. 
a.	The city may authorize such a rebate of any cash deposit upon certification by the city building inspector that a specified proportion of the required improvements has been completed. 
(2)	This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been deposited under the Land Division Act, 1967 Public Act No. 288, MCL 560.101 to 560.293 or under section 30-433 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 150.28; Ord. No. 453, § 502, 12-8-1986; 2006, Act 110; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 567, § 1, 6-25-2007) 
Sec. 30-504. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No permanent certification of occupancy shall be issued under any building code applicable in the city until all requirements of this article have been met. A temporary certificate may be issued under circumstances where expressly permitted by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 150.29; Ord. No. 453, § 503, 12-8-1986) 
Sec. 30-505. - Special zoning orders book and map. 
    The zoning administrator shall keep in his office a book to be known as the "special zoning orders book," in which he shall list, with a brief description, all variances, conditional use permits, authorizations for planned unit development designations of class A nonconformance, and any terminations of any of them. Each item shall be assigned a number when entered. The zoning administrator shall also keep a map, to be known as the "special zoning orders map," on which he shall record the numbers in the special zoning orders book to indicate the locations affected by the items in the book. The special zoning orders book and map shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 150.30; Ord. No. 453, § 504, 12-8-1986) 
Sec. 30-506. - Interpretation of the zoning map. 
    Where due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the zoning maps there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any zoning district boundary as shown thereon, the zoning administrator shall make an interpretation of said map upon request of any person. Any person aggrieved by any such interpretation may appeal such interpretation to the zoning board of appeals. The administrator and the zoning board of appeals, in interpreting the zoning map or deciding any appeal, shall apply the following standards: 
(1)	Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow the lot lines, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, or along the center line of alleys, streets, rights-of-way or watercourses, unless such boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the zoning map. 
(2)	Where zoning districts' boundary lines are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundary lines. 
(3)	Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of any such zoning district boundary line, unless indicated by dimensions shown on the zoning map, shall be determined by the use of the map scale shown thereon. 
(4)	If, after the application of the foregoing rules uncertainty still exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary line, the boundary line shall be determined in a reasonable manner considering the history of uses of property and the history of zoning ordinance[s] and amendments in the city as well as all other relevant facts. 
(Code 1976, § 150.31; Ord. No. 453, § 505, 12-8-1986) 
Sec. 30-507. - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
(a)	Nonconforming uses and structures within the city are those which do not conform to a zoning provision or requirement of this article VIII, but were lawfully established prior to December 18, 1986, or lawfully established prior to any amendment of this article VIII. Class A nonconforming uses or structures are those which have been designated by this article or the zoning board of appeals, after application by an interested person or the zoning administrator, upon findings that continuance of such use or structure would not be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare, or the spirit of this article; that the use of the structure does not and is not likely to significantly depress the value of nearby properties; that the use or structure was lawful at the time of its inception; and that no useful purpose would be served by strict application of the provisions or requirements of this article with which the use or structure does not conform. All nonconforming uses and structures not designated as class A are class B nonconforming uses or structures. 
(b)	All residential structures lawfully existing on December 18, 1986, are designated as class A nonconforming uses with the right to alter, enlarge and rebuild within the limits set forth in this article for R-2 zoning districts. 
(1)	Procedure for obtaining class A designation; conditions. A written application shall be filed setting forth the name and address of the applicant, giving a legal description of the property to which the application pertains, and including such other information as may be necessary to enable the zoning board of appeals to make a determination on such designation. The zoning board of appeals may require the furnishing of such additional information as it considers necessary. The notice and hearing procedure before the zoning board of appeals shall be the same as in the case of an application for variance. The decision on such application shall be in writing and shall set forth the findings and reasons on which such decision is based. Any conditions shall be attached to the notice, including any time limit, where necessary, to assure that the use or structure does not become contrary to the public health, safety or welfare, or the spirit and purpose of this article. A vested interest shall not arise of a class A designation, whether it arises from designation in this article or by action of the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)	Revocation of class A designation. A class A designation shall be revoked, following the same procedure required for designation, upon a finding that, as a result of any change of conditions or circumstances, the use or structure no longer qualifies for a class A designation. 
(3)	Regulations for class A nonconforming uses and structures. A class A nonconforming use shall not be resumed if it has been abandoned or has been changed to a conforming use for any period of time. A class A structure shall not be used, altered or enlarged in violation of any condition imposed in the designation of such structure as a class A nonconforming structure. 
(4)	Regulations for class B nonconforming uses and structures. It is the purpose of this article to eliminate class B nonconforming uses and structures as rapidly as permitted by law without payment of compensation. A class B nonconforming use shall not be resumed if it has been abandoned or has been changed to a conforming use for any period of time, or if the structure in which such use is conducted is damaged by fire or other casualty to the extent that the cost of reconstruction or repair exceeds 50 percent of the reproduction cost of such structure. A class B nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged or structurally altered, nor shall it be repaired or reconstructed if it has been damaged by fire or other casualty to the extent that the cost of reconstruction or repair exceeds 50 percent of the reproduction cost of such structure. A class B nonconforming use shall not be changed to a substantially different nonconforming use, nor enlarged so as to make use of more land area than used at the time of becoming nonconforming. 
(c)	The legislative body may acquire, by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, private property or an interest in private property for the removal of nonconforming uses and structures. The legislative body may provide that the cost and expense of acquiring private property may be paid from general funds or assessed to a special district in accordance with the applicable statutory provisions relating to the creation and operation of special assessment districts for public improvements in local units of government. Property acquired under this subsection by a city shall not be used for public housing. 
(d)	The elimination of the nonconforming uses and structures in a zoning district is declared to be for a public purpose and for a public use. The legislative body may institute proceedings for condemnation of nonconforming uses and structures under 1911 Public Act No. 149, MCL 213.21 to 213.25. 
(Code 1976, § 150.37; Ord. No. 453, § 511, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 574, 10-27-2008) 
State Law reference- Nonconformities, MCL 125.583a. 
Sec. 30-508. - Conditional use permits. 
    A conditional use shall not be established in any zoning district within the city, except upon a permit issued by the zoning committee, which shall be guided by the following and other applicable standards set forth in this article: 
(1)	Upon receipt of an application for a conditional use permit the zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing on the application and shall provide notice of the request as required under section MCL 125.3103. 
(2)	The conditional use shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained in a manner, which is harmonious with the character of adjacent property and the surrounding area, and shall not interfere with the general enjoyment of adjacent property. 
(3)	The conditional use shall not be hazardous to adjacent property, or involve uses, activities, materials or equipment which will be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of persons or property through the excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, odor or fumes. 
(4)	The conditional use shall be adequately served by essential public facilities and services and shall not place demands on public services and facilities in excess of the current capacity. 
(5)	The zoning commission may deny, approve, or approve with conditions a request for conditional use approval. The decision on a conditional use shall be incorporated in a statement of findings and conclusions relative to the conditional use, which specifies the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed. 
(6)	Appeals from a decision on a conditional use permit here under may be taken as provided for in section 30-511. 
(Code 1976, § 150.33; Ord. No. 453, § 507, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007) 
State Law reference- Conditional uses, MCL 125.3502, 125.3604 
Sec. 30-509. - Site plan review. 
    The purpose of the site plan review shall be to determine compliance with the provisions set forth in this article, to promote the orderly development of the city, the stability of values, investments and general welfare, and to help prevent the impairment or depreciation of land values and development by the erection of structures, or additions or alterations to structures, without proper attention to siting and appearance. The following provisions shall apply to all site plans unless otherwise provided in this article and shall be minimum requirements, and additional procedures may be required by this article or the city commission: 
(1)	A site plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review, and a fee shall be submitted in accordance with the fee schedule approved by the city commission for the following: 
a.	Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of this article. 
b.	Any development, except newly constructed single-family and two-family residential, for which off-street parking areas are provided as set forth in section 30-583. 
c.	Any use in the multiple residential (R-3), business (B-1, B-2) or industrial (I-1, I-2) districts. 
d.	Any use, except newly constructed single-family or two-family residential, which lies contiguous to a major thoroughfare or collector street, or across the street from a residential district. 
e.	All residentially-related conditional uses permitted in single-family districts, including, but not limited to, churches, schools and public facilities. 
f.	Building additions, modifications, accessory buildings or fences shall require zoning administrator review. 
(2)	Site plans shall be prepared in a clear and orderly manner and shall include the following information: 
a.	A scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet if the subject property is less than three acres, and one inch equals 100 feet if the subject property is three acres or more. 
b.	Date, north point and scale. 
c.	The actual dimensions of all lot and property lines (as shown by a licensed surveyor with the survey stakes visible), showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties. 
d.	The location of all existing and proposed structures and utilities on the subject property and all existing structures and utilities on land immediately adjacent to the site within 100 feet of the site's parcel lines. 
e.	The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas. 
f.	The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys. 
(3)	In the process of reviewing the site plan, the zoning administrator shall consider: 
a.	The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress and egress from the site in relation to streets giving access to the site and in relation to pedestrian traffic. 
b.	The traffic circulation features within the site and the location of an automobile parking area, and the zoning administrator may make such requirements with respect to any matters, as well as assure: 
1.	Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the site and in relation to access streets. 
2.	Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and the existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
(4)	The zoning administrator and/or the planning commission may further require landscaping, fences and walls in pursuance of the objectives set forth in this section, and such landscaping, fences and walls shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the continuous maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant. 
(5)	a.	The site plan shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator and if the zoning administrator approves the application as complete it shall be forwarded to the planning commission for approval, disapproval or approval with conditions. If the zoning administrator deems the application incomplete, it shall be disapproved and returned to the applicant for further action. The failure of the zoning administrator to either disapprove the application or to approve it as complete within 45 days after submission of the application shall constitute a decision by the zoning administrator that the application is complete and shall be forwarded to the planning commission for action, unless an extension is agreed upon mutually by the applicant and the zoning administrator. 
b.	In addition to any specific items of review required by this section, the review of a site plan by the zoning administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.	That the proposed use conforms to the uses permitted in that zoning district. 
2.	That the dimensional arrangement of building(s) and structure(s) conform to the required yards, setbacks and height restrictions of the ordinance. 
3.	That the proposed use conforms to all use and design provisions and requirements (if any) as found in the zoning ordinance for specified uses. 
4.	That there is a proper relationship between the existing and proposed streets and highways within the vicinity to assure the safety and convenience of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
5.	That the proposed on-site buildings, structures and entryways are situated and designed to minimize adverse effects (upon owners and occupants of adjacent and surrounding properties and members of the public) by providing for adequate design of ingress/egress, interior/exterior traffic flow, storm drainage, erosion, grading, lighting and parking as specified by the zoning ordinance or other county or state law. 
6.	That natural features of the landscape are retained where they can enhance the development on the site, or where they furnish a barrier or buffer between the project and adjoining properties (used for dissimilar purposes), or where they assist in preserving the general safety, health and appearance of the neighborhood (e.g. controlling erosion or the discharge of stormwater, etc.). 
7.	That adverse effect upon adjoining residents or owners of the proposed development and activities are minimized by appropriate screening, fencing, or landscaping (as provided or required in the zoning ordinance). 
8.	That all buildings and structures are accessible to emergency vehicles. 
9.	That the site plan as approved is consistent with the intent and purposes of the zoning ordinance and that any special use permits or variances that have been obtained. 
(6)	The building permit may be revoked by the zoning administrator in any case where the conditions of the site plan, as approved by the planning commission, have not been complied with. 
(7)	Any structure or use added subsequent to the initial site plan approval must be approved by the planning commission. Incidental and minor variations of the approved site plan, with written approval of the zoning administrator and agreed to by the landowner, shall not invalidate prior site plan approval. 
(8)	If a new use is proposed for a premise for which a site plan was previously approved, and no new structures are to be erected and/or no structural additions or alterations are to be made to existing structures, then the following provisions shall be applied by the zoning administrator: 
(a)	Site plan review shall not be required if the zoning administrator determines that the new use does not have a material adverse impact on the conditions set forth in this section 30-509 which conditions the zoning administrator is required to consider in a site plan review. 
(b)	Site plan review shall be required if the zoning administrator determines that the new use does have a material impact on one or more of the conditions which are required to be considered in a site plan review; however the site plan review process shall be required as to the condition or conditions impacted only, and if approved by the planning commission shall be considered as a modification of the previously approved site plan for the premises. 
(c)	The zoning administrator's authority under this subsection shall apply only to uses which are permitted uses under the applicable zoning provisions. 
(Code 1976, § 150.21; Ord. No. 453, § 307, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 547, § 1(307), 10-27-2003; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 567, § 1, 6-25-2007; Ord. No. 574, 10-27-2008; Ord. No. 594, 3-10-2014) 
State Law reference- Site plans, MCL 125.3501. 
Sec. 30-510. - Zoning board of appeals. 
(a)	Establishment. There is established a zoning board of appeals (ZBA), which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in PA 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101 et seq. 
(b)	Jurisdiction. The board shall have the following powers and authority: 
(1)	To hear and decide questions that arise in the administration of the city Code zoning provisions, including the interpretation of zoning maps. 
(2)	To hear and decide matters referred to the ZBA or upon which the ZBA is required to pass under the city Code zoning provisions. 
(3)	To hear and decide appeals from any administrative order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or body charged with enforcement of the city Code zoning provisions. 
(4)	If so provided in the city Code, appeals from special land use and planned unit development decisions. 
(5)	To subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to any matter before the ZBA. 
(6)	The ZBA may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(c)	Membership. The board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to approval of the city commission. 
(d)	Makeup of board. The five regular members of the board shall be made up as follows: 
(1)	One regular member shall be a member of the Gladstone Planning Commission; such member to be appointed in the regular manner upon recommendation to the mayor by the chairperson of the planning commission. 
(2)	The remaining members and any alternate members shall be selected from the electors of Gladstone residing within the city and shall be representative of the population distribution and the various interests present in the city. 
(e)	Alternate members. The mayor may appoint, subject to the approval of the city commission, not more than two alternate members for the same term as regular members. 
(1)	An alternate member may be called to serve as a member of the board in the absence of a regular member, if the regular member will be unable to attend one or more meetings. 
(2)	An alternate member may be called to serve as a member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. In such event the alternate member shall serve in the case until a final decision is made. 
(3)	An alternate member serving on the board has the same voting rights as a regular member. 
(f)	Disqualification for appointment. An elected official, employee or contractor of the city shall not be eligible to serve as a member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(g)	Removal of member. A member of the board may be removed by the city commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or non-feasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(h)	Conflict of interest. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Conflict of interest shall be defined in a rule of procedure as adopted by the zoning board of appeals. A member of the board who is also a member of the planning commission shall not participate in a public hearing, or vote on the same matter the member voted on as a member of the planning commission. However, the member may consider and vote on other unrelated matters involving the same property. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office. 
(i)	Terms. The terms of office for board members shall be for three years; however, the office of the member appointed from the planning commission shall be considered vacant if before the three year term expires such member is no longer a member of the planning commission. Upon initial appointment of the board members, some appointments may be for fewer than three years to provide for staggered terms. 
(j)	Filling vacancies. A vacancy on the board shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, in the same manner as the original appointment. A successor shall be appointed not more than one month after the term of the preceding member has expired, or otherwise ended. 
(k)	Quorum. The board shall not conduct business unless a majority of the regular members of the board are present. Alternates shall not be counted in determining a quorum. 
(l)	Meetings. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at other times as the board may specify in its rules of procedure. The chairperson, or acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(m)	Other powers and duties. The board shall have such other powers and duties as are provided for in P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended; MCL 125.3101 et seq. 
(Code 1976, § 150.35; Ord. No. 453, § 509, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 574, 10-27-2008; Ord. No. 584, § 1, 8-22-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 584, § 1, adopted Aug. 22, 2011, retitled § 30-510 from "Board of zoning appeals" to "Zoning board of appeals." 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-251 et seq. 
State Law reference- Board of appeals, MCL 125.3601, 125.3602, 125.3603. 
Sec. 30-511. - Appeals. 
(a)	An appeal may be taken to the board of appeals by any person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board of bureau of the city. 
(b)	An appeal under this section shall be taken within the time prescribed by the board of appeals by general rule by filing, with the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The officer or body from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)	An appeal under this section stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the officer or body, cause imminent peril to life or property. If such a certification is filed, the proceedings shall only be stayed by a restraining order. A restraining order may be granted by the board or the circuit court, on application, on notice to the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(d)	The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and shall give notice of the appeal as provided in section 30-513 of this Code. 
(e)	The board of appeals shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and shall make an order, requirement, decision or determination as in the board's opinion should be made in the premises and, to that end, shall have all of the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal is taken. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall state the grounds of any determination made by the board. 
(f)	The board of appeals may impose conditions upon an affirmative decision as provided in Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3604(7). 
(g)	The decision of the board of appeals shall be final. 
(1)	Any party aggrieved by a decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal to the circuit court for the county in which the property is located. The circuit court shall review the record and decision to ensure that the decision meets all of the following requirements: 
a.	Complies with the constitution and laws of the state. 
b.	Is based upon proper procedure. 
c.	Is supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the record. 
d.	Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by law to the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)	If the court finds the record inadequate to make the review required by this section or finds that additional material evidence exists that with good reason was not presented, the court shall order further proceedings on conditions that the court considers proper. The zoning board of appeals may modify its findings and decision as a result of the new proceedings or may affirm the original decision. The supplementary record and decision shall be filed with the court. The court may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision. 
(3)	An appeal under this section shall be filed within 30 days after the zoning board of appeals certifies its decision in writing or approves the minutes of its decision. The court shall have jurisdiction to make such further orders as justice may require. An appeal may be had from the decision of any circuit court to the court of appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 150.35(C); Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 125.3604, 125.3605, 125.3606, 125.3607. 
Sec. 30-512. - Variances. 
    The appeals board shall base its decisions on variances from the strict requirements of this Code so that the spirit of the Code is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done based on the following standards: 
(1)	Standards for variance decisions by the appeals board. 
a.	Dimensional variances. A dimensional variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals only in cases where the applicant demonstrates in the official record of the public hearing that practical difficulty exists by showing all of the following: 
1.	That the need for the requested variance is due to unique circumstances or physical conditions of the property involved such as narrowness, shallowness, shape, water, or topography, and is not due to the applicants personal or economic difficulty. 
2.	That the need for the requested variance is not the result of actions of the property owner or previous property owners (self-created). 
3.	That strict compliance with regulations governing area, setback, frontage, height, bulk, density or other dimensional requirements will unreasonably prevent the property owner from using the property for a permitted purpose, or will render conformity with those regulations unnecessarily burdensome. 
4.	That the requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district. 
5.	That the requested variance will not cause an adverse impact on surrounding property, property values, or the use and enjoyment of property in the neighborhood or district. 
(2)	Use variances. Under no circumstances shall the appeals board grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Code in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Code in said district. 
(Code 1976, § 150.36; Ord. No. 453, § 510, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 507, § 2, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 574, 10-27-2008) 
State Law reference- Variances, MCL 125.3604. 
Sec. 30-513. - Administrative standards and procedures. 
(a)	Administrative decisions. Whenever, in the course of administration and enforcement of this article, it is necessary or desirable to make an administrative decision, the board of appeals or zoning committee shall make the decision in accordance with the standards set forth in this article. 
(b)	Public hearings. When a public hearing is required in the administration of this article, the zoning board of appeals or the zoning committee shall: 
(1)	Base their decision upon facts presented at a public hearing preceded by a notice in a newspaper of general circulation. Any changes in this article shall follow the provisions set forth in chapter V of the Charter; 
(2)	Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in subsection (b)(3) to the owners of property for which approval is being considered and to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning district. The notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the hearing, if the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different persons, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall be given notice. If a single structure contains more than four dwelling units or other distinct special area owned or leased by different persons, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
(3)	The notice under subsection (2) is considered to be given when personally delivered or when deposited during normal business hours for delivery with the United States postal service or other public or private delivery service. 
(4)	A notice shall do all of the following: 
a.	Specify in all notices of a public hearing, the time, date and place of the hearing and the nature of the request. 
b.	Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses other means of identification may be used. Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
c.	Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(5)	For any group of adjacent property numbering 11 or more that is proposed for rezoning, the requirements of subsection (b)(2), above, and the requirement of [subsection] (b)(3)b. that street addresses be listed do not apply to that group of adjacent properties. 
(6)	A party may appear in person or by agent or attorney to present or rebut information either supporting or opposing the zoning action under consideration; 
(7)	Prepare a comprehensive summary record of the hearing, including an exact record of motions, votes and other official actions; 
(8)	Set forth in writing and in detail any denial, approval, conditional approval or order and the facts supporting such decision which shall indicate the requirements and standards of this article which were relied upon for such decision; and 
(9)	File the record, written testimony or documents submitted with regard to the hearings and the decision with the city clerk, which records and documents shall be open to public inspection. 
(c)	Filing of administrative guides or rules. All administrative guides or rules developed to assist the board of appeals or the zoning committee in the administration of this article shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 150.38; Ord. No. 453, § 512, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 507, § 1, 9-9-1996; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 574, 10-27-2008) 
State Law reference- MCL 125.3103, 125.3602(2), 125.3603, 125.3604. 
Sec. 30-514. - Fees. 
    The city commission may, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees to be paid for zoning compliance permits and for the consideration of conditional use permits, variances, fence permits, planned unit development, class A designations, or amendments to this article. Fees, if any, should be collected by the zoning administrator to be used to defray the cost of zoning administration. 
(Code 1976, § 150.41; Ord. No. 453, § 602, 12-8-1986) 
Secs. 30-515-30-540. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISTRICTS AND DISTRICT REGULATIONS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference- District regulations authorized, MCL 125.582. 

Sec. 30-541. - Establishment of districts. 
    The city is divided into zoning districts which are set forth in this division. The boundaries of such zoning districts are established as shown on the city zoning map as set forth in section 30-505. Conditional uses which are set forth in this division shall also meet the standards set forth in section 30-508. 
(Code 1976, § 150.05; Ord. No. 453, § 201, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007) 
Sec. 30-542. - R-1 district. 
(a)	Scope and intent. This section applies to district R-1. The intent of the R-1 district is to establish and preserve quite neighborhoods for single-family homes within the city as desired by a large number of people, free from other uses except uses which are both compatible with and convenient to the residents of such district. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses in the R-1 district shall be detached single-family dwellings and a state-licensed residential facility approved to receive six or fewer individuals and a family childcare home approved to receive six or fewer minor children other than a facility for the care and treatment of individuals released from or assigned to adult correctional institution. 
(c)	Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-1 district shall be schools, churches, group childcare homes, unlighted golf courses, except miniature golf courses, private parks, swimming pools and similar recreation facilities. Conditional uses in the R-1 district shall be located, site planned and designed to avoid undue noise, nuisances and dangers. 
(Code 1976, § 150.06; Ord. No. 453, § 202, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 459, 8-8-1988; Ord. No. 462, § 1(150.06), 10-9-1989; Ord. No. 467, § 2, 5-28-1991; Ord. No. 506, § 2, 6-24-1996; Ord. No. 513, § 1, 8-25-1997; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 574, 10-27-2008) 
State Law reference- Mandatory permitted uses, MCL 125.3206. 
Sec. 30-543. - R-1A district. 
(a)	Scope and intent. This section applies to the R-1A district. The intent of the R-1 district is to establish and preserve quiet neighborhoods for single-family homes within the city as desired by a large number of people, free from other uses except such uses which are both compatible with and convenient to the residents of such district. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses. The permitted principal use within the R-1A district shall be detached single-family dwellings. 
(c)	Conditional uses. The only conditional use allowed within the R-1A district shall be private parks. Conditional uses in R-1A district shall be located, site planned and designed to avoid undue noise and other nuisances and dangers. 
(d)	Minimum home size. The minimum size for homes located in the R-1A district shall be as follows: 
(1)	One-story homes, 1,500 square feet measured on the first floor and which shall not include any garage floor space. 
(2)	Bi-level and tri-level homes, 2,000 square feet calculated by adding the sums of the square footage on the lower and upper levels in the case of a bi-level home, or by adding the sums of the lower, upper and ground floor levels in the case of a tri-level home and which does not include any garage floor space. 
(Ord. No. 498, 5-22-1995; Ord. No. 499, § 202-A, 10-23-1995) 
State Law reference- Mandatory permitted uses, MCL 125.583b, 125.583c. 
Sec. 30-544. - R-2 district. 
(a)	Scope and intent. This section applies to the R-2 district. The intent of the R-2 district is to establish and preserve quiet single-family and two-family home neighborhoods within the city, free from other uses except such uses, which are both compatible with and convenient to the residents of such district. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses within the R-2 district shall be detached single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings. 
(c)	Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-2 district are the same conditional uses as permitted in the R-1 district as well as adult foster care small group homes and shall be subject to the same conditions. 
(Code 1976, § 150.07; Ord. No. 453, § 203, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007) 
State Law reference- Mandatory permitted uses, MCL 125.3204, 125.3206. 
Sec. 30-545. - R-3 district. 
(a)	Scope and intent. This section applies to the R-3 multiple dwelling district. The R-3 district is established and designed to permit a more intensive residential use of land within the city. Various types and sizes of residential accommodations for ownership or rental would thereby be provided to meet the needs of the different age and family groups in the city. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses within the R-3 district shall include any use permitted in the R-2 district, as well as multiple dwellings, lodging houses, boardinghouses. 
(c)	Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the R-3 district shall be the same as permitted in R-1 district, subject to the same conditions, as well as hospitals, adult foster care large group home, day care centers, multiple-family low-rent family public housing and multiple-family low-rent senior citizen public housing. 
(Code 1976, § 150.08; Ord. No. 453, § 204, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 506, § 3, 6-24-1996; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007) 
State Law reference- Mandatory permitted uses, MCL 125.3204, 125.3206. 
Sec. 30-546. - R-4 district. 
(a)	Intent. To establish and preserve quiet single- and two-family-homes neighborhoods free from other uses except those which are both compatible with and convenient to the residents of the district. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses. Detached single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings and mobile homes. 
(c)	Conditional uses. The same conditional uses as permitted in district R-1, subject to the same conditions. 
(Code 1976, § 150.09; Ord. No. 453, § 205, 12-8-1986) 
State Law reference- Mandatory permitted uses, MCL 125.583b, 125.583c. 
Sec. 30-547. - B-1 district. 
(a)	Intent. To establish and preserve a district for residential and commercial uses such as small stores and service establishments which serve primarily the people of the immediate neighborhood and which can thrive without drawing patrons from a large part of the city and creating traffic congestion which results therefrom. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses. The same uses permitted in the R-2 district and restaurants (except drive-in and fast food), taverns, cocktail lounges, branch banks, offices, self-service laundromats and dry cleaning pick-up stations, bakeries, catering and delicatessen ships [shops], greenhouses and flower shops, shoe repair and other repair shops, studious [studios], convenience grocery stores, and other retail and service establishments primarily serving the immediate neighborhood. No commercial establishment shall occupy a floor area exceeding 3,000 square feet. 
(c)	Conditional uses. The same conditional uses as permitted in the R-3 district and gasoline service stations. 
(Code 1976, § 150.10; Ord. No. 453, § 206, 12-8-1986) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Mandatory permitted uses, MCL 125.583b, 125.583c. 
Sec. 30-548. - B-2 district. 
(a)	Scope and intent. This section applies to the B-2 district. The intent of the B-2 district is to establish and preserve general commercial areas within the city that are convenient and attractive for a wide range of retail uses and business, government and professional offices. The intent of this district is to encourage the concentration of commercial business to the mutual advantage of both the consumers and merchants and thereby promote the best use of land at certain strategic locations. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses. Permitted principal uses within the B-2 district shall include retail establishments selling gifts, hardware, clothing, drugs, groceries, sporting goods, antiques, baked goods, arts and crafts, studios, beauty shops and barbershops, banks, restaurants, cocktail lounges, offices, clinics, personal service establishments, hotels, motels, funeral homes, theaters (except drive-in), and gas stations. Residential occupancy shall be permitted above the ground floor in the district. 
(c)	Conditional uses. Conditional uses within the B-2 district shall include open-air business uses, such as sales and rental establishments for trailers, mobile homes, boats, farm equipment, automobile dealers for new or used cars, and the same conditional uses as permitted in the R-3 district. 
(d)	Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses within the B-2 district shall include junkyards. 
(Code 1976, § 150.11; Ord. No. 453, § 207, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 503, § 207, 2-26-1996) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Mandatory permitted uses, MCL 125.583b, 125.583c. 
Sec. 30-549. - O-S office service district. 
(a)	Intent. To establish and preserve areas for employment activity and service to the public such as offices, banks, clinics, and personal services which do not materially detract from nearby residential uses. 
(b)	Principle permitted uses. Offices of business, professional, financial, medical offices, clinics, facilities for human care such as hospitals, sanitariums, and rest and convalescent homes. 
(c)	Conditional uses. An accessory use customarily related to a principal use authorized by this section such as, but not limited to, a pharmacy or apothecary shop, stores limited to corrective garments or bandages, or optical service, may be permitted. Business, professional and private schools, other than trade or manual arts schools, operated for profit. Examples of private schools permitted herein include, but [are] not limited to, the following: dance studios, music and voice schools, art studios, beauty schools, and professional training. 
(Code 1976, § 150.12; Ord. No. 453, § 208, 12-8-1986) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 10. 
Sec. 30-550. - I-1 light industrial district. 
(a)	Scope and intent. This section applies to the I-1 light industrial district. The I-1 district is designed to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses and industrial operations whose external physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. 
(b)	Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses in the I-1 district shall include any use permitted in the B-2 district; warehousing and wholesale establishments; trucking facilities; the compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food projects, hardware and tool and dye; the manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials; automobile sales for new and used cars; sales and rentals of trailers, mobile homes, boats and farm equipment; planing mills; lumberyards; gas stations; dry cleaning plants and laboratories. 
(c)	Conditional uses. Conditional uses within the I-1 district shall include drive-in theaters, but only where such theaters are designed so that patron entrance and exit drives lead only to streets having a paved surface of at least 44 feet in width for a distance of at least 200 feet on either side of the intersection between the street and driveway and where the theater screen is not visible from any R-1, R-2 or R-3 district. 
(d)	Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses within the I-1 district shall include junkyards. 
(Code 1976, § 150.13; Ord. No. 453, § 209, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 503, § 209, 2-26-1996) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 10. 
Sec. 30-551. - I-2 industrial district. 
(a)	Scope and intent. This section applies to the I-2 industrial district. The Intent of the I-2 district is to permit certain industrial uses to locate in desirable areas of the city, which uses are primarily of a manufacturing, assembling and fabricating character, including large-scale or specialized industrial operations requiring good access by road and/or railroad, needing special sites of public utility services, and whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 district is structured to permit the manufacturing, processing and compounding of semi-finished products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared materials. 
(b)	Permitted principal uses. Permitted uses within the I-2 district shall Include manufacturing, processing and compounding of semi-finished or finished products from raw materials or previously prepared materials and junkyards, any use permitted in the I-1 district, except uses identified as businesses in the B-2 district. 
(c)	Conditional uses. Conditional uses within the I-2 district shall include kennels as defined in chapter 6, animals. 
(Code 1976, § 150.14; Ord. No. 453, § 210, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 503, § 210, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 569, § 1, 8-13-2007) 
Cross reference- Businesses, Ch. 10. 
Sec. 30-552. - Height and placement regulations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, no structure shall be erected or maintained within the city between any lot line and the pertinent setback distance, and no structure shall be erected or maintained which exceeds the height limit set forth in the following table: 
Side Setback 
(feet) District Front Setback 
(feet) Minimum Total Both Sides R-1 25 5 12 R-1A 75 10 20 R-2 25 5 12 R-3 25 5 12 R-4 25 5 12 B-1 20  0 1  0 1 B-2 20 0 0 O-S 30 10 20 I-1 25 10 20 I-2 25 10 20  
1 There shall be a minimum setback of five feet and total of 14 feet for residential dwellings. 
District Rear Setback 
(feet) Height Limit 
(feet) R-1 35 30 R-1A 30 30 R-2 30 35 R-3 30 40 R-4 30 35 B-1 25 30 B-2 10 40 O-S 35 40 I-1 20 40 I-2 20 40  
(Code 1976, § 150.15; Ord. No. 453, § 301, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 498, § 301, 5-22-1995; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007) 
Sec. 30-553. - Additional height and placement regulations. 
(a)	Where the average of the then existing front setbacks on the lots adjoining and on either side of a lot to be developed on the same street within the city is more or less than the setback required by section 30-552, then such average, rather than the distance specified in such section, shall apply. 
(b)	In the R-1, R-2 and R-3, R-4 districts, garages and other necessary outbuildings, if detached from any other buildings and located at least ten feet from such buildings, may be located in, or partially in, the area to the rear of the rear setback line, provided that such garages and outbuildings do not occupy more than 30 percent of such area, are not located closer than five feet from any lot line and do not exceed 15 feet in height. In the R-1 and R-2, R-4 districts, garages and other accessory buildings shall not exceed 1,040 square feet. 
(c)	No buildings, including accessory buildings, shall be constructed closer than five feet to any dedicated public street or alley right-of-way. 
(d)	Chimneys, church steeples and radio and television antennas may exceed otherwise established height limits by not more than 25 feet. Elevator housing and cooling equipment may exceed otherwise established height limits by not more than ten feet. In the I-2 district, the height of a structure may exceed the otherwise established height limit, provided that the height of such structure does not exceed its distance to the nearest property line. 
(e)	Terraces, patios and porches which are uncovered and unenclosed and stoops may project up to three feet beyond a side setback line, six feet beyond a front setback line and 15 feet beyond a rear setback line, provided that they are not more than three feet above grade. Roof overhangs, bay windows and awnings or canopies may project up to two feet, six inches beyond any setback line; provided, however, that awnings or canopies located in B-1, B-2, and O-3 districts may project from the wall to which it is attached to within two feet of and shall be at least eight feet above the curb line or edge of the street where there is no curb. This subsection shall not authorize the erection or maintenance of any structure, or part thereof, over any public street or alley. 
(f)	Where a lot fronts on two streets at their intersection, the required front setback shall be on one of the streets, whichever is selected by the owner, or as defined by section 30-471. 
(g)	In the B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-2 districts, structures shall not be erected or maintained within 30 feet of the boundary line of any R-1, R-2 or R-3, R-4 district. 
(Code 1976, § 150.16; Ord. No. 453, § 302, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 521, § 1, 12-28-1998; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Sec. 30-554. - Land use and density and intensity regulations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, no development, use or structure within the city shall exceed the density and intensity limits set forth in the following table: 
District Minimum Lot 6 
Area 
(square feet) Minimum Lot 5,6 
Width 
(feet) Maximum Ground 
Coverage Ratio R-1 9,000 1 80 30 R-1A One acre See Note 7 25 R-2 5,000 1 50 35 R-3  9,000 1,2  50 4  35 4 R-4 5,000 1 50 35 B-1 4,000 3 40 50 B-2 0 0 60 O-S 0 50 60 I-1 0 0 70 I-2 0 0 70  
Notes: 
1 Per dwelling unit. 
2   For the first dwelling unit, 2,500 for the second dwelling unit and 1,500 for each additional dwelling unit. Each additional building constitutes a separate calculation for minimum lot area. 
3   Per dwelling unit. There shall be no minimum for nonresidential use. 
4 Applies only to residential use. 
5 Measured at front setback line. 
6   On lots held under separate and distinct ownership on December 18, 1986, a single-family dwelling may be built, provided that the setback, side and rear yard requirements are met. 
7   Lot fronting on a curvilinear right-of-way shall have a minimum lot width of 75 feet (chord measurement) as measured along the right-of-way and having a minimum lot width of 100 feet at the front setback line. 
8   Lots having 35 percent or less of their width along a curvilinear right-of-way shall have a minimum lot width of 150 feet measured along the right-of-way line. 
(Code 1976, § 150.17; Ord. No. 453, § 303, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 498, § 303, 5-22-1995; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007) 
Sec. 30-555. - Planned unit development. 
(a)	Established. A district known as the "planned unit development district," also referred to as the "PUD district," is established and as used in this section, "planned unit development" includes such terms as cluster zoning, planned development, community unit plan, and planned residential development and other terminology denoting zoning requirements designed to accomplish the objectives of the zoning ordinance through a land development project review process based on the application of site planning criteria to achieve integration of the proposed land development project with the characteristics of the project area. 
(b)	Purpose. The purpose of the planned unit development district is to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development; encourage innovation in land use and variety and design, layout and type of structures constructed; achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources and the provision of public services and utilities; provide adequate housing, additional commercial establishments and new employment or maintain current employment; encourage the use and improvement of existing sites when the uniform regulations contained in other zoning districts do not provide adequate protection and safeguards for the site or its surrounding areas; encourage the provision of open spaces and the development of recreational facilities in a location within reasonable distance of planned living units; and minimize the adverse impact that new development may have on the natural environment or public facilities, such as drainage systems, sewage disposal systems, water systems and other publicly provided systems, services and facilities. All such development shall be consistent with the public health, safety, convenience and welfare. 
(c)	Principal permitted uses. Principal permitted uses within the planned unit development district shall be all residential uses, including multiple-family apartments, or a mixture of single-family and multiple-family units on a planned basis, through the use of cluster homes, row houses, townhouses and/or apartment houses; all business, service and professional offices; all manufacturing or industrial uses; all commercial uses; or any combination of such uses. 
(d)	Permitted accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted in the planned unit development district shall include any accessory uses, which are permitted in any residential, commercial, office and/or industrial district in accordance with the regulations set forth in this article. 
(e)	Site plan submission. All owners, or the holders of a lawful option, within the planned unit development district shall file with the zoning administrator a proposed site plan and detailed description of the structures to be erected, the other facilities of the project and the land uses involved. In addition, such owners, or the holders of a lawful option, shall furnish such other information as the zoning administrator and/or the zoning commission may reasonably require, consistent with the purposes set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(f)	Applicability of section. The provisions of this section may be applied, upon application of a proper person, to any parcel exceeding one-half acre in size, except where the parcel is located in the R-1 district. 
(g)	Approval standards. Based upon the standards set forth in this subsection, the zoning committee may recommend denial, approval or approval with conditions, and the city commission may deny, approve or approve with conditions a proposed planned unit development. In making such a decision, the zoning committee shall rely upon the following standards: 
(1)	The uses proposed within the planned unit development will have a beneficial effect, in terms of public health, safety, welfare or convenience, on present and future potential land uses. The uses shall not adversely affect, in a material manner, the public utility and circulation system, surrounding properties or the environment. 
(2)	Off-street parking within the planned unit development shall be sufficient to meet the minimum parking required by section 30-583; however, if it is deemed necessary in order to achieve the purposes set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the zoning committee may require more or less parking than that required by such section. 
(3)	All streets and parking areas within the planned unit development shall meet the minimum requirements set forth in city ordinances, unless modified by the zoning committee to achieve the purposes set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(4)	Landscaping or screening shall be provided, if necessary, within the planned unit development in order to ensure that the proposed uses will be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public and private property. 
(5)	Effort shall be made to ensure the preservation of natural and architectural features, trees, hedge rows, wood lots and the integrity of the land within the planned unit development. 
(6)	The site for the planned unit development shall have adequate lateral support so as to ensure that there will be no erosion of soil or other material. 
(7)	Public water, sewer and electrical facilities shall be available within the planned unit development or shall be provided by the developer as part of the site development. 
(8)	The proposed density, setbacks and heights of the planned unit development shall be no different than the density, setbacks and heights which would be required for each of the component uses of the development. However, if it is deemed necessary in order to achieve the purposes set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the zoning committee may require greater or lesser density, setbacks or heights within such planned unit development than those required by this article. 
(9)	Traffic and accessory conditions regulations shall be as follows: 
a.	Safe, convenient, uncongested and well defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and to the planned unit development district shall be provided. 
b.	Drives and streets shall not be laid out so as to encourage outside traffic to traverse the planned unit development, nor to create unnecessary fragmentation of the development into small blocks. 
c.	No material impediment to the visibility of automotive traffic, cyclists or pedestrians shall be created or maintained. 
(10)	All buildings shall conform to city codes and ordinances. 
(h)	Procedural requirements. Upon receipt of a planned unit development application and site plan, the zoning administrator shall transmit the application and plan to the zoning committee. The zoning committee shall hold a public hearing in the same manner and give notice of such hearing as required for zoning amendments under section 30-475. 
(i)	Rezoning of parcel. Approval of the planned unit development by the zoning committee shall be a recommendation to the city commission to rezone the property to a planned unit development zoning classification for the uses as shown on the planned unit development application and site plan. 
(j)	Time for completion of development. Within 18 months of the approval of an application and site plan for a proposed planned unit development, or for a phase of such development, all proposed buildings, parking spaces, landscaping, usable open spaces and amenities included in the site plan shall be started or the planned unit development district will revert to its previous zoning. Work shall be continued in a reasonably diligent manner and completed within three years of the approval by the city commission. Such 18-month and three-year periods may be extended if applied for by the applicant and granted by the city commission in writing following a public notice and public hearing. Failure on the part of the owner to secure the applicable written extension shall result in a stoppage of all construction. 
(k)	Consequences of approval. After approval of a planned unit development, the parcel to which it pertains shall be developed and used in its entirety only as authorized and described in the resolution approving the planned unit development. 
(l)	Changes. Minor changes to a previously approved planned unit development site plan may be approved without the necessity of action by the zoning committee or city commission if the zoning administrator certifies in writing that the proposed revision does not alter the basic design, nor any specified conditions of the site plan as approved by the city commission. Any changes or alterations, other than minor changes as set forth in this section, may be made only by following the same procedures as required for the adoption of a planned unit development in the first instance. 
(m)	Appeal. A party aggrieved by the decision of the city commission may appeal to the circuit court for the county in which the property is located as provided under subsection 30-511(g) of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 150.22; Ord. No. 453, § 308, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 470, § 2, 5-28-1991; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007) 
State Law reference- Planned unit developments, MCL 125.3503. 
Sec. 30-556. - Site condominiums. 
(a)	A site condominium unit shall be a unit created by the division of land on the basis of condominium ownership that is not subject to the platting provisions of the Land Division Act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967, as amended. 
(b)	A site condominium unit shall be treated as a separate lot or parcel and may have buildings constructed on it and uses conducted within it as allowed in its zoning district, provided the unit meets the development requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(c)	Site plan approval. 
(1)	A site plan, including the condominium documents required for the establishment of a condominium, shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with section 30-509. 
(2)	Approval of a preliminary site plan shall for a period of two years confer upon the proprietor approval of lot sizes, lot orientations, and street layouts. 
(3)	Three separate one-year extensions may be granted by the city commission if applied for in writing prior to the date of expiration of approval of the preliminary site plan. 
(4)	After a period of two years from approval, unless extensions as provided for in this chapter have been granted, the preliminary site plan approval shall become null and void if substantial construction has been commenced and proceeded in a meaningful manner. 
(d)	Monuments shall be set at all boundary corners and deflection points and at all street right-of-way intersection corner and deflection points. Lot irons shall be set at all condominium site corners and deflection points of condominium site lines. 
(e)	The city engineer may grant a delay in the setting of required monuments or irons for a reasonable time, but not to exceed one year from the date of approval by the city commission, on condition that the developer deposit with the city clerk cash, a certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the city, whichever the developer selects, in an amount as determined from tine to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(1)	The deposit shall be returned to the developer upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor registered in the State of Michigan that the monuments and irons have been set as required within the time specified. 
(2)	If the developer defaults, the city commission shall promptly engage a registered surveyor to set the monuments and irons in the ground as shown on the condominium site plan at the developer's expense. 
(f)	All rights-of-way and utility easements shall be described separately from individual condominium sites and shall be accurately delineated by bearings and distances on the condominium subdivision plan and the final site plan. 
(1)	The rights-of-way and utility easements shall be separately designed for their individual purpose, such as access, roadway, location, installation, maintenance and replacing of public utilities. 
(2)	The developer shall dedicate to the city all easements for utilities, water, sewer, and electrical easements may be placed within streets, subject to the approval of the city engineer and fee standards of the city. 
(3)	All streets proposed for any site condominium shall be developed within the minimum design, construction, inspection, approval, and maintenance requirements of the city. 
(Ord. No. 547, § 1(309), 10-27-2003) 
Sec. 30-557. - Wireless telecommunications facility. 
(a)	Purpose. In recognition of the requirements of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, this section is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of Gladstone, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunication facilities within the city so as to ensure coordinated development of communication infrastructure while preserving the health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents. This section establishes general guidelines for the siting of wireless telecommunication towers; and antennas to enhance and fulfill the following: 
(1)	Preserve the authority of the city to provide for reasonable opportunity for the siting of telecommunications services and to provide such services to the community effectively and efficiently; 
(2)	Minimize the visual impact of such facilities as viewed from other vantage points; 
(3)	Encourage the location of wireless communication facilities onto existing structures to reduce the number of new communication towers needed within the city; 
(4)	Encourage co-location and site sharing of new and existing wireless communication facilities; 
(5)	Control the type of tower facility constructed when towers are permitted; 
(6)	Establish adequate development and design criteria to enhance the ability of providers of telecommunications services to provide service to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; 
(7)	Enhance prosperity through protection of property values; and reduce adverse impacts such facilities may create, including, but not limited to, impacts on aesthetics, environmentally sensitive areas, historically significant locations, flight corridors and scenic corridors from the uncontrolled development of wireless communications facilities by requiring reasonable siting conditions; 
(8)	Ensure the harmonious and orderly development of wireless communication facilities within the city; 
(9)	Provide development standards for the development of wireless communication facilities which are consistent with the requirements of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and in the best interest of the future of the city; 
(10)	Provide clear performance standards addressing the siting of wireless communication facilities; 
(11)	Provide for the removal of abandoned facilities, and provide a mechanism for the city to remove these abandoned towers. 
(b)	Construction of other code sections. To the extent these development standards conflict with other provisions of the city Code, these standards shall control. 
(c)	Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply. 
(1)	Antenna array. An antenna array is one or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include omni-directional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna (disc). The antenna array does not include the support structure. 
(2)	Attached wireless communication facility. An attached wireless communication facility is an antenna array that is attached to an existing building or structure (attachment structure), which structures shall include but not be limited to utility poles, signs, water towers, rooftops, towers with any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which attaches the antenna array to the existing building or structure and associated connection cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside or outside of the attachment structure. 
(3)	Buffer zone. An area of land specifically designed to separate one zoning use from another, such as separating a residential neighborhood from an commercial or industrial use. 
(4)	Co-location/site sharing. Co-location/site sharing shall mean use of a common wireless communication facility or common site by more than one wireless communication license holder or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications technology and/or placement of an antenna array on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity. 
(5)	Accessory structure. An accessory structure is any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a wireless communication facility, which includes cabinets, shelters, and any addition of an existing structure, pedestals or other similar structures. 
(6)	Guy wire. A cable used to secure and steady a tower. 
(7)	Height. When referring to a wireless communication facility, height shall mean the vertical distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the wireless communication facility, including the antenna array and other attachments. 
(8)	Monopole. Any tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
(9)	Pre-existing towers and antennas . Any tower or antenna lawfully constructed or permitted prior to the adoption of this section as well as the replacement of any such towers and antennas. 
(10)	Tower/support structure . A structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, and may include self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, monopole towers and other similar structures. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, digital communication towers, alternative tower structures and the like; but shall not include radio and TV reception antennas referred to in code section 30-553. Any device (attachment devi[c]e) which is used to attach an attached wireless communication facility to an existing building or structure (attachment structure) shall be excluded from the definition of and regulations applicable to support structures. 
(11)	Setback. Setback shall mean the required distance from the property line of the parcel on which the wireless communication facility is located to the base of the support structure and equipment shelter or cabinet where applicable, or, in the case of guy-wire supports, the guy anchors. 
(12)	Temporary wireless communication facility . Temporary wireless communication facility shall mean a wireless communication facility to be placed in use for 90 or fewer days. 
(13)	Tower and antenna use application (TAA). A form provided to the applicant by the city for the applicant to specify the location, construction, use and compliance with the development standards of a proposed wireless communications facility. 
(14)	Wireless communication . Wireless communications shall mean any personal wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services. 
(15)	Wireless communications facility. A wireless communication facility is any un-staffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications services, usually consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, an equipment facility, and a support structure to achieve the necessary elevation. 
(d)	Location and site requirements. 
(1)	Communication towers are prohibited in all zoning districts except in the Industrial District (I-1 and I-2) and residential districts. 
(2)	In residential districts the tower shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to its height. 
(3)	In industrial districts the tower shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to its height, unless a registered structural engineer certifies the plan of tower construction and the likelihood of a tower failure is minimal. The applicant shall incur all costs associated with engineering reviews and plans. 
(4)	No part of the tower or support structure shall be constructed or maintained at any time, permanently or temporarily, on or upon any required setback area for the district in which the tower and support structure is to be located. 
(5)	The wireless communication facility shall be enclosed by a fence at least six feet in height, constructed of wood, vinyl or metal, and otherwise in compliance with section 30-582. 
(e)	Special performance standards. A proposal for a new wireless communication facility shall not be approved by the planning commission unless the proposal meets the standards for a conditional use permit as set forth in code section 30-508 and, in addition, meets the special standards set forth below: 
(1)	The proposal shall not be approved unless the planning commission finds that the equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on existing or approved towers, buildings or alternative structures within a radius of two miles of the proposed tower because of one or more of the following reasons: 
a.	The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved tower, building or structures, as documented by a qualified and licensed State of Michigan professional engineer, and the existing or approved tower, building or structure cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at reasonable cost. 
b.	The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower, building or other structure as documented by intermodulation study prepared by qualified personnel and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost. 
c.	Existing or approved towers, buildings or other structures within the search radius, or combinations thereof, cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as documented by qualified personnel and supported with radio frequency propagation studies. 
d.	The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or other structure to adapt an existing tower or other structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
e.	The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(2)	The allowable height of a tower shall be determined on a case-by-case basis as part of the conditional use permit process for compliance with all the provisions of section 30-508, and this section 30-557, with particular emphasis on compliance with the special performance standards in subsection (e). 
(3)	Equipment facilities, in residential districts are limited to uses associated with the operation of the tower and may not be located any closer to property lines (front or side) than 30 feet. 
(4)	Equipment facilities shall not exceed a size that is reasonable to support the structure. 
(5)	All buffer zone requirements for locations that adjoin residential areas within this zoning ordinance shall be met. 
(6)	All towers shall be equipped with anti-climbing devices to prevent unauthorized access. 
(7)	A registered structural engineer shall certify the plan of the tower construction and submit plans with the building permit. 
(8)	The applicant shall provide verification that the antenna mounts and structure have been reviewed and approved by a professional engineer and that the installation is in compliance with all applicable codes. 
(9)	All towers must meet the standards of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Federal Communications Commission. 
(10)	Communication towers in excess of 100 feet in height above grade level shall be prohibited within a two mile radius of a public airport or a 1/2 mile radius of a helipad. 
(11)	Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive-resistant material. 
(12)	Antennae and metal towers shall be grounded for protection against a direct strike by lightning and shall comply as to electrical wiring and connections with applicable local statutes, regulations and standards. 
(13)	Towers with antennae shall be designed to withstand a uniform wind loading as prescribed in the Michigan Building Code Section 3108. 
(14)	All signals and remote control conductors of low energy extending substantially horizontally above the ground between a tower or antenna and a structure, or between towers, shall be at least eight feet above the ground at all points, unless buried underground. 
(15)	Towers shall be located and operated so that they do not interfere with television, radio and other communication device's reception in nearby residential areas. 
(16)	Towers shall be located so there is room for vehicles doing maintenance to maneuver on the property owned and/or leased by the applicant. 
(17)	The base of the tower shall occupy no more than 500 square feet. 
(18)	Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Security and safety lighting of accessory structures is allowed if such lighting is down shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site. 
(19)	There shall not be displayed advertising or identification of any kind intended to be visible from the ground or other structures, except a small message containing provider identification and emergency contact information, and such other information as may be required by law or regulation. 
(20)	Structures shall be subject to any state and federal regulations concerning non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation. If more restrictive state or federal standards are adopted in the future, the antenna shall be made to conform, within a reasonable time to the extent required by such standard or the conditional use approval will be subject to revocation by the city commission. Cost for testing and verification of compliance shall be borne by the operator of the antenna. 
(21)	There shall be no employees located on the site on a permanent basis to service or maintain the antenna. Occasional or temporary repair and service activities are excluded from this restriction. 
(22)	All parking and drive areas must meet the requirements set forth in the Code, section 30-583. 
(23)	Where the property adjoins any residentially zoned property or land use, the developer shall create a buffer zone by planting evergreen shrubs capable of creating a continuous hedge and obtaining a height of at least five feet shall be planted with a maximum spacing of five feet. Plants shall be at least three gallon container plants or 24 inches tall at the time of planting. Trees planted must be maintained and/or replaced to insure continued compliance of this requirement. 
a.	All plants and trees shall be indigenous to the City of Gladstone and Delta County and be drought resistant. 
b.	Existing mature tree growth and natural land form on the site shall be preserved to the extent feasible; provided however, that vegetation that causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access to the facility may be trimmed or removed. 
c.	Existing vegetation on a facility site may be used in lieu of required landscaping where approved by the zoning administrator or designee. 
d.	Grading for the facility shall be minimized and limited only to the area necessary for the new facility. 
(24)	Attached wireless communication facilities shall not add more than 25 feet to the height of the existing building or structure to which it is attached (attachment structure). However, antenna attachments to existing wireless communication facilities with support structures shall not increase the height of the support structure above the maximum original permitted height of that support structure. 
(25)	All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications Commission and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with revised standards and regulation within six months of their effective date shall be deemed abandonment and shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna in accordance with the requirements of subsection (g) of this section 30-557. 
(f)	Co-location requirements. 
(1)	Wireless communication facilities with support structures shall be constructed to the Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunication Industries Association (EIS/TIA) 222 Revision F Standard entitle[d] "Structural Standards for Steel Antennas Towers and Antenna Support Structures" (or equivalent), as it may be updated and amended. Each support structure shall be capable of supporting multiple antenna arrays. 
(2)	All wireless communication facilities with a support structure up to a height of 150 feet shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least three separate antenna arrays. All wireless communication facilities with a support structure greater than 150 feet shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least four separate antenna arrays. 
(3)	All applicants for wireless communications facilities are required to submit a statement with the application agreeing to allow and reasonably market co-location opportunities to other wireless communications facility users. The statement shall include the applicant's policy regarding co-location of other providers and the methodology to be used by the applicant to determine reasonable rates to be charged to other providers. The collocation agreement shall be considered a condition of issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(g)	Removal of abandoned support structure. 
(1)	Any support structure that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the city at its discretion may require the support structure owner(s) to remove the support structure within 90 days after notice from the city to remove the support structure. If there are two or more users of a single support structure, this provision shall not become effective until all providers cease to use the support structure. If the owner(s) of an abandoned support structure cannot be located or is no longer in business the requirements of this subsection shall be the responsibility of the landowner(s) on the property of which the support is located. 
(2)	If a tower is not in compliance with the provisions of subsection (e)(25) of this section 30-557 and deemed to be abandoned, the city in its discretion may require the support structure owner(s) to remove the support structure. If the owner(s) cannot be located or are no longer in business, the requirements of the subsection shall be the responsibility of the landowner of the property on which the support structure is located. 
(h)	Nonconforming existing facilities. Wireless communication facilities in existence on the effective date of this section 30-557 which do not comply with the requirements of this section are subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	Nonconforming facilities may continue in use for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded without complying with this section, except as further provided in this subsection (h). 
(2)	A facility which is nonconforming only because it does not meet requirements in section (d) location and site requirements may add additional antennas (belonging to the same provider or other providers) by means of an administrative approval issued pursuant to the provisions of this section and subsection (i). 
(3)	Nonconforming wireless communications facilities which become damaged due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored to its former use, location and physical dimensions. Provided, however, that if the damage to the wireless communication facility exceeds 50 percent of replacement cost, said wireless communication facility may only be reconstructed or repaired in compliance with this section 30-557. 
(4)	Any nonconforming wireless communications facility not in use for six months shall be deemed abandoned and all rights as a nonconforming use shall cease and be subject to removal under the provision of subsection (g). 
(i)	Administrative approval. Attached wireless communications facilities and/or antenna array attachments onto existing structures that meet the development criteria may be permitted by the city manager, after an administrative review. If the development criteria are not met the city manager shall deny the request. All other proposed wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the conditional use permit process. 
(j)	Approval process. All applications for a conditional use permit regardless of the type of wireless communication facility shall include the following: 
(1)	A sealed complete set of drawings prepared by a licensed architect or engineer that will include a site plan, elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations and other documentation showing the location and dimensions of the wireless communications facility and all improvements associated therewith, including information concerning specifications, antenna locations, equipment-facility and shelters, landscaping, parking, access, fencing and if relevant as determined by staff, topography, adjacent uses and existing vegetation. Radio frequency propagation maps shall be required for all new tower applications, showing the extent and strength of proposed coverage from the proposed tower, and shall also include the coverage afforded by adjoining existing wireless communication facility sites. To the extent possible, the site plan shall comply with the provisions of section 30-509. 
(2)	The application shall be submitted on forms prescribed by the city. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan containing the information described above. The wireless communication facility shall not be operated in any capacity until the applicant provides a copy of its FCC license providing authorization for the applicant to operate, receive and transmit wireless communication services for the facility. 
(3)	All applicable fees shall accompany each application. 
(4)	In the course of its consideration of an application, the city may deem it necessary to employ an engineer(s) or other consultant(s) qualified in the design and installation of wireless communication facilities to assist the city in the technical aspects of the application. In such cases, any additional reasonable cost incurred by the city not to exceed $2,000.00 for the technical review and recommendation shall be reimbursed by the applicant prior to the final hearing on the application. The city may also require additional review fees, as necessary, including but not limited to, intermodulation and propagation map studies. These fees shall be reimbursed, at cost, by the applicant. 
(5)	The planning commission, in accordance with the purposes and intent of this section, may approve the application with conditions, additional development criteria, or restrictions as it deems necessary to reduce or minimize any adverse effects and to enhance the compatibility of the wireless communication facility with the surrounding property; provided that the conditions, additional development criteria, or restrictions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished, and are specifically included in a motion for approval of the application. 
(k)	Finding of fact. The conditional use permit shall be granted when each of the following findings of fact have been made by the planning commission: 
(1)	The wireless communication facility will not materially endanger the public health or safety if located where proposed and developed according to the plan submitted; 
(2)	The wireless communication facility meets all required conditions, specifications and development standards of this section; 
(3)	The wireless communication facility will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or abutting property, or that the use is a public necessity; 
(4)	The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plan submitted, will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and in general conformity with the plan of development of the area and its environs; 
(5)	If applicable, additional development conditions are based upon the purpose and goals of this section; and 
(6)	If applicable, additional development conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished. 
(l)	Exception to this section. 
(1)	The provisions of this section 30-557 shall not apply to the following systems: 
a.	Automatic meter reading which enables one-way or two-way communication between electric meters, heat meters, gas meters and water meters to allow the collection and transmission of data between the meter and a central database to facilitate the measuring, billing, troubleshooting and analysis of usage data. 
i.	Such systems may utilize handheld, mobile and network technologies based on telephony platforms (wired and wireless), radio frequency or power line transmissions. 
ii.	Equipment for such systems which is mounted on utility poles shall be of a minimal size required to operate the systems in order to minimize the visual impact of such equipment and not be a distraction or sight obstruction to nearby vehicle traffic. 
(Ord. No. 581, § 1, 4-11-2011; Ord. No. 587, § 1, 4-23-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 581, § 1, adopted Apr. 11, 2011, enacted new provisions to read as § 30-556. Seeing as provisions have already been set out as § 30-556, these provisions were herein incorporated as a new § 30-557, at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 30-558-30-580. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 30-581. - Accessory uses and structures. 
    Where a lot is devoted to a permitted principal use, customary accessory uses and structures are authorized, except as prohibited specifically or by necessary implication in this [article] or any other ordinance. The following special rules are applicable: 
(1)	Customary home occupations are permitted as an accessory conditional use to residential use or occupancy but only to the extent authorized by the definitions of these terms in this article. 
(2)	Accessory uses to a gas station are limited to lubrication, changing oil and filters, changing and repairing of tires and tubes, engine tune-up, hand washing and polishing without automatic equipment, and replacement of light bulbs, windshield wiper blades and other small parts, and do not include steam cleaning, body repairs, painting, or transmission or chassis repairs except as listed above. 
(Code 1976, § 150.39; Ord. No. 453, § 513, 12-8-1986) 
Sec. 30-582. - Fences and hedges. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of the city commission to promote the general welfare of the city by following regulations relating to fences and hedges. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building line means the line established by law, beyond which a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law. 
    Fence means any construction, barrier or erection, which wholly or partially encircles any given area. 
    Hedge means a bush or shrub, or any living green fence of any nature, which wholly or partially encircles any given area. 
    Protective measures fence means a fence erected for the express purpose of the protection of the enclosed area and its contents in all areas other than residential areas. When such protective measures fence employs barbed wire along the uppermost edge of such fence, the minimum height for such fence below the barbed wire extension shall be six feet. 
    Sidewalk line means the edge of the established sidewalk nearest the established lot line of any property within the city. 
(c)	Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or cause to be constructed, any fence or hedge upon any property within the city without first having obtained a permit therefore in the manner provided for in this section. 
(d)	Permit application. Any person desiring to build or to cause to be built a fence or to grow a hedge or cause a hedge to be grown upon property owned in the city shall first apply to the building inspector for a permit. Such application shall contain all information required by the building inspector necessary for the determination of whether the erection of such fence or growing of such hedge will violate any ordinance of the city or law of the state. 
(e)	Height. 
(1)	Front yard. In residential and local business zones, fences and hedges in the front yard area shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(2)	Side and rear yard. In residential and local business zones, fences and hedges in the side and rear yard areas shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(3)	Corner lots. On corner lots in residential and local business zones, fences and hedges nearer the street than the established building line shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(f)	Extensions restricted. 
(1)	A partition fence or hedge shall not extend towards the street beyond two feet from the established lot line, nor shall any fence or hedge, or portion thereof, be erected in any area on or parallel to the lot line, unless it shall be located a minimum of two feet behind the inside edge of the established sidewalk line. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to have planted any shrub or bush outside of the established sidewalk line. 
(2)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow any hedge growth to extend toward the street beyond two feet from the established lot line. 
(3)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow a fence or hedge growth to be erected less than three feet from an alley property lot line in a residential or local business zoned area. 
(g)	Type of fences restricted. 
(1)	No person who is the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of any building in the city shall erect, cause to be erected or maintain on or about the walk or stairway to the entrance of such building any railing, fence, guard or other projection on which there shall be affixed or placed, or in any manner attached, any barbed wire construction; nor shall there be maintained, either partially or wholly, around any street or sidewalk in the front lane or public way, or in or along any street or sidewalk in front or adjacent to any public space or place, nor nailed or caused to be nailed or fastened in any form, shape or manner, upon any partition form, any such barbed wire construction; nor shall any electrical current be charged through any fence. 
(2)	A permit granted by the city building inspector shall be required for any person wishing to erect a protective measures fence. Such permit shall be granted only after demonstration of the need of such fence. The owner, or his agent, of a protective measures fence shall be granted permission to erect necessary and reasonable barriers along the uppermost edge of such protective measures fence that he deems reasonable for the protection of property within the enclosed area. 
(h)	Owner's liability. Any person within the corporate limits of the city who erects or maintains a fence or hedge between the edge of the established lot line and the inside edge of the sidewalk, or where any sidewalk would normally be, shall be fully responsible for the care and maintenance of such fence or hedge, and shall assume full responsibility for any damage arising due to the erection of such fence or hedge. 
(i)	Waiver. Upon complaint in writing by any person directly or adversely affected, the planning commission may, after a public hearing in accordance with the established procedure of the commission, in its sound discretion and in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, reduce or remit the requirements of this section in individual cases coming before the commission. Provided however, the provisions of subsection (e) (3) regarding corner lots shall not be subject to waiver under this provision. 
(j)	Nonconforming uses. The lawful erection of a fence or hedge growth existing on December 18, 1986, may be continued although such erection or growth does not conform to the provisions of this section, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period in excess of 90 days, the future erection of a fence or hedge growth shall be in conformity with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 150.18; Ord. No. 453, § 304, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 563, § 2, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 30-583. - Off-street parking. 
(a)	Off-street parking shall be provided within the city for motor vehicles. The minimum number of parking spaces, which shall be provided, are as follows: 
Use Spaces Required Apartments and townhouses 2 per dwelling unit or floor area in square feet divided by 440, whichever is greater Banks 1 per 150 square feet of floor space Barbershops and beauty parlors 2 plus 1.5 per chair Bed and breakfasts 1 per sleeping room Bowling alleys 5 per lane in addition to spaces required for restaurant facilities Churches, theaters, facilities for spectator sports, auditoriums, concert halls 0.35 times the seating capacity Doctor and dentist offices 1 per 100 square feet of waiting room area, plus 1 per doctor or dentist Fast food take-out establishments and drive-in restaurants 0.10 times the floor area in square feet Funeral parlors 1 per 50 square feet of floor space Furniture; appliance, household equipment, carpet and hardware stores; repair shops, including shoe repair; contractors' showrooms, etc., and museums and galleries 1.2 per 100 square feet of floor space Gas stations 1 per pump, plus 2 per lift (in addition to stopping places adjacent to pumps) Golf courses 7 per hole Hotels and motels 1.2 per room in addition to spaces required for restaurant facilities Laundromats 0.5 per machine Mobile home subdivisions and parks 2 per mobile home Offices 1 per 300 square feet of floor space Restaurants, except drive-ins 1.2 per 100 square feet of floor space Retail stores and service establishments 1 per 150 square feet of floor space and outdoor sales space Roominghouses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, adult foster care facilities, family or group day care homes 0.4 times the maximum number of occupants Single-family and two-family dwellings 2 per dwelling unit Warehouses 1 per 500 square feet of floor space Other businesses and industrial uses 0.75 times the maximum number of employees on the premises at any one time  
(b)	Where calculation of off-street parking space in accordance with the table set forth in subsection (a) of this section results in requiring a fractional space, any fraction of a space less than one-half shall be disregarded and any fraction of one-half or more shall require one space. 
(c)	Required off-street parking shall be provided on the lot to which it pertains. 
(d)	The use of any required off-street parking space for the storage of a motor vehicle for sale, or for any other purpose other than the parking of motor vehicles, shall be prohibited. 
(e)	The zoning administrator may permit a modification of the required location of off-street parking facilities and/or the amount of off-street parking facilities required if, after investigation, he finds that such modification is necessary to secure an appropriate development of a specific parcel of land, provided that such modification will not be inconsistent with the spirit and purpose of this section, public safety and substantial justice. 
(f)	The following minimum design standards shall be observed in laying out off-street parking facilities: 
Parking Angle 
(degrees) Stall Width 
(feet) Aisle Width 
(feet) Stall Length 
(feet) Curb to Curb 
(feet)  0-15 9 12 23 30 16-37 10 11 19 47 38-57 10 13 19 54 58-74 10 18 19 61 75-90 10 24 19 63  
(g)	Landscaping of off-street parking lots. 
(1)	Purpose. The purpose of this Code section is to promote the general welfare of the city by requiring landscaping for off-street parking lots, as defined herein, intended to promote pedestrian safety through better traffic control; reduce air and water pollution; reduce stormwater impacts; to shade and cool parking areas; provide a buffer between adjoining land uses; and enhance the appearance of parking lots and their visual impact from public sidewalks and streets. 
(2)	Definitions. 
a.	Parking lot means off-street surface parking lots and other areas used for the parking, service sale or storage of vehicles, where such parking lot or area consists of more than 10,000 square feet. 
b.	Perimeter parking lot landscaping means landscaping located inside the area used for the parking, service, sale, and storage and maneuvering vehicles. 
c.	Interior parking lot landscaping means landscaping located inside the area used for the parking, service, sale, and storage and maneuvering of vehicle. 
d.	Trees means deciduous shade trees or coniferous trees as shown on an approved list prepared by the city forester. 
(3)	Development standards. 
a.	Landscaping shall be required for all parking lots as defined herein. A landscaping plan shall be included as part of the required site plan and subject to the same approval process. Minor modifications to the landscaping requirements may be approved where the circumstances of the site require it. 
b.	Perimeter parking lot landscaping. These requirements shall apply to all parking lots as defined herein. The perimeter of the parking lot shall be bordered by a landscaped strip of soil not less than five feet wide and consisting only of the following: 
1.	A mix of deciduous shade trees and/or coniferous trees uniformly distributed and spaced not more than 35 feet apart; and 
2.	Ground cover covering 100 percent of the exposed soil which cover shall consist of: 
i.	Low-growing ground plantings such as grass or flowers; and/or 
ii.	A planting of shrubs not more than 48 inches in height. 
iii.	No loose mulch shall be allowed as ground cover except under the canopy of shrubs and within two feet of the base of trees. 
iv.	In addition to the above, decorative landscaping stone may be used as ground cover to the extent that it does not make up more than 30 percent of the total ground cover. 
3.	Provided that further, that where the perimeter parking lot landscaping areas abut a structure or where the parking lot access is shared with an adjoining parcel, such areas shall be landscaped as described above, or, at the discretion of the parking lot owner or operator, with paved sidewalks not less than six feet wide and planted with trees spaced not more than 35 feet apart in three feet by five feet tree wells. 
4.	Where a parking lot abuts a residential district, the landscaping as required above shall include a wall, a sight-obscuring fence or sight-obscuring landscaping not less than six feet in height. 
(4)	Interior parking lot landscaping. These requirements shall apply to all parking lots as defined herein except those used for the service, sale or storage of vehicles. In addition to the perimeter parking lot landscaping requirements, parking lots shall have not less than ten percent of the gross area of the interior of the parking lot devoted to landscaping. Pedestrian walkways shall not be included as part of such ten percent requirement. Such interior landscaping shall consist of: 
a.	Not less than one tree for each ten parking spaces; and 
b.	Ground cover covering 100 percent of the exposed ground which cover shall consist of: 
1.	Ground plantings such as grass or flowers; and/or 
2.	A planting of shrubs not more than 48 inches in height. 
3.	No loose mulch shall be allowed as ground cover except under the canopy of shrubs and within two feet of the base of trees. 
4.	Where there are more than 12 contiguous parking spaces in a row, there shall be a landscaped strip created separating each 12 spaces from the next contiguous space. Such landscaped strip shall be at least six feet in width and contain shade trees and/or ground cover as described in subsection (3)b.2. above. 
(5)	Tree requirements. The trees used in the landscaping requirements hereunder may already exist on the site or may be planted. Not less than one-half of the total number of trees shall be of a type characterized by moderate growth and expected to reach a mature height of more than 30 feet. At the time of approval of the site plan, trees used for landscaping hereunder, whether existing on the site or planted, shall be not less than ten feet in height and have a trunk diameter of not less than two and one-half inches caliper size six inches above the ground. 
(6)	Protective requirements for landscaping. All landscaping hereunder shall be provided with suitable curbing, which may consist of landscaping timbers, cast-in-place concrete or pre-cast concrete, for the purpose of protecting landscaped areas from damage by vehicles, snow removal operations or other activities on the site. 
(7)	Maintenance of landscaping. In addition to the requirements of any other applicable ordinance or statute, the parking lot owner and/or operator shall be responsible for maintaining the landscaping required hereunder, which maintenance shall include: 
a.	Any necessary cutting or trimming of shrubs to insure continued compliance with the requirements hereunder, such as height or spacing requirements. 
b.	Any replacement of trees, shrubs or ground cover, which are dead or dying or otherwise, removed and which are necessary to continued compliance with the requirements hereunder. 
c.	Any other replacement or repair necessary to insure continued compliance with the requirements hereunder. 
(8)	Applicability of this section. 
a.	The landscaping requirements hereunder shall apply to: 
1.	Any parking lot as defined herein constructed on or after the effective date of this section. 
2.	Any existing parking lot as defined herein to which substantial changes or improvements are made or after the effective date of this section, such as: 
i.	Enlarging the area of the parking lot by more than 25 percent, or 
ii.	Removing and replacing the surface of a paved lot or changing a gravel surface to a paved surface, where either action involves 50 percent or more of the area of the parking lot. 
(Code 1976, § 150.19; Ord. No. 453, § 305, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 468, § 2, 5-28-1991; Ord. No. 558, §§ 1-7, 2005; Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 577, § 2, 5-11-2009) 
Cross reference- Parking, § 54-101 et seq. 
Sec. 30-584. - Required off-street loading spaces. 
    Loading spaces required under this section shall be at least 50 feet long and 12 feet wide. Every lot used for business or industrial purposes and having a building or buildings with a total floor area of at least 10,000 square feet and every lot used for office or research purposes on which there is a building or buildings having a total floor area of at least 20,000 square feet shall be provided with off-street loading space. An additional off-street loading space shall be required for lots used for business or industrial purposes where the floor area of all buildings exceeds 100,000 square feet. 
(Code 1976, § 150.20; Ord. No. 453, § 306, 12-8-1986) 
Sec. 30-585. - Bed and breakfast facilities. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bed and breakfast facility means a facility which is subordinate to a dwelling unit and in which transient guests are provided sleeping rooms and breakfast only, in return for payment. 
(b)	License; fees; exceptions; transferability. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to operate a bed and breakfast facility as defined in subsection (a) of this section without first obtaining a license. The annual fee for such license shall be $100.00 for the whole or any part of the year and shall be paid at the office of the city clerk. This section shall not apply to hotels, motels or boardinghouses doing business within the city. Bed and breakfast licenses shall be renewed on an annual basis in January of each year and are not transferable to another location or another operator. 
(c)	Dwelling unit and operator requirements. Bed and breakfast facilities shall be confined to a single-family dwelling unit which is the principal dwelling unit on the property. The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast facility takes place shall be the principal residence of the operator, and the operator shall live on the premises during any time that the bed and breakfast facility is active. 
(d)	Guest register. Each bed and breakfast facility operator shall keep a list of names of all persons staying at the bed and breakfast facility. Such list shall be available for inspection by city officials at any reasonable time. 
(e)	Length of stay. The maximum stay for any occupant of a bed and breakfast facility shall be 14 consecutive days. 
(f)	License application. Applicants for a license to operate a bed and breakfast facility within the city shall submit the following for review: 
(1)	A floor plan of the single-family dwelling unit illustrating that the proposed use will comply with the provisions of this article and other applicable provisions of this Code within the terms of this section. 
(2)	A site plan showing the dimensions of the property, the size and location of the buildings and the proposed parking. 
(g)	Exits; minimum size; smoke detectors; lavatories and bathing facilities. A premises shall not be utilized as a bed and breakfast facility unless there are at least two exits to the outdoors from such premises. Rooms utilized for sleeping purposes shall have a minimum size of 100 square feet for two occupants, with an additional 30 square feet for additional occupants, to a maximum of four occupants per room. The minimum size of a dwelling unit for a bed and breakfast facility shall be 2,000 square feet of normal residential space, not including garages and storage sheds. A maximum of four guests shall be allowed to stay in any one bed and breakfast facility sleeping room. Each sleeping room used for a bed and breakfast facility use shall have a separate smoke detector alarm. Lavatories and bathing facilities shall be available to all persons using any bed and breakfast facility unit. 
(h)	Parking. A bed and breakfast facility shall provide parking in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 30-583. 
(i)	Signage. One sign, not exceeding two square feet, with only internal lighting shall be permitted in the front of the dwelling unit on the property of the applicant. 
(j)	Number permitted. There shall be no more than two bed and breakfast facility uses permitted within a 750-foot radius of each other. 
(k)	Food and beverages. Food and beverages shall be served within a bed and breakfast facility only to registered guests or personal guests of the owner/operator. 
(l)	Public nuisance violations. Bed and breakfast facility operations shall not be permitted and shall cease whenever the operations shall become a nuisance to adjoining residents by reason of noise, smoke, odor, lighting, unreasonable traffic congestion or when such conditions interfere with the safety or rights of others. The impact of a bed and breakfast facility operation shall not be greater than that of a private home with guests. 
(m)	Retail sales. Retail sales of any kind shall not be permitted on the premises of a bed and breakfast facility. 
(n)	Authority for license denial. The floor and site plans for a bed and breakfast facility use shall be reviewed by the building inspector and/or zoning administrator for compliance with all city, state and federal codes and ordinances. If the building inspector, zoning administrator or city clerk find that an applicant cannot meet a particular requirement, they shall have authority to deny the applicant a license. The denial may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals, who may then weigh the facts of the case and make a final decision on such appeal. 
(o)	License suspension, revocation and renewal. The city clerk shall have the authority to refuse to renew a bed and breakfast facility license or to suspend or revoke such license for continued and repeated violations of the provisions of this section. A decision to deny a license may be appealed by the applicant to the zoning board of appeals. Any license issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked by the zoning board of appeals for good cause shown after investigation and opportunity to the holder of such license to be heard in opposition to such revocation. In such investigation, the compliance or noncompliance with state law and local ordinances, the conduct of the licensee in regard to the public and other considerations shall be weighed in the determination of such license revocation. 
(p)	Application of other ordinances. The regulation and license of bed and breakfast facilities shall be deemed to be additional to, and not to the exclusion of, the requirements of a conditional use as defined and regulated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 469, § 1, 5-28-1991) 
Sec. 30-586. - State-licensed residential facilities; child care homes and centers. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)	State-licensed residential facility means one of the following facilities as more fully defined by state law (MCL 400.701 et seq. and MCL 722.111 et seq.): 
a.	Adult foster care family home approved to receive six or fewer adults to be provided foster care. 
b.	Adult foster care small group home approved to receive 12 or fewer adults to be provided foster care. 
c.	Adult foster care large group home approved to receive at least 13 but not more than 20 adults to be provided foster care. 
d.	Foster family home approved to receive four or fewer minor children to be provided foster care. 
e.	Foster family group home approved to receive more than four but fewer than seven minor children to be provided foster care. 
(2)	Family child care home means a private home providing day care for six or fewer minor children, as more fully defined in state law (MCL 722.111 et seq.). 
(3)	Group child care home means a private home providing day care for more than six but not more than 12 minor children, as more fully defined in state law (MCL 722.111 et seq.). 
(4)	Day care center means a facility other than a private residence providing day care for one or more preschool or school-age children, as more fully define in state law (MCL 722.111 et seq.). 
(b)	Standards. A conditional use permit may be issued for a state licensed residential facility, if required or family or group child-care homes or child care center if, in addition to the general standards for conditional uses set forth in section 30-508 of this Code, all of the following specific standards are met. 
(1)	The facility or home is not located closer than 1,500 feet to any of the following: 
The distance required under this section shall be measured along a road, street, or place maintained by the state or city and generally open to the public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular traffic, not including an alley. 
a.	Another licensed group child care home or child care center. 
b.	Another adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, 1979 Public Act No. 218, MCL 400.701 to 400.737. 
c.	A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to seven or more people licensed under article 6 of the Public Health Code, 1978 Public Act No. 368, MCL 333.6101 to 333.6523. 
d.	A community correction center, resident home, halfway house, or other similar facility, which houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of the department of corrections. 
(2)	Has appropriate fencing for the safety of the children in the group child care home or center in compliance with section 30-582, fences and hedges. 
(3)	Maintains the property consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
(4)	Group child care homes and child care centers shall be in operation only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(5)	Meets the requirements of chapter 30, division 5 of this Code governing signs used by the facility to identify itself. 
(6)	Meets the requirements of section 30-583 regarding off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007; Ord. No. 574, 10-27-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 574, adopted Oct. 27, 2008, changed the title of § 30-586 from "State licensed residential facilities; day-care homes and centers" to "State-licensed residential facilities; child care homes and centers". This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 30-587. - Home occupations. 
    Home occupations as defined herein shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Such use shall be registered with the zoning administrator. 
(2)	The use shall employ only the inhabitants of the dwelling. 
(3)	Such use shall not change the character of the dwelling by creating noise, vibrations, glare, fumes, odors, electrical interferences nor become a nuisance. 
(4)	Such use shall not require delivery of goods or visits of customers before 8:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. 
(5)	Such use shall not be pursued in an accessory building or structure on the premises. 
(6)	Such use shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the dwelling's floor space. 
(7)	There shall be no external indication of such use nor any change of appearance of the building or premises except that one nonilluminated sign not exceeding two square feet and not extending more than 12 inches from the exterior face of the wall may be attached on a wall of the dwelling to advertise such activity. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 2, 3-26-2007) 
Secs. 30-588-30-600. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SIGNS[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 

Sec. 30-601. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Awning means a retractable or fixed shelter constructed of nonrigid materials on a supporting framework that project from the exterior wall of a building. 
    Awning and canopy signs means a sign attached to the surface of an awning or canopy, or painted or printed upon the surface of an awning or canopy. 
    Balloon sign means a sign composed of a nonporous bag of material filled with air. 
    Banner sign means a fabric, plastic or other sign made of nonrigid material without an enclosing structural framework. 
    Billboard means any structure, including the wall of a building, on which lettered, figured or pictorial matter is displayed for the purpose of advertising a business, service or entertainment which is not conducted on the land upon which the structure is located or products not primarily sold, manufactured, processed or fabricated on such land. 
    Business center means any two or more businesses (other than within the C-2 district), which are located on a single parcel of property; are connected by common walls, partitions, canopies or other structural members to form a continuous building or group of buildings; share a common parking area; or otherwise present the appearance of a single, contiguous business area. 
    Business center sign means a freestanding sign which identifies the name of a business center and/or one or more individual businesses within the center. 
    Canopy means a fixed shelter constructed of rigid materials on a supporting framework that project from the exterior wall of the building. 
    Construction sign means a temporary sign which identifies the owners, financiers, contractors, architects and engineers of a project under construction. 
    Directional sign means a sign which gives directions, instructions or facility information for the use on the lot on which the sign is located, such as parking or exit and entrance signs. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign, not attached to a building or wall, supported on poles or supports, with a minimum ground clearance of eight feet to permit an unobstructed view for motorists and pedestrians. 
    Government sign means a temporary or permanent sign erected by the city. 
    Ground sign means a sign, the bottom of which is no more than 24 inches from the ground and not more than five feet above grade, which rests directly on the ground or is supported by short poles or a base and is not attached to a building or a wall. 
    Highway sign means a temporary or permanent sign erected by the city or federal government within or adjacent to the road right-of-way for the purpose of directing or controlling traffic on a public street, road or highway. 
    Institutional identification sign/bulletin board means a ground sign upon which is displayed the name of a church, school, library, community center or similar public or quasi-public institution located on the property and which may contain a space for a reader board in order to announce the services, events or activities of such institution. 
    Marquee means a permanent structure constructed of rigid materials that projects from the exterior wall of a building. 
    Marquee sign means a sign affixed flat against the surface of a marquee. 
    Memorial sign means a nonilluminated sign, table or plaque, which commemorates a person, event, structure or site. 
    Mural means a design or representation painted or drawn on a wall which does not advertise an establishment, product, service or activity. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign which relates to or advertises an establishment, product, merchandise, good, service or entertainment which is not located, sold, offered, produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which the sign is located, including, but not limited to, billboards. 
    Placard means a sign not exceeding two square feet which provides notices of a public nature, such as "No Trespassing," "No Hunting," "Closed," or "Open" signs. 
    Political sign means a temporary sign used in connection with an official local government, school district, county, state or federal election or referendum. 
    Political sign means a double-faced sign attached to a building or wall that extends more than 12 inches, but not more than 48 inches, from the face of the building or wall. 
    Projecting sign means any sign other than a wall, awning, canopy or marquee sign, which is affixed to a building and is supported only by the wall on which the sign is mounted. 
    Reader board means a portion of a sign on which copy is changed manually. 
    Real estate sign means nonilluminated, temporary sign pertaining to the sale, rent or lease of the property upon which the sign is located. 
    Residential subdivision sign means a permanent ground sign identifying a recognized platted subdivision, site condominium project, multifamily development or other residential development, which has been approved by the city. 
    Roof sign means a sign erected above the roofline of a building. 
    Roofline means the highest point of a flat roof and the lowest point of a pitched roof, excluding any cupolas, chimneys or other minor projections. 
    Sidewalk sign means a portable sign of A-frame construction used during hours a business is open and stored inside when not in use. 
    Sign means any display, figure, painting, drawing, placard, poster or other device visible from the public way which is designed, intended or used to convey a message, advertise, inform or direct attention to a person, institution, organization, activity, place, object or product. A sign may be a structure, or part thereof, painted on or attached directly or indirectly to a structure. 
    Special event sign means a temporary sign containing a public message concerning a special event sponsored by a governmental agency or nonprofit organization. 
    Temporary sign means a display, informational sign, banner or other advertising device, with or without a structural frame, which is intended for a limited period of display, including seasonal produce sales, decorative displays for holidays or public demonstrations. 
    Wall sign means a sign painted or attached directly to and parallel to the exterior wall of a building and extending no greater than 12 inches from the exterior face of the wall to which it is attached. 
    Window sign means a sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 5-14-2005; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 535, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2001, repealed § 30-601 in its entirety. The former § 30-601 pertained to definitions pertaining to signs and derived from Ord. No. 453, § 401, adopted Dec. 8, 1986; Ord. No. 534, § II, adopted Nov. 27, 2000. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2; Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 
Sec. 30-602. - Intent. 
    The sign regulations set forth in this division are intended to protect and further the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city; to maintain and improve the appearance of the city; to conserve community character; to prevent traffic hazards; to provide safer conditions for pedestrians; and to promote economic development by regulating the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, size, location and number of signs. It is further determined that to allow signs of excessive number and size in the city would unduly distract pedestrians and motorists, create a traffic hazard and reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. The regulations set forth in this division are intended to serve as a means of advertising. 
(Ord. No. 534, § I, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Sec. 30-603. - General requirements. 
(a)	No sign shall be placed in, upon or over any public right-of-way, alley or other public place within the city, except for permitted highway and government signs and signs permitted in the B-2 district, which may project from a building wall over a public way. 
(b)	No light pole, utility pole or other supporting member shall be used for the placement of any sign unless it is specifically designed and approved for such use. 
(c)	No sign shall be erected in any place where it may, by reason of its position, shape, color or other characteristic, interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or constitutes a nuisance. 
(d)	No commercial vehicle which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, has the intended function of acting as a sign, shall be parked in any area abutting a street unless no other parking area is available. 
(e)	No sign shall contain any moving or animated parts, nor have the appearance of having any moving or animated parts, except as provided within this division. 
(f)	All ground, freestanding and wall signs may contain reader boards within the maximum size limits permitted for the sign. 
(g)	No wall sign shall extend beyond the edge of the wall to which it is affixed, nor extend above the roofline of the building to which it is attached. 
(h)	Subject to constitutional limitations, all signs shall pertain only to the business or activity conducted on the premises, except political signs, special event signs and billboards. 
(i)	Nonilluminated real estate signs shall be permitted in any zoning district within the city but shall be removed within 30 days after completion of the sale or lease of the property. 
(j)	Construction signs shall be permitted within any zoning district within the city subject to the following regulations: 
(1)	Such signs shall not be larger than 32 square feet, shall be located no closer than ten feet from the street right-of-way line and shall not be higher than ten feet. 
(2)	In residential developments, any construction sign shall be removed when a permanent subdivision sign is erected, final plat approval is obtained or a certificate of occupancy is issued for any dwelling in the development, whichever comes first. 
(3)	In nonresidential developments, any construction sign shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building. 
(4)	Such signs shall be erected no more than 45 days prior to the issuance of a building permit. If the construction project does not commence by the forty-fifth day, the sign permit may be revoked by the city. It will then be the responsibility of the permit holder to promptly remove the construction sign. 
(k)	Community special event signs are permitted in any zoning district within the city, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)	Such signs may be located either on or off the lot on which the special events are held. 
(2)	The display of community special event signs shall be limited to the ten days immediately preceding the special event which is being advertised. 
(3)	Such signs shall have a maximum size of 32 square feet in area, and a maximum height above ground level of six feet and shall be set back a minimum of two feet from any property line. 
(4)	Such signs shall be removed within 48 hours of the conclusion of the special event which is being advertised. 
(l)	Directional signs are permitted in any zoning district within the city subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)	Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in area, or exceed three feet in height, and shall be set back at least two feet from any property line. 
(2)	Such signs may contain a commercial logo or trademark not exceeding one-third of the sign's size but shall not contain a business name or commercial message. 
(m)	Temporary signs shall be permitted in any zoning district within the city subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)	Such signs shall only be displayed upon receipt of a permit issued by the zoning administrator, unless such sign is exempted from the permit requirement under section 30-604. 
(2)	Such signs shall not be displayed on any lot or parcel for more than 30 consecutive days for any one permit, and not more than two permits shall be issued for any lot or parcel during any calendar year. 
(3)	Upon expiration of a temporary sign permit, the permit holder shall remove such sign. 
(4)	Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(5)	Only one temporary sign shall be permitted on a lot or parcel. 
(6)	Such signs shall not be closer than five feet from any property line fronting on a public street. 
(7)	All temporary signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds per square foot of area. 
(n)	Lighted signs shall be inspected by the zoning administrator for proper and adequate electrical connections. If deemed necessary by the zoning administrator, an electrical code permit will be required for a lighted sign. 
(Ord. No. 534 § III, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 556, § 2, 5-14-2005; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Sec. 30-604. - Exemptions. 
    The following signs shall not require a sign permit but shall be subject to all other applicable general requirements of this division: 
(1)	Government signs. 
(2)	Placards. 
(3)	Temporary sale signs which are four square feet or less in size. 
(4)	Window signs provided the total area of all signs within one foot of the window shall not obscure more than 50 percent of the window area. 
(5)	Current political signs. 
(6)	Historical markers. 
(7)	Memorial signs or tablets. 
(8)	Murals. 
(9)	Signs which are not visible from any street. 
(10)	Essential services signs. 
(11)	Signs containing the address and owner's or occupant's name, which signs are up to one square foot in area and are attached to a mailbox, light fixture or exterior wall. 
(12)	Flags or insignias of a nation, state, local governments, community organization or educational institution. 
(Ord. No. 534, § IV, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Sec. 30-605. - Prohibited signs. 
    All signs not specifically allowed under this division, unless exempted by this section, shall be prohibited in the city. The following types of signs shall be expressly prohibited: 
(1)	Balloons, balloon signs, strings of light bulbs, pennants, streamers, banners or flags, except flags of a noncommercial nature not used for the purposes of commercial advertisement. 
(2)	Any sign, including window signs, which have flashing, moving or oscillating lights, excluding time and temperature signs. 
(3)	Roof signs. 
(4)	Off-premises signs, except for noncommercial signs, community special event signs and billboards. 
(Ord. No. 534, § V, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Sec. 30-606. - Measurements. 
(a)	The area of a sign within the city shall be measured as the area within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any straight line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, logo or any other figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding only the structure necessary to support the sign. 
(b)	The area of a freestanding, ground or projecting sign that has two or more faces shall be measured by including the area of all sign faces, except if two such faces are placed back-to-back, are of equal size and are no more than two feet apart at any point, the area of the two back-to-back faces shall be counted as one face. If the two back-to-back faces are of unequal size, the larger of the two sign faces shall be counted as the one face. 
(c)	The height of a sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from the highest point of the sign to the finished grade of the ground immediately beneath the sign, excluding any artificially constructed earthen berms. 
(d)	The sign areas for wall signs, projecting signs and awning signs for buildings with multiple tenants shall be determined by taking the portion of the front wall of the building applicable to each tenant and computing sign requirements for that portion of the total wall. 
(Ord. No. 534, § VI, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Sec. 30-607. - Maintenance. 
(a)	Signs within the city shall be maintained free of peeling paint or paper, fading, staining, rust or other condition, which impairs legibility or intelligibility. 
(b)	Sign supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be maintained in such a manner as not cause a hazard. 
(c)	If signs are not properly maintained and pose a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the city shall have the right to remove the sign, and the city shall pass on all removal costs to the sign owner. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 403, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 534, § VII, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 1-8-2001; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Sec. 30-608. - Signs permitted by district. 
    The following signs are permitted in combination, unless otherwise noted, in each district, subject to the requirements set forth in the tables and other applicable regulations of this division: 
(1)	R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 residential districts. 
a.	Residential subdivision signs (freestanding signs shall not be permitted). 
1.	Number: One per entrance road to the development, not exceeding two such signs per development. 
2.	Size: Not greater than 24 square feet. 
3.	Location: Minimum of 15 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
4.	Height: Not more than four feet above grade. 
b.	Institutional identification signs/bulletin boards. 
1.	Number: One per lot or parcel. 
2.	Size: Not greater than 32 square feet. 
3.	Location: Minimum of 15 feet from the street right-of-way. 
4.	Height: Not more than five feet above grade. 
c.	Wall signs for home occupations. 
1.	Number: One per lot or parcel. 
2.	Size: Not greater than two square feet. 
3.	Location: Mounted flat against the wall and nonilluminated. 
d.	Wall signs for nonresidential uses. 
1.	Number: One per street frontage. 
2.	Size: For public and quasi-public facilities, such as schools, churches and similar institutional uses, no sign shall be greater than five percent of the wall area to which it is affixed, not to exceed 50 square feet. For private offices, no such sign shall be greater than six square feet. 
3.	Location: Mounted flat against the wall facing the street. 
(2)	B-1, B-2 and O-S business districts. 
a.	Ground or freestanding signs. 
1.	Number: One per street frontage, but not more than two signs, provided that lots with two street frontages shall have a minimum width at each right-of-way line of at least 50 feet in order to have a second sign. 
2.	Size: Not greater than 48 square feet for ground signs, or 60 square feet for freestanding signs. 
3.	Location: Minimum of two feet from the property line. 
4.	Height: Not more than five feet above grade for ground signs, or 25 feet for freestanding signs with a minimum of eight feet ground clearance to permit an unobstructed view for motorists and pedestrians. 
5.	Illumination: No illumination shall be allowed if the property is adjacent to a residential district. 
b.	Wall signs. 
1.	Number: One per business, provided that any business which has frontage on more than one street shall be permitted to have one wall sign per street frontage, subject to the size restriction set forth in subsection (2)b.2 of this section. 
2.	Size: Not greater than ten percent of the wall area to which it is affixed and which is occupied by the respective business, not to exceed 60 square feet. 
3.	Location: Mounted flat against the wall facing the street. 
c.	Projecting signs. 
1.	Number: One per street frontage. 
2.	Size: 
3.	Location: The edge of the sign nearest the building wall shall not extend more than two feet from the wall and the outermost edge of the sign including the structure supporting the sign shall be set back at least two feet from the curb edge of the street or from the edge of the street where there is no curb. 
4.	Height: The bottom edge of the sign, including the structure supporting the sign shall be at least eight feet above the sidewalk or ground level where there is no sidewalk. 
5.	Variances: May be granted through the zoning board of appeals (city commission). 
d.	Awning, canopy and marquee signs. 
1.	Number: One per street frontage. 
2.	Location: Shall not be placed upon an awning or canopy or marquee unless such awning, canopy or marquee: 
i.	Is set back at least two feet from the curb edge of the street or from the edge of the street where there is no curb. 
ii.	The bottom edge of which is at least eight feet above the sidewalk or ground level where there is no sidewalk. 
iii.	The top edge of which does not extend above the roofline of the building to which it is attached. 
3.	Variances: Variances from the dimensional limitations of this section shall not be granted. 
e.	Business center signs. 
1.	Number: One per street frontage, but not more than two signs, provided that lots with two street frontages shall have a minimum width at each right-of-way of at least 50 feet in order to have a second sign. Freestanding signs shall not be permitted for individual businesses within any business center. 
2.	Size: Not greater than 80 square feet. 
3.	Location: Minimum of two feet from the property line. 
4.	Height: Not more than 25 feet. 
f.	Billboards (if approved as a special exception use). 
1.	Size: Not greater than 300 square feet. 
2.	Location: Shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from the road right-of-way line, no closer than 50 feet to any other property line, and no closer than 300 feet to any other billboard on the same or opposite side of the street. 
3.	Height: Not more than 30 feet. 
4.	Lighting: Illumination shall be permitted provided such illumination is concentrated on the surface of the sign and is located so as to avoid glare or reflection onto any portion of the adjacent street or highway, the path of oncoming vehicles or any adjacent premises. In no event shall any billboard have flashing of intermittent lights, or shall the light be permitted to rotate or oscillate. 
g.	Sidewalk signs. 
1.	Size: Sidewalk signs shall be of A-frame construction with a minimum base spread of two feet. Each surface of A-frame construction shall not exceed six square feet. 
2.	Location: Sidewalk signs shall be permitted during the hours a business is open to the public and must be removed at the end of business each day. A minimum of six feet of unobstructed sidewalk must remain between the sign and adjacent buildings. 
3.	Height: The maximum height shall be five feet. 
4.	Lighting and copy: The surfaces of sidewalk signs shall be durable and the copy may be painted or printed on the surface. Loose paper faces shall not be permitted. Sidewalk signs shall not be illuminated. 
(3)	I-1 and I-2 industrial districts. 
a.	Ground signs. 
1.	Number: One per street frontage but not more than two signs, provided that lots with two street frontages shall have a minimum width at each right-of-way line of at least 50 feet in order to have a second sign. 
2.	Size: Not greater than 48 square feet for one sign, and if there are two signs, the second sign shall be no greater than 24 square feet. 
3.	Location: Minimum of two feet from the property line. 
4.	Height: Not more than five feet above grade. 
b.	Freestanding signs. 
1.	Number: One per street frontage, but not more than two signs, provided that lots with two street frontages shall have a minimum width at each right-of-way line of at least 50 feet in order to have a second sign. 
2.	Size: Not greater than 100 square feet for one sign, and if there are two signs, the second sign shall be no greater than 32 square feet. 
3.	Location: Minimum of two feet from the property line. 
4.	Height: Not more than 30 feet above grade. 
c.	Wall signs. 
1.	Number: One per street frontage. 
2.	Size: Not greater than five percent of the wall area to which the sign is affixed, not to exceed 100 square feet. 
3.	Location: Mounted flat on the wall facing the street. 
d.	Billboards (if approved as a conditional use). 
1.	Number: See business center as set forth in subsection (2)e. of this section. 
2.	Size: Not greater than 300 square feet. 
3.	Location: Shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet from the road right-of-way line, not closer than 50 feet to any other property line and not closer than 300 feet to any other billboard on the same or opposite side of the street. 
4.	Height: Not more than 30 feet. 
5.	Lighting: See business center as set forth in subsection (2)e. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 402, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 534, § IX, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 1-8-2001; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Sec. 30-609. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)	Every permanent sign which was erected legally and which lawfully existed within the city on the effective date of this amending Ordinance No. 570 [March 11, 2008], but which does not conform to the height, size, area or location requirements of this article as [of] such date is deemed to be a nonconforming sign. Such nonconforming status shall not be granted to any temporary sign, banner, placard or other nonpermanent sign. 
(b)	Nonconforming signs may not be altered, expanded, enlarged or extended; however, nonconforming signs may be maintained and repaired so as to continue the useful life of the sign. 
(c)	For the purposes of this article, a nonconforming sign may be diminished in size or dimension without jeopardizing the privilege of nonconforming use. The copy of the sign may not be amended or changed, unless specifically designed to be changed periodically as for a reader board, without bringing such sign into compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(d)	Any nonconforming sign which is damaged by fire or other casualty loss shall not be restored or rebuilt if reconstruction will constitute more than 50 percent of the value of the sign on the date of loss. 
(e)	Any sign which, for a period of one year or more, no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted or product sold shall be removed by the owner of the building, structure or property upon which such sign is located within 30 days of receipt of written notice by the zoning administrator to remove such sign. 
(f)	A sign which is accessory to a nonconforming sign may be erected in the city in accordance with the sign regulations for the district in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 453, § 404, 12-8-1986; Ord. No. 534, § X, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 535, § 1, 1-8-2001; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Sec. 30-610. - Permits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, place, or permit to be placed, or replace any sign within the city without first obtaining a sign and/or building permit, unless such sign is specifically exempted as provide in this article. 
(Ord. No. 534, § XI, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 570, § 1, 2-25-2008) 
Chapter 34 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 54. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS 

Sec. 34-31. - Destruction of public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maliciously or intentionally destroy, tear down or injure any street signs, electric light poles, or their appurtenances or fixtures, fire alarm boxes or wires or fixtures or any other public property. 
(Code 1976, § 130.15) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 34-32. - Defacing construction. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to willfully mark or deface any sidewalk, street, building or other article in the process of construction. 
(Code 1976, § 130.13) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 34-33. - Destruction of tools. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or intentionally break, destroy, injure or carry away any tools, fixtures, machinery, furniture or any other property belonging to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 130.16) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq.; theft, MCL 750.356 et seq. 
Sec. 34-34. - Injury or defacement of buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or intentionally injure or deface any building belonging to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 130.17) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 34-35. - Trespassing. 
    Any person who shall wilfully enter upon the lands or premises of another person, without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant or the agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon such land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart from such land or premises by the owner or occupant or the agent or servant of the owner or occupant, who, without lawful authority, neglects or refuses to depart from such land or premises of another shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days and/or by a fine of not more than $50.00, in the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1976, § 130.14) 
State Law reference- Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Secs. 34-36-34-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 34-71. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm in the city. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)	Police officers, members of the United States Armed Forces or National Guard while engaged in the official performance of duties. 
(2)	Persons exercising their legal rights of self-defense or defense of others. 
(Code 1976, § 132.03) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit discharge of firearms preserved, MCL 125.1104. 
Sec. 34-72. - Fireworks ordinance. 
(a)	Title. This section shall be known and cited as the City of Gladstone Fireworks Ordinance. 
(b)	Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to provide for and protect the public health, safety and welfare of persons within the City of Gladstone by establishing regulations pertaining to the ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks within the City of Gladstone. 
(c)	Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
    APA as used herein means the American Pyrotechnics Association. 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible efforts [effects] by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3 or 3.5. Consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172 and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
    Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flame gun or a flare, designated for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effects. 
    Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8 and 3.5. 
    Minor is an individual who is less than 18 years old. 
    National holiday means the following legal public holidays: 
(1)	New Year's Day, January 1. 
(2)	Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in January. 
(3)	Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February. 
(4)	Memorial Day, the last Monday in May. 
(5)	Independence Day, July 4. 
(6)	Labor Day, the first Monday in September. 
(7)	Columbus Day, the second Monday in September. 
(8)	Veteran's Day, November 1. 
(9)	Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November. 
(10)	Christmas Day, December 25. 
    Novelties means that term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2., 3.2.3, 3.2.4 and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(1)	Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cup, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cup. 
(2)	Toy, pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noise makers and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph (1) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(3)	Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in diameter. 
    Person means an individual, agent, association, charitable organization, company, limited liability company, corporation, labor organization, legal representative, partnership, unincorporated organization or any other legal or commercial entity. 
(d)	Prohibition. No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks within the City of Gladstone, except this prohibition shall not preclude any person from the ignition, discharge or use of consumer fireworks on the day preceding, the day of or the day after a national holiday; provided further, however, that no person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on said days, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. consistent with section 7 (2) of Public act 65 of 2013. 
(e)	Miscellaneous requirements/prohibitions. 
(1)	This section does not apply to and does not regulate the use of novelties in the City of Gladstone. 
(2)	A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks. 
(3)	Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to a minor. 
(4)	No person shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property or the property of another person without that person or organization's express permission to use these fireworks on those premises. 
(5)	A person shall not discharge consumer fireworks in such a manner so as remnants from consumer fireworks land on public property or the property of another, including, but not limited to, hotel and motel property, apartment property, and condominium property, without that person or organization's express permission. 
(6)	A person shall not use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, controlled substances or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance (as defined by MCL 257.1d and MCL 257.86). 
(7)	Consumer fireworks shall not be used if a burn ban is in effect. 
(8)	Consumer fireworks shall only be used in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal law. 
(f)	Penalty. A person who violates a provision of this section shall, upon determination of the violation or admission by the person, be responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a fine and costs, of not more than $500.00 for each violation plus costs; payment of all costs incurred by the Gladstone Public Safety Department under the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, MCL 28.451 et seq. as amended ("Act"), in securing, seizing, storing and disposing of the fireworks that are in violation of the Act, or this section shall be the responsibility of all persons found guilty, responsible or liable for the violation. In recognition that the public safety department's actual costs for any seizure will include having the personnel, equipment and facilities necessary to store fireworks in compliance with the Act, costs to be paid shall be determined in accordance with rates and methods established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 592, §§ 1-6, 12-9-2013) 
Secs. 34-73-34-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 34-101. - Loitering. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, stand in crowds or remain loitering on the sidewalk or at the crosswalks of streets, so as to hinder or impede pedestrians, or in front of any church or place of worship during service or the gathering or departing of the congregation. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter about or obstruct the free or uninterrupted passage of any hall, stairway, vestibule or passageway leading to any store, office, theater or other public building so as to interfere with ingress or egress. 
(Code 1976, § 130.02) 
Sec. 34-102. - Begging and soliciting alms. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accosting means approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner that would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in his immediate possession. 
    Ask, beg and solicit mean and include, but are not limited to, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts which are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
    Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after the person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)	Where prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)	On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)	Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)	Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)	Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)	In any public transportation vehicle, or in any bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxistand; 
(6)	From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)	From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; or 
(8)	Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business, or athletic facility. 
(c)	Means prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value by: 
(1)	Accosting another person; or 
(2)	Forcing oneself upon the company of another person. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91,61(i)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 34-103. - Disturbing the peace. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any loud or boisterous noise, any fighting or quarreling or disturbance of the peace and quiet of the city in any street, alley or other place within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 130.05) 
Sec. 34-104. - Public intoxication. 
    Any person who is intoxicated in a public place within the city and is either directly endangering the safety of another person or property or acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91,61(o)), 9-26-1994) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(c); local public intoxicating ordinances, MCL 333.6523. 
Sec. 34-105. - Unlawful noise. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating, permit or continue to permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the city. The following activities shall be prohibited within the city if such activities produce clearly audible sound beyond the property line of the property on which they are conducted: 
(1)	Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horns or signal devices on any automobile or motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching or apparently out of control, to give warning of an intent to get under motion, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle; any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, and the sound of such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, or in excess of 86 dBA at a distance of 50 feet. 
(2)	Radios, phonographs or musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, tape player or musical instrument in such a manner, or with such volume, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of the persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any person in the vicinity, or in such a manner as to be audible on a property or in a dwelling unit other than that in which it is located, in excess of 67 dBA beyond the property line on which the instrument is used. 
(3)	Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or the making of any loud noise on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or making any such noise at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of the persons in any dwelling, hotel, hospital or other type of residence or in any office of any person in the vicinity. 
(4)	Animals or birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person. 
(5)	Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud boisterous manner. 
(6)	Whistles or sirens. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give notice of the time to begin work or as a warning of fire or danger. 
(7)	Vehicles. A person shall not operate a motor vehicle, motorcycle or moped on a highway or street if the noise exceeds one of the following limits, at a distance of 50 feet, except as provided in subsections (a)(7)b.3 and (a)(7)c.3 of this section: 
a.	A motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 8,500 pounds or more: 
1.	Ninety dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is greater than 35 miles per hour; 
2.	Eighty-six dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway is not more than 35 miles per hour; 
3.	Eighty-eight dBA under a stationary running test. 
b.	Motorcycle or moped: 
1.	Eighth-six dBA if the maximum lawful speed is greater than 35 miles per hour; 
2.	Eighty-two dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is not more than 35 miles per hour; 
3.	Ninety-five dBA under a stationary run-up test at a distance of 75 inches. 
c.	A motor vehicle or combination of vehicles towed by a motor vehicle not covered under subsection (a)(7)a or b of this section: 
1.	Eighty-two dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is greater than 35 miles per hour; 
2.	Seventy-six dBA if the maximum lawful speed on the highway or street is not more than 35 miles per hour; 
3.	Ninety-five dBA under a stationary run-up test at a distance of 20 inches from the end of the tailpipe. 
(8)	Construction. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair, of any building and the excavation of streets and highways on Sundays, and other days except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless a permit is first obtained from the city manager. 
(9)	Device to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, amplifier or an instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention for any purpose. The prohibition of this section shall apply even if the sound level produced by a prohibited activity does not exceed the applicable level specified in this section. 
(10)	Maximum permissible sound levels. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or permit any activity that produces dBA beyond his property line exceeding the level specified in the following table 1. Where property is used for both residential and commercial purposes, the residential levels shall be used only for measurement made on the portion of the property used solely for residential purposes. 
Table 1 
Use of Property 
Receiving Sound 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. Residential 61 55 Commercial 71 61  
Anti-noise regulations in this table are based upon dBA criteria: 
a.	"Decibel" means a unit of sound level on a logarithmic scale measured relative to the threshold of audible sound by the human ear, in compliance with the American National Standards Institute Standard § 1.1-1960. 
b.	Decibels on the A-weighted network of a sound level meter shall be as specified in the American National Standard Institute § 1.4-1971. 
c.	In order to regulate and prove violations occurring under this section, any noise in excess of the maximum decibel limits according to the regulations stated in subsection (a) of this section is deemed to be a violation of this article. However, violation under such sections referred to in this subsection (a), but which have no definite determination, shall nevertheless be deemed a violation of this article. 
(b)	The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to, or to be enforced against, the following: 
(1)	Any police or fire vehicle or ambulance while such vehicle is engaged in emergency business. 
(2)	Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city or the state, during the night, where the public safety, welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)	Any official city function or any function approved by the city manager in writing. 
(c)	Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1976, § 130.04) 
Sec. 34-106. - Interruption of assemblage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to make any loud talk or boisterous noise so as to interrupt the service in any place of divine worship, or so as to interrupt any play, lecture or other public or private assemblage. 
(Code 1976, § 130.06) 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle noise, MCL 257.707a et seq. 
Secs. 34-107-34-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 34-141. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity, in an indecent or lewd dress or to make an indecent exposure of his person on the streets, alleys or other places within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 130.03) 
State Law reference- Indecent exposure, MCL 750.535a; local ordinances prohibiting nudity, MCL 117.5h. 
Sec. 34-142. - Prostitution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be an inmate or visitor to a house of prostitution with the intent to advance, aid or engage in prostitution or engage the illegal services of a prostitute, or to be an inmate or a visitor to such house. 
(Code 1976, § 130.07) 
State Law reference- Prostitution, MCL 750.448 et seq. 
Secs. 34-143-34-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING SCHOOLS 

Sec. 34-171. - Possession of alcohol on school property. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means and includes any intoxicating liquor, spirits, beer or wine. 
    School property means and includes all buildings, premises, grounds and fixtures which are owned, leased or otherwise possessed for school purposes. 
(b)	Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess alcoholic beverages on school property within the city at any time. 
(c)	Violation; penalty. A violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, such violator shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1976, § 131.03) 
Sec. 34-172. - Injury of school property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, destroy, mark with ink, paint, chalk or other substance, or post any handbills on, or in any other manner deface any public school building, the property of the school district known as public schools of the city, any building occupied by any public school in the city, or the grounds, fences, trees or other appurtenances or fixtures belonging to such buildings. 
(Code 1976, § 130.08) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 34-173. - Language causing breach of the peace. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any language which is reasonably calculated to cause an immediate breach of the peace on any lands or premises belonging to the public schools of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 130.10) 
Sec. 34-174. - Disturbance of school. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to willfully or maliciously make on any public or private ground adjacent to any building in which public school is in actual session any noise, disturbance or improper discussion, by which the peace, quiet or good order of the school shall be disturbed. 
(Code 1976, § 130.09) 
Sec. 34-175. - Disturbance of school order. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to disturb or interrupt the peace, good order or quiet of a school in any school room where any public school is assembled, or in any building in which school is in session, or on the grounds adjacent to a school. 
(Code 1976, § 130.11) 
Sec. 34-176. - Refusal to leave school. 
    Any person not in immediate attendance in a school who is in the building or upon the premises while school is in session, or during the usual daily intermission or recess, who shall conduct or behave himself improperly, and who, upon the request of the superintendent of the schools, the teacher of the school or person in charge to leave the building or premises, shall neglect or refuse to do so shall be punished as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 130.12) 
State Law reference- Refusal to leave premises, MCL 750.552. 
Secs. 34-177-34-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 34-211. - Duty of public safety officer. 
    It shall be the duty of, and it shall be lawful for, any public safety officer to take away from any child under the age of 18 years any air gun, slingshot, shotgun or rifle which has been possessed or used contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 131.08) 
Sec. 34-212. - Curfew. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, frequent or play in and upon the public sidewalks, streets, highways, alleys, parks, docks, wharves or public buildings or places of amusement or entertainment, vacant lots or other public grounds or places in the city in the nighttime between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. This subsection shall not apply if such minor was: 
(1)	Accompanied by his parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)	On an errand at the direction of his parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)	In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)	Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)	Involved in an emergency. In this subsection, the term "emergency" means an unforseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. Such term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life; 
(6)	Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(7)	Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or 
(8)	Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. 
(b)	The parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of any minor under the age of 17 years, or other adult person, shall not knowingly allow or permit any minor to violate subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1976, §§ 131.01, 131.02) 
State Law reference- Curfew, MCL 750.751 et seq. 
Sec. 34-213. - Possession of dangerous weapons. 
    No child under the age of 18 years shall be allowed to have in his possession or control, or use, any air guns, slingshots or other dangerous weapons within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 131.06) 
Sec. 34-214. - Possession of firearms. 
(a)	Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, an individual who is less than 18 years of age shall not possess a firearm in public, except under the direct supervision of an individual 18 years of age or older. 
(b)	Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to an individual who is less than 18 years of age who possesses a firearm in accordance with part 401 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.40101 et seq.) or part 435 of such act (MCL 324.43501 et seq.); however, an individual who is less than 18 years of age may possess a firearm without a hunting license while at, or going to or from, a recognized target range or trap or skeet shooting ground if, while going to or from the range or ground, the firearm is enclosed and securely fastened in a case or locked in the trunk of a motor vehicle. 
(c)	An individual who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1976, § 131.06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.234f. 
Sec. 34-215. - Sale of weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, furnish, give to or permit any child under the age of 18 years to have in his possession or use any dangerous weapon within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 131.07) 
Chapter 38 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of parks and recreation, § 2-121; environment, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; vegetation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Public recreation system authorized, MCL 123.51 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means alcoholic liquor, beer, wine, spirits or alcohol other than that which has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for beverage purposes. 
    Commercial boatsman means any person, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership or society, or any other organization operating a boat for the purpose of monetary gain. 
    Commercial boatsman, local, means any commercial boatsman residing in or located within the limits of the city. 
    Commercial boatsman, nonlocal, means any commercial boatsman residing or located outside the city but within the state. 
    Commercial boatsman, out-of-state, means any commercial boatsman residing or located outside the state. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle self-propelled by any means, including all devices in, on or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn, excluding only devices moved exclusively by human power, but does not include authorized city vehicles. 
    Nonresident yachtsman means any yachting person, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership or society, or any other organization not residing in or located within the limits of the city. 
    Nonresident yachtsman on cruise means any yachting person living aboard his craft or in local hostelries. 
    Other authorized persons mean city personnel engaged in the course of their duties, as well as bona fide guests or residents of Gladstone Bay Campground. 
    Park means any area or plat of land owned or operated by the city and developed and used for public recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, parks, landscaped tracts, picnic grounds, playgrounds, athletic fields, stadiums, camps, foot and bicycle paths, ice rinks and other recreational structures and facilities for the use and benefit of the public, except the area known and designated as the Gladstone Sports Park Building. 
    Public park land means any area or plat of land owned or operated by the city and developed and used for public recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, parks, landscaped tracts, picnic grounds, playgrounds, athletic fields, ski hills, camps, foot and bicycle paths, ice rinks and facilities for the use and benefit of the public. 
    Resident yachtsman means any yachting person, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership or society, or any other organization residing in or located within the limits of the city. 
    Residents of Gladstone Bay Campground means all persons using the Gladstone Bay Campground pursuant to a permit granted by the director of parks and recreation or his duly authorized representative, and subject to regulations promulgated by such permit. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.60), 9-26-1994) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-2. - Fees. 
(a)	Adopted annually; publication. The parks and recreation commission shall recommend to the city commission the adoption of an annual fee schedule for permits and activities sponsored by or made available through the parks and recreation department. The city commission, on an annual basis as part of its budget process, shall adopt by resolution a fee schedule for permits and activities within the parks and recreation program. Such fee schedule shall be published upon adoption, and a copy of the fee schedule shall be made available at the city clerk's office. Fees for activities in the special activities parks shall be posted at such parks. 
(b)	Resident rebate. The city commission, in setting its annual fee schedule for parks and recreation, has authority to establish a rebate of up to 20 percent for residents of the city. The rebate to be paid to city residents shall be determined annually by resolution of the city commission, which shall set the time for the rebate to be exercised, the amount and the manner of application for such rebate. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.63, 91.64), 9-26-1994) 
Secs. 38-3-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and authorities, § 2-251 et seq. 

Sec. 38-31. - Established; advisory commission. 
    There is established a parks and recreation commission of the city to act solely in an advisory capacity to the city commission and city administration. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.40), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-32. - Composition; appointment. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.41), 9-26-1994; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 3-8-2004) 
Sec. 38-33. - Persons ineligible for membership. 
    A person shall not be eligible for appointment to the parks and recreation commission who is the holder of any public office, elective or appointive under the city Charter and who does not meet the eligibility requirements for holding public office as provided in the city Charter. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.42), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-34. - Director of parks and recreation to serve as nonvoting member. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall serve as a nonvoting permanent member of the parks and recreation commission. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.43), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-35. - Terms of office. 
    All members of the parks and recreation commission, other than the director of parks and recreation, shall serve a term of three years. The terms of the present members of the parks and recreation commission shall remain as established. Any new members shall be appointed in staggered terms so that reappointment or replacement members shall serve full three-year terms with different expiration dates. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.44), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-36. - Vacancies in membership. 
    Vacancies on the parks and recreation commission occurring before the expiration of any terms of office shall be reported by the parks and recreation commission to the mayor and shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.45), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-37. - Meetings. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall elect one of its members as chairman and such other officers as the members deem necessary. The parks and recreation commission shall adopt bylaws for the orderly conduct of its meetings, which shall be held on a monthly basis or as often as may be deemed necessary by the chairman. A copy of the minutes of all parks and recreation commission meetings shall be filed with the city clerk for submittal to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.46), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-38. - Duties. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the city commission and the director of parks and recreation. The parks and recreation commission shall review and from time to time make recommendations to the city commission relative to the improvement of existing and the development of new parks and recreation programs. The parks and recreation commission shall establish reasonable rules and regulations for the protection of rights and property vested in the city and under control of the parks and recreation department for the use, care, maintenance and management of all parks, public lands and waters in and adjacent to the city. It shall be the duty of the parks and recreation commission to make sure the rules, regulations and ordinances governing the parks, public land and waters of the city are adequately enforced. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.47), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-39. - Authority to call on other city bodies for assistance. 
    The parks and recreation commission may call on any department, board or commission of the city for such technical and advisory assistance as may be needed. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.48), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-40. - Expenditures. 
    The parks and recreation commission and its members shall not incur any expense or create any obligation or liability upon the city. If any expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning of the parks and recreation commission, prior approval of such expenditure shall first be obtained from the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.49), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-41. - Fee schedule. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall develop on an annual basis a fee schedule for parks and recreation activities which it shall recommend for adoption by the city commission as part of their annual budgetary process. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.50), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-42. - Director of parks and recreation. 
    A director of parks and recreation shall be appointed by and serve under the general direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.51), 9-26-1994) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 38-43. - General duties of director. 
    The director of parks and recreation shall be the administrative head of the department of parks and recreation and shall have the duty to: 
(1)	Provide recreation programs and activities for the inhabitants for the city; 
(2)	Plan and coordinate functions, activities, additions, developments and improvements for the department, draft and implement a city recreation plan, train and administer personnel and enforce department policies; and 
(3)	Maintain and repair parks, playgrounds, public grounds, play areas and the public harbor, including the interior and exterior of all city buildings and park service buildings, and provide for the maintenance and storage of all park and recreational equipment. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.52), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-44. - Rules and regulations. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall establish rules and regulations for the use of the city parks and special recreational facilities, which shall be published upon adoption and a copy of which shall be kept by the city clerk's office. Rules and regulations for the use of the special activity parks shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the special activity park and shall be accessible for viewing 24 hours a day. Such rules and regulations shall be designed to protect the parks and preserve the right of the public to use such parks and to protect public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.65), 9-26-1994) 
Secs. 38-45-38-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-71. - Permits. 
(a)	The parks and recreation commission shall recommend to the city commission the adoption of a schedule of activities which require a permit on both an annual and daily basis. The city commission shall adopt by resolution a list of recreational activities which can only be done within the city parks and recreation system after the issuance of the appropriate permit. 
(b)	A permit shall not be granted under this article to any person for any purpose, unless, in the application therefor, the party applying for the permit shall agree to indemnify and save the city harmless from all liability because of injury to persons or property arising out of the activity or privilege for which the permit was granted. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.62), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-72. - Interfering with park employees or police officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to resist a police officer or city employee exercising his duty within the park area; fail or refuse to obey any lawful command of any such police officer or park employee or in any way interfere with or hinder or prevent any such police officer or park employee from discharging his duty; or in any manner assist or give aid to any person in custody to escape or to attempt to escape from custody, or rescue or attempt to rescue any person when in such custody. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or in any manner hinder any employee of the city while such employee is engaged in constructing, repairing or caring for any city park property. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(mm)), 9-26-1994) 
State Law reference- Obstruction of police officer, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 38-73. - Loitering after closing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or remain upon any park, playing field, playground or other public place after the hour that the parks and recreation commission has ordered such park, playing field, playground or other public place to be closed. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(u)), 9-26-1994) 
State Law reference- Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 38-74. - Entering restricted areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of the city park system where persons are prohibited from going as indicated by a sign or notice. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(g)), 9-26-1994) 
State Law reference- Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 38-75. - Public meetings, concerts or entertainment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to call or hold any public meetings or give any concert or public entertainment of any kind in the city park system without the express consent of the director of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(f)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-76. - Parades, processions, exercises, etc. 
    Parades, processions, exercises or other activities which result in the congregating together of a large number of people within the city shall not be permitted within any parks, public places or boulevard without a permit having been obtained from the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(z)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-77. - Concessions; designation of docks for pleasure boats. 
    The owner or operator of any boat, automobile, aeroplane or hydroplane shall not solicit or be permitted to operate for hire upon or from any portion of a park, public place or boulevard within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city commission, which permit may be issued under such reasonable conditions as may be established and may be revoked or suspended for violation of such conditions or for other cause. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(v)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-78. - Offering articles for sale. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or exchange for sale any article or thing; do any hawking, peddling or soliciting; buy or offer to buy any article or thing; or take up any collection or solicit or receive contributions of money or anything of value in the city park system, except when authorized to do so by permit or contract with the director of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(c)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-79. - Engaging in sports, games, exercises or amusements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any sport, game, exercise or amusement in the city park system, except such portions of the city park system which may be designated for such activities by the director of parks and recreation and only under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by him. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(a)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-80. - Improper speech and conduct. 
    No person shall use any language which is reasonably calculated to occasion an immediate breach of the peace, nor be guilty of any indecent act or behavior within the city park system. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(h)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-81. - Sleeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep in the city park system between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except in areas within the park system specifically set aside for camping, and then only after having secured the proper permit. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(j)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-82. - Restricted use of playground equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any of the playground apparatuses or devices meant exclusively for the use of children which would limit, in any manner, the use by children. If any person is asked by an adult or city official to allow children to use the equipment, such request shall be granted immediately. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(k)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-83. - Throwing missiles; shooting golf balls. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or cast any stones or other missiles within the city park system or shoot any golf balls or other similar missiles in any part of the park unless there is an area specifically designated for such activity. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(l)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-84. - Obstructing traffic. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to set or place, or cause to be set or placed, any goods, wares or merchandise or property of any kind so as to obstruct travel in the city park system. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(m)), 9-26-1994) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 54. 
Sec. 38-85. - Fires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to light or make use of any fire in the city park system, except such portions of the park system as may be designated by the director of parks and recreation for such purpose, and then only under regulations as prescribed by the director. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(o)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-86. - Use of intoxicants. 
(a)	The consumption of intoxicating liquor, beer or wine in the city park system shall be permitted, except where otherwise posted. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away any intoxicating liquor, beer or wine in the city park system, unless a valid permit has been issued as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)	Upon written application to the director of parks and recreation or his designee, a limited permit may be issued for discreet consumption of alcoholic beverages for family or social parties and recognized club activities. Such permit, if issued, shall be subject to the rules, regulations and restrictions imposed by the department of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(o)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-87. - Depositing refuse; use of receptacles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into and deposit, dump, throw or place any coal, ashes, dust, garbage refuse or rubbish in or upon any part of the city park system. Paper, garbage or refuse matter accumulated during use of park facilities shall be deposited only in receptacles provided for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(p)), 9-26-1994) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 42. 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq. 
Sec. 38-88. - Advertising, handbills, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display any placard or advertisement of any kind in the city park system, or to distribute, cast, throw or place any handbill, pamphlet, circular, advertisement or notice of any kind, or post, stencil or otherwise affix any notice, bill, advertisement or other paper upon any structure or thing in or about the park premises. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(q)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-89. - Gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play games of chance or use any gambling device in the city park system. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(r)), 9-26-1994) 
State Law reference- Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Sec. 38-90. - Fishing and swimming. 
    Fishing or swimming shall not be allowed from or upon any portion of city parks, boulevards and public places, except places or sections specifically designated by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(s)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-91. - Defacing property and trees. 
    No person shall cut, break, climb on or in any way injure or deface any tree, shrub, plant or turf nor write, draw, paint or spray any of the buildings, fences, bridges, lamps or posts or other structures or property within the city park system. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(kk)), 9-26-1994) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq. 
Sec. 38-92. - Animals. 
(a)	Interfering with animals, nests. It shall be unlawful for any person to trap, catch, wound, kill or treat cruelly, or attempt to trap, catch, wound or kill any bird or animal, or molest or rob any nest of any bird or animal in the city park system. 
(b)	Riding horses, mules. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any horse, mule, pony or other such riding animal in any of the parks of the city, unless bridle paths have been established in such park; in which case, no person shall drive any such animal in such park, except on such designated bridle path. 
(c)	Allowing animals in parks prohibited; exception. 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person to lead or allow to be loose upon city park premises any animal, except dogs may be taken into the park system, provided they are under the direct control of the owner by command, which can be readily demonstrated, or by a suitable leash not more that six feet in length. Such leash shall be of sufficient strength to hold such animal in constant check. Tying animals by a leash which exceeds six feet in length to any tree, shrub, structure or other fixture or thing is strictly prohibited. 
(2)	Subsection (c) of this section shall not apply to a guide or leader dog or a hearing or service dog that is leading or accompanying a person with disabilities if the guide or leader dog is wearing a harness or if the hearing dog or service dog is wearing a blaze orange leash and collar, hearing dog cape or service dog backpack, and the person with disabilities who is being led or accompanied by such dog has in his possession a pictured identification card certifying that the dog was trained by a qualified organization or trainer as defined by the state. 
(d)	Abandonment of animals in parks prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, leave or desert, within the confines of any city park, any carnivorous animals, such as cats, dogs or any other species of animal which is or may be a menace to the wild life which is or may be harbored within the confines of any such park. 
State Law reference- Right of disabled person to have guide, leader, hearing or service dog, MCL 750.502c. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(a), (d), (e), (t)), 9-26-1994) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6. 
Sec. 38-93. - Golfing activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any golfing activity, such as practice driving or putting, upon any park, playing field, playground or other public place within the city. Such restriction shall not apply to any designated golf course, driving range, putting green or putting course, unless otherwise posted. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(w)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-94. - Combustion powered model planes, boats and cars. 
    A combustion powered model aircraft, model automobile or model boat shall not be operated, or the engines tested, in any park, public place or boulevard within the city, except at such locations as may be designated by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(x)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-95. - Picnics; sale of food or refreshments prohibited. 
(a)	Picnics may not be held upon or in any park, bathing beach, public place or boulevard within the city, except in sections set aside for such purpose. 
(b)	Refreshments, alcoholic or otherwise, or food of any kind shall not be permitted to be sold or offered for sale in any park, bathing beach, public place or boulevard within the city, except as permitted by the city commission in areas designated for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(y)), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-96. - Use of firearms or fireworks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within or upon any parks, public places or boulevards within the city to fire or discharge any revolver or other firearm, throw stones or other missiles or fire, discharge or set off any rocket, cracker, torpedo, squib or other fireworks containing any substance of an explosive nature. Nothing in this section shall prevent special fireworks exhibitions to be given under the auspices or direction of the city, upon special permit issued by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(aa)), 9-26-1994) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit discharge of firearms preserved, MCL 123.1102. 
Sec. 38-97. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)	Indecent exposure of the person, disorderly conduct, objectionable noise, use of radio loudspeakers, riots, breach of the peace, the use of profane or obscene language and possession, sale or consumption of any alcoholic beverage on or adjacent to any competitive athletic area, except those designated by the city commission, shall be prohibited in the parks, public places and boulevards of the city, provided that the term "radio loud speakers," as used in this section, shall not apply to apparatus erected or maintained for the purpose of transmitting speeches or concerts by or under the supervision of the city commission. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to make, countenance or assist in making any improper noise or engage in any riot, disorderly conduct or collect in crowds with other persons for unlawful purposes or to the annoyance, obstruction or disturbance of other persons in any city park. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(bb), (ll)), 9-26-1994) 
State Law reference- Disorderly persons, MCL 750.167. 
Sec. 38-98. - Traffic and vehicles. 
(a)	Vehicles on footwalks, bridle paths, etc. A wheel barrel, handcraft, automobile, motorcycle, bicycle, motor-driven cycle, go-cart or unlicensed vehicle shall not be permitted on the footwalks, sidewalks, bridle paths, pedestrian trails, grass plots or planted places of any park, public place or boulevard within the city, except in such sections as may be designated by the city commission. 
(b)	Regulation of traffic. The public safety department, with the approval of the city commission, shall have authority to regulate and control traffic vehicles upon or within the parks, public places and boulevards within the city. The public safety department may designate certain roadways to be used by vehicles going in a certain direction and shall make evident such designation by appropriate signs. 
(c)	Driving or parking on grass or shrubbery; stopping, standing or parking generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park any vehicle of any description upon any part of a park, public place or boulevard within the city which is laid out and appropriated for grass or shrubbery. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle upon that portion of the roadway located between the property lot lines and the nearest curblines unless permitted by action of the city commission and appropriate signs are erected. 
(d)	Obstruction of traffic. A vehicle shall not be permitted to stand upon any boulevard or roadway of any park within the city in such a manner so as to obstruct or blockade traffic. Every vehicle shall come to a complete stop before crossing any boulevard, provided that this regulation shall not apply to any intersection where traffic is being directed by a traffic officer or traffic signal. 
(e)	Speed limits. A vehicle shall not be operated or driven in any park or public place within the city at a rate of speed in excess of 25 miles per hour. Where signs are erected for the control of traffic which is less than 25 miles per hour, it shall be unlawful to exceed the rate of speed designated upon the sign. 
(f)	Trailers. An automobile or other vehicle hauling a second vehicle or trailer of any description shall not be permitted within any parks or public places within the city, except where designated by proper signage. The term "trailer," as used in this subsection, means any vehicle which is wholly or partially dependent upon another unit to provide motive power. 
(g)	Testing of vehicles. A motor car, truck or motorcycle shall not be driven in any park within the city for testing of such motor car, truck or motorcycle. The term "testing," as used in this subsection, means the operating or driving of a motor vehicle for ascertaining its fitness for service and use. 
(h)	Repairing of automobiles. It shall be unlawful for any person to clean, wash, polish, repair or in any manner service any motor vehicle or trailer within the confines of any public park within the city, or cause such to be done. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "repair" means the replacement of old, worn out parts of a vehicle with new parts, and the term "service" means the drainage of oil, sludge, gasoline and water for the purpose of replacing such oil, sludge, gasoline and water with a new supply. This prohibition shall not apply to the changing of deflated tires or the performing of necessary emergency work on a disabled car for the purpose of immediate movement or to places specifically set aside by the department of parks and recreation for motor vehicle repair and service. 
(i)	Use of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or use any vehicle upon any portion of the city park system where such vehicles are prohibited from being brought or used by direction of the director of parks and recreation. The public safety department is authorized to remove and/or impound any and all vehicles which have been brought into or used in the city park system where such vehicles are prohibited from use by direction of the director of parks and recreation, except vehicles legally parked in a designated parking area. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.61(cc)-(jj), (nn)), 9-26-1994) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 54. 
State Law reference- Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq. 
Secs. 38-99-38-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIAL USE PARKS 

Sec. 38-121. - Yacht harbor and boats. 
(a)	Management. The yacht harbor shall be operated under the jurisdiction of the harbor master. The assignment of boat stalls and mooring spaces shall be made by permit by the harbor master or his duly appointed representative. 
(b)	Establishment of rules and regulations. The parks and recreation commission shall have authority to establish such rules and regulations as may be deemed advisable to promote peace, health or safety in the yacht harbor. The parks and recreation commission shall have authority to delegate enforcement of such rules and regulations to the harbor master, who may call on the public safety department to assist in enforcing all such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary. Failure to abide by the rules, regulations and provisions of this division shall be grounds for suspension and/or loss of privileges in the yacht harbor. 
(c)	Permit required to moor boats. It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, anchor, moor, tie or fasten any canoe, scow, skiff or other equipment which shall be construed to be navigable upon or in the water (except boats belonging to the United States government) in the yacht harbor or to any wharf, pier or dock within the confines of any part of the yacht harbor without first obtaining a permit from the department of parks and recreation. 
(d)	Permittees to assume liability for damages. A permit shall not be granted under this division to any person for any purpose unless, in the application for such permit, the party applying for the permit shall agree in writing to indemnify and save the city harmless from any liability because of injury to persons or property arising out of the activities or privileges for which the permit was issued. 
(e)	Motor vehicles. All vehicles servicing or used in connection with any type of watercraft in the yacht harbor shall remain in the regularly established roads or designated parking areas. 
(f)	Small craft. Rowboats and other small craft shall be tied or moored in areas designated by the harbor master. 
(g)	Launching. All boats shall be placed in the water or taken out of the water only at the places designated for such purpose. Except for emergency repairs, boats shall not be dry docked or stored in the yacht harbor or city property. 
(h)	Marking. All craft shall be marked with the owner's identification and shall be registered with the harbor master. 
(i)	Speed limit. The maximum speed limit of all craft in the yacht harbor area shall be five miles per hour, no-wake speed. 
(j)	Boat space fees. All permit fees shall be collected in advance at the time boat space is assigned. Such fees shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(k)	Other users. The following rates shall apply to the other users of the harbor facilities: 
(1)	Nonresident yachtsmen on cruise shall pay rates as set by the city commission. 
(2)	Local commercial boatsmen shall pay double the user rates set for resident yachtsmen. 
(3)	Nonlocal commercial boatsmen shall not be permitted in the harbor, except for repairs for a period not to exceed 72 hours or for the duration of a storm. 
(l)	Conditions of usage. The boat harbor may be used for pleasure craft only under the following conditions: 
(1)	Mooring in channel. Boats shall not be moored for longer than two hours in the entrance and channel leading from the bay into the harbor. Boats shall not be moored in such entrance or channel at any time so as to obstruct the free passage through the channel. 
(2)	Lights. Between one hour after sundown and one hour before sunrise all boats entering and using the boat harbor shall have lit thereon one red light and one green light. 
(3)	Power boats. Power boats shall not be allowed to be driven within the harbor for any other purpose than for entering or leaving the harbor or mooring of boats in the harbor. 
(4)	Anchoring. All boats moored within the harbor which are not securely tied must be securely anchored. 
(m)	Disturbance of the peace. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any language which is reasonably calculated to cause an immediate breach of the peace or to otherwise create any breach or disturbance of the peace within the boat harbor or entrance and the lagoon. All power boats shall be operated as quietly as possible, consistent with the necessary operation of such boats. 
(n)	Garbage. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or dump any rubbish into the boat harbor, the harbor entrance or the lagoon. 
(o)	Bathing and fishing. The boat harbor and harbor entrance shall be reserved for boating purposes, and it shall be unlawful for any person to seine for minnows or fish in such places. Swimming shall be prohibited in the boat harbor, harbor entrance and lagoon. 
(p)	Unlocked boats. If any person shall leave any boat or craft unlocked or unchained for a period of time longer than 12 hours, such boat or craft shall be considered abandoned and shall be taken into possession by the department of public safety. 
(q)	Sale of impounded boats. The city may not sell at auction any boat impounded by city officials until at least 14 days after written notice to the owner of the boat, if known, or publication of sale in the local newspaper. The owner of the impounded boat may claim such boat or craft by paying the reasonable costs of the taking of possession and storing of the boat or craft any time up to the time of the actual sale of the boat or craft. 
(r)	Costs of taking possession and storage. The costs of taking possession of any boat shall be $50.00, and the costs of storage shall be $25.00 for each day or part of a day that the boat or craft is in the possession of the department of public safety. 
(s)	Sale of unclaimed boat. If any boat or craft remains unclaimed for 14 days after being impounded by the department of public safety, the boat or craft shall be destroyed or sold at public sale. All proceeds realized from the impounding or sale of such boat or craft shall be turned over to the general fund of the city. 
(t)	Authority of harbor master to board or move boats and impound ice shanties. The harbor master or his designee shall have the authority to board any boat which may be anchored, moored, tied or fastened in violation of the terms of this division and move, or cause to be moved, such boat to another location. The harbor master or his designee shall have the right to hold such boat if any permit fees for moving such boat are not paid. The harbor master and/or any authorized city official may remove any ice shanty from park property within seven days of the placing of such ice shanty on park property. The same costs as set forth in subsection (r) of this section shall be charged for the cost of impoundment and storage of such ice shanty. 
(u)	Interference with employees of the department of parks and recreation. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, prevent or interfere with the agents or employees of the department of parks and recreation while such agents or employees are engaged in carrying out the provisions of this division. 
(v)	Advertising and peddling while at mooring spaces. It shall be unlawful for any person to display any placard or commercial display upon any vessel while occupying a mooring space or to hawk, peddle or offer any other article for sale, charter or trade within any mooring space in any park or part thereof. 
(w)	Disorderly conduct; swimming; speed of boats entering or leaving basins or harbors. Indecent exposure of the person, disorderly conduct, riot or breach of the peace shall be expressly forbidden while occupying a mooring space. Vessels propelled by motor shall reduce their speed to no-wake speed and shall not be maneuvered, except as absolutely necessary, while entering or leaving any basin or harbor. Swimming, diving or bathing shall not be permitted in any basin or harbor. 
(x)	Speed at boat launch ramp. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate the motor of a vessel at a greater speed than idle speed at any boat launch ramp administered by the department of parks and recreation unless the propeller of such vessel is disengaged. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.80), 9-26-1994; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 8-26-1996) 
Sec. 38-122. - Sports park facility. 
(a)	Management. The city sports park facility shall be operated under the jurisdiction of the director of parks and recreation or his representatives. 
(b)	Establishment of rules and regulations. The parks and recreation commission shall have the authority to establish such rules and regulations as may be deemed advisable to promote the peace, health or safety at the sports park facility. The parks and recreation commission shall have the authority to delegate enforcement of such rules and regulations to the director of parks and recreation and his staff who may call the public safety department to assist in the enforcement of all such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary. Failure to abide by such rules and regulations shall be grounds for suspension and/or loss of the privilege to use the sports park facility. 
(c)	Fees and permits. A schedule of fees for the use of the sports park facility shall be conspicuously posted at the sports park facility. Fees and permits required for the reservation and use of the lodge and baseball fields shall be available with the parks and recreation department and the city clerk's office. 
(d)	Permittees to assume liability for damages. A permit shall not be granted under this section to any person for any purpose unless, in the application for such permit, the party applying for the permit shall agree in writing to indemnify and save the city harmless from any liability because of injury to persons or property arising out of the activities or privileges for which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.82), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 38-123. - Gladstone Bay Campground. 
(a)	Management. The Gladstone Bay Campground shall be operated under the jurisdiction of the director of parks and recreation or his representatives. 
(b)	Establishment of rules and regulations. The parks and recreation commission shall have the authority to establish such rules and regulations as may be deemed advisable to promote the peace, health or safety in the campground. The parks and recreation commission shall have the authority to delegate enforcement of such rules and regulations to the director of parks and recreation and his staff who may call the public safety department to assist in the enforcement of all such rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary. Failure to abide by such rules and regulations shall be grounds for suspension and/or loss of the privilege to use the campground facility. 
(c)	Fees and permits. A schedule of fees shall be adopted annually by the city commission for the use of the campground and shall be conspicuously posted at the campground facility. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.86), 9-26-1994) 
Chapter 42 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 22; depositing refuse in parks, § 38-87; utilities, ch. 58. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 553, adopted Oct. 25, 2004, amended art. II, §§ 42-31-42-42, in its entirety as set out herein. The former art. II, §§ 42-31-42-42, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 50.02-50.08, 50.12-50.14, 50.17-50.20. 

Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garbage means and includes all organic refuse from kitchens and household waste that has been prepared for or intended to be used as food, or has resulted from the preparation of food, and all organic refuse from private premises, public food establishments and institutions where foodstuffs intended for human consumption have been prepared, used, offered for sale or stored. 
    Recyclable materials means clean aluminum cans, steel cans, #1 and #2 plastics, newsprint, phone books, magazines and catalogs, paperback books, office/mixed paper and corrugated cardboard. Recyclable materials may be segregated from garbage, refuse and yard waste for separate collection. 
    Refuse means and includes bottles, crockery, metal vessels, pasteboard and wooden boxes, ashes, dead animals, and all waste not classified as garbage, yard waste, recycling materials or hazardous waste. Refuse is produced by the normal operation of dwelling places, households, apartment houses, stores, office buildings, restaurants, hotels, institutions and commercial establishments. 
    Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, vegetable or other garden debris, or brush or tree trimmings less than four feet in length or two inches in diameter, that can be converted to compost humus. Yard waste shall be mulched or composted at the residence or place of business, or delivered to the Gladstone Compost site for processing. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-32. - Rules. 
    The city manager shall be empowered to prepare and publish rules for the effective administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, and after such publication such rules shall have the force of law, and any person violating any such rules shall be subject to punishment as set forth in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-33. - Collector's license. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse, yard waste or recyclables without first obtaining a license. 
(b)	Every person who is required to secure a license under the terms of this article shall first make a written application therefore in substantially the manner and form provided in chapter 10 of this Code. The application shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that he will comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the rules promulgated under this article and that his license may be revoked at any time by the city manager. The granting and/or revocation of such license shall be discretionary with the city manager. Any person feeling aggrieved by the decision of the city manager may appeal to the city commission, whose decision in the matter shall be final. The fee for such license shall be $5.00 annually. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-34. - Excavation materials; tree trimmings. 
    Materials caused from excavations or building operations and the removal of tree trimmings (other than those defined as yard waste) are not embraced by the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-35. - Accumulation of garbage. 
    Any person owning or occupying any lot, building or premises in the city shall not allow any garbage, yard waste or refuse to accumulate and remain on such lot or premises for a period of time in excess of that stated as "frequency of collection." However, this section shall not apply to lands designated as residential or municipal compost piles, or garbage and refuse dumps. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-36. - Scattering garbage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, cause to be deposited, scatter or abandon waste, rubbish or garbage on any public or private place in the city, except as provided in section 42-35. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-37. - Burning garbage. 
    Garbage or refuse shall not be burned in the open air or in a burning barrel within the city. Waste material which causes or creates a dense or offensive smoke when it is burned shall not be burned in the open air or in a burn barrel upon any street or land within the city, except at such place as the department of refuse and garbage shall designate for final disposal of such materials, or in the case of dead grass and leaves, with the approval of the director of public safety or his authorized agents. Such approval shall be given upon a showing that such burning will not endanger public safety, and that the burning is in compliance with the regulations of the State Department of Environmental Quality. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-38. - Collection. 
    Collection of domestic garbage, refuse and recyclables within the city shall be made at least once each week. Collections from hotels, apartments, stores, office buildings, restaurants, institutions and commercial establishments shall be made not less than once each week or more often with the needs as determined by the city manager. The number of receptacles for such institutions shall be adequate to contain the waste materials. Multiple dwellings exceeding three families shall be deemed an apartment house. Collections in excess of weekly collections shall be by special contract and paid for by the person receiving such service. Unpaid accounts shall constitute a direct lien against the owner of the property served. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-39. - Garbage collection vehicles. 
    All vehicles used for the transportation of garbage and/or refuse within the city shall have metal lined bodies, be watertight and constructed so that no leakage can escape from the vehicle while transporting garbage or refuse. The body of such vehicle shall be kept covered at all times except during loading or unloading. Such cover shall consist of a tight-fitting metal cover or watertight canvas cover of such size that it may extend well down on the sides and ends of the body of the vehicle and be securely fastened at the corners, sides and ends. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-40. - Containers. 
    Every tenant, lessee or occupant of any premises within the city where garbage is created shall provide such premises with one or more plastic or galvanized metal garbage receptacles with tight-fitting plastic or galvanized covers. Such receptacles shall not exceed 38-gallon capacity and shall not be filled so as to exceed 50 pounds when full. Such receptacles shall be adequate for receiving and holding all garbage created on such premises between the times of collection and removal. Every tenant, lessee or occupant of any premises where refuse is created shall, where necessary, provide in addition to the garbage receptacles one or more receptacles which are acceptable to the public works department to contain all refuse which may accumulate upon such premises between removals. 
(1)	All such containers for garbage and/or refuse shall be equipped for easy handling and shall not be filled above the top edge of the container or in a manner which is likely to spill the contents of the container from the bottom, sides or top when being picked up and dumped into the collecting conveyance. Receptacles for garbage and/or refuse must be kept clean and sanitary by the owner or occupants of the premises on which they are located. Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the requirements of this article, or of the public works department, may be deemed rubbish and shall be collected as rubbish by the public works department's collectors. 
(2)	Refuse and garbage receptacles and bundles shall be placed in a location which is convenient for collection and acceptable to the public works department, but off public streets and alleys, and in a manner that will not cause a nuisance, create a public eyesore or violate esthetic principals. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city limits to place garbage in receptacles provided for the accumulation of such garbage without draining and wrapping the garbage in paper, provided such restriction shall not apply to restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled commercially. Rubbish that is larger than that which can be contained in receptacles shall be securely tied in bundles not exceeding 50 pounds in weight. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-41. - Explosives, flammable materials and hazardous materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to place, or cause to be placed, in regular garbage or refuse receptacles any explosive or highly flammable materials, or any materials excluded from Michigan Landfills by Public Act No. 34 of 2000. These prohibited items include medical wastes, whole rubber tires, used oil, lead, acid, batteries, low-level radioactive wastes, hazardous wastes, yard clippings, liquid wastes (except through the household hazardous waste program), PCBs and asbestos. All such materials shall be disposed of under the supervision of the public safety director, or the supervision of the Delta Solid Waste Management Authority landfill personnel. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Sec. 42-42. - Garbage and refuse originating outside city limits. 
(a)	Prohibited acts. The following shall be prohibited within the city: 
(1)	It shall be unlawful for any person, whether a resident or nonresident of the city, to bring garbage or refuse which originates outside the city limits into the city for collection or disposal by the city. 
(2)	A resident of the city shall not consent, give permission or allow garbage or refuse originating outside the city limits to be brought to such person's residence or premises within city limits for collection or disposal by the city. 
(b)	Presumption. In any proceeding for a violation of this section, proof that garbage or refuse found within the city limits displays information identifying a person that resides outside the city limits shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the person so identified deposited the garbage or refuse at the point where such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 553, 10-25-2004) 
Chapter 46 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Streets, sidewalks, sewers and drains, ch. XII. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(9); any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any road, street, sidewalk or alley saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(10); any ordinance establishing the grade or any road, street or sidewalk saved from repeal, § 1-5(a)(11); hawkers and peddlers, § 10-131 et seq.; transient merchants and transient photographers, § 10-241 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; land development regulations, ch. 30; street numbers required, § 30-71; moving buildings, § 30-111 et seq.; flood damage prevention, § 30-261 et seq.; subdivisions and other divisions of land, § 30-341 et seq.; street and roads in subdivisions, § 30-401; sidewalks in subdivisions, § 30-402; zoning, § 30-471 et seq.; signs, § 30-601 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 58; vegetation, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Obstruction or destruction. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Complete streets is defined as a design principle to promote a safe network of access for pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists of all ages and abilities. 
    Street means the entire width between boundary lines of each publicly maintained way when any part is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
(b)	Obstruction or incumbrance prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to obstruct or incumber any sidewalk, street, alley or public land or approach thereto, or any other public ground within the city, with any boxes, merchandise, lumber, wood, coal or vehicles maintained on such public places. This shall not prevent the proper parking of vehicles on streets or in any of the parks or public grounds of the city, nor prevent the deposit of merchandise temporarily on any sidewalks, solely for the purpose of loading or unloading into or from any vehicle. It shall not be unlawful to deposit fuel, furniture or other articles temporarily on any sidewalk, street or alley for such reasonable length of time as it may be necessary to remove such article, not to exceed 24 hours. The city manager, upon sufficient showing of the necessity, may issue temporary permits to utilize a portion of any street, alley or sidewalk for the construction or repair of any building or any adjacent lot. 
(c)	Destruction prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to take up or haul away from any street or public grounds within the city any gravel, sand or cement without a permit to do so issued by the city manager. 
(Code 1976, §§ 92.30-92.32; Ord. No. 586, § 1, 1-9-2012) 
Sec. 46-2. - Encroachments. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, build or place, or cause to be erected, built or placed, upon any street or public ground in the city any building, fence or other structure, or to own, maintain, use or control any building, fence or other structure so erected or placed. This section shall not apply to structures erected by the city or with the consent of the city. 
(b)	If any building, fence or structure erected in the city shall extend into or in any way encroach upon or obstruct any street or public place, except as may be erected by the city or with the consent of the city commission, the city manager shall serve a written notice signed by the city manager upon the owner or occupant of such building, fence or structure as provided in section 2-2 for the serving of notices if such person is a resident of the city. The notice shall specify the location and extent of the encroachment and require the owner to remove such obstruction or encroachment from any street or public place within a reasonable time as specified in the notice. If the owner, within the time specified in the notice, shall not remove the obstruction or encroachment, the owner shall be liable to prosecution as provided by this Code. 
(c)	Any building, fence or other structure which shall be erected, built or placed upon any street, alley or other public place within the city, except as may be erected by the city or with the consent of the city commission, is declared a nuisance, and upon the expiration of the time specified in the notice as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, the city commission may direct the city manager to remove the encroachment or obstruction at the expense of the owner or occupant, who shall be liable to pay the costs of such removal as a special assessment levied on his property. 
(Code 1976, §§ 92.33-92.35) 
Sec. 46-3. - Driveways. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to construct a driveway from the edge of any pavement to the property line of any property abutting on a street wherein the pavement has been laid without adopting the standard driveway specifications which are on file in the city clerk's office. The city manager or his duly authorized agent may, in his discretion, authorize an alteration of the standard driveway specifications, provided that a sketch or plan in writing shall be presented to him or his authorized agent showing the nature and extent of the proposed change and alteration. 
(b)	Any person desiring to construct a driveway shall make application in writing to the city manager, specifying the type of driveway to be constructed, and such person shall not proceed to construct the driveway until the application has been approved by the city manager or his duly authorized agent. 
(c)	If any person shall violate the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the city manager or his authorized agent shall abate any driveway not constructed in accordance with the provisions of such subsection as a nuisance and shall then cause such driveway to be destroyed and removed. The cost of destruction and removal of such driveway shall be levied as a special assessment against the property of the owner. 
(Code 1976, §§ 92.36-92.38) 
Sec. 46-4. - Complete streets improvements. 
    The City of Gladstone will plan for, design, and construct all transportation improvement projects, both new and retrofit activities, to provide appropriate accommodations for bicyclists, pedestrian, transit users, and persons of all ages and abilities in accordance with the City of Gladstone Master Plan and the Capital Improvements Plan. In furtherance of that policy: 
(a)	The City of Gladstone Master Plan and Capital Improvements Plan shall be referenced and its implementation considered prior to construction or reconstruction within the city's rights-of-way. 
(b)	The master plan and capital improvements plan will include, at a minimum, accommodations for accessibility, sidewalks, curb ramps and cuts, trails, pathways, signage, bike lanes, and shall incorporate principles of complete streets and maximize walkable and bikeable streets within the City of Gladstone. 
(c)	The accommodations shall also be designed and built using guidance from the most recent additions of the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities , the Michigan Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MMUTCD) (MDOT), and the American with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG). Methods of providing flexibility within safe design parameters, such as context sensitive design solutions and design, will be considered. 
(d)	The City of Gladstone Master Plan will be updated every five years from the date of its initial adoption and the capital improvements plan will be updated annually. 
(e)	It will be the goal of the city to fund the implementation of the master plan and capital improvement plan, which shall include expending State Act 51 funds received by the city annually in accordance with Public Act 135 of 2010, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 1, 1-9-2012) 
Secs. 46-5-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE AND CONSTRUCTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-31. - Notice of construction and repair. 
    If the city commission shall deem it necessary and desirable that a new sidewalk shall be constructed or the old sidewalk shall be repaired by the owner in any public street in the parkway according to the provisions of the city Charter or this division, it shall pass a resolution designating the location of the sidewalk, the separate or single lot or sidewalk district, parcel of land or premises in front of which the sidewalk is to be constructed or repaired, and if known, the name of the owner of the separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises and the time within which the sidewalk shall be constructed or repaired, which shall not be less than two weeks. The city commission shall instruct the city manager to notify the owner of the separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises as provided in section 2-2. 
(Code 1976, § 92.03) 
Sec. 46-32. - Special assessment. 
(a)	When the city manager shall have reported to the city commission a sworn statement of the cost and expense incurred in constructing a new sidewalk or repairing a sidewalk with respect to any separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises, then it shall be the duty of the city commission to levy the cost and expense of such construction as a special assessment against the owner and upon the separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises, payable forthwith to the city treasurer without further notice to the owner, with interest at the rate as set by the city commission from the date of the sworn statement. 
(b)	Within 30 days prior to the passage of the annual appropriation bill for the city, the city manager shall report to the city commission all special assessments levied against the owner and upon any separate or single lots, parcels of land or premises within the city still remaining unpaid. The city commission shall forthwith order the city assessor to assess such unpaid special assessments against the respective separate or single lots, parcels of land or premises, together with interest at the rate set by the city commission from the date of the resolution. 
(Code 1976, §§ 92.06, 92.07) 
Secs. 46-33-46-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 46-51. - Responsibility. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of private property to construct sidewalks in the public streets of the city in the parkway between the line of any separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises and the nearest curbline in any public street, in accordance with this article, upon receipt of a notice of the passage of a resolution by the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 92.01) 
Sec. 46-52. - Failure to construct. 
    If the owner of any separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises shall not, within the time required, construct a new sidewalk, after being notified as provided in section 2-2, it shall then be the duty of the city manager to construct the sidewalk as ordered by the city commission, and the city manager shall keep an accurate account of the cost and expense of the labor and materials incurred in constructing the sidewalk, with interest at the rate as set by the city commission, together with the cost, if any, of the service of a copy of any resolution of the city commission upon the owner and to report a sworn statement of the account to the city commission forthwith upon the completion of the work. 
(Code 1976, § 92.04) 
Sec. 46-53. - Construction, reconstruction or removal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct or remove any public sidewalk within the city, except in accordance with the line, grade, slope and specifications established by the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 92.08) 
Sec. 46-54. - Specifications. 
(a)	All sidewalks within the city shall be constructed of Portland cement upon a proper foundation. 
(b)	The width of all sidewalks constructed in the city shall be as follows: 
(1)	On Delta Avenue from Sixth Street to 12th Street, sidewalks shall be 12 feet wide and from 12th Street to 16th Street, sidewalks shall be eight feet wide; 
(2)	On Central Avenue from Delta Avenue to the alley between Minnesota Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue, sidewalks shall be 12 feet wide; 
(3)	From the alley between Minnesota Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue to Michigan Avenue, sidewalks shall be eight feet wide; 
(4)	From Michigan Avenue South to the end of the street, sidewalks shall be six feet wide; 
(5)	On Delta Avenue from Fourth Street to Sixth Street, sidewalks shall be eight feet wide; 
(6)	All other sidewalks in the city shall be the uniform width of six feet. 
(c)	If any person, owner or agent shall construct a new sidewalk which shall be of a different width than prescribed in subsection (b) of this section, such person, owner or agent shall be guilty of an offense. 
(d)	Any sidewalk constructed contrary to the provisions of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance. It shall be the duty of the city manager to remove such sidewalk, if necessary, and to construct a sidewalk, the cost of which shall be charged to the lots in front of which it is constructed, in the same manner as if the owner or agent of the property failed to construct a sidewalk after the city commission has ordered a sidewalk to be constructed. 
(Code 1976, §§ 92.09-92.11) 
Secs. 46-55-46-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 46-81. - Responsibility. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises in the city to keep, at his peril, the sidewalks in the parkway between any separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises and the nearest curbline in any public street in good repair, in a safe condition for public use and free from any pitfalls, obstructions or any other nuisances of such a nature as to interfere with the public use of such sidewalks. 
(Code 1976, § 92.02) 
Sec. 46-82. - Failure to maintain. 
    If the owner of any separate or single lot, parcel of land or premises in the city shall fail to keep the sidewalks constructed in the parkway between the separate or single lots, parcels of land or premises and the nearest curbline in good repair and in a safe condition for public use after notice to do so by the city manager, it shall be the duty of the city manager to cause such sidewalks to be immediately repaired and put in a safe condition for public use and to keep an accurate account of the labor and/or material in connection with the such work and interest at the rate set by the city commission upon all costs and expenses incurred, and the city manager shall return a sworn statement of the account to the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 92.05) 
Secs. 46-83-46-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SNOW REMOVAL 

Sec. 46-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business district means the south side of Delta Avenue from Seventh Street to 11th Street, the north side of Delta Avenue from Seventh Street to the west line of the building known as the Rialto building and located at 1004 Delta Avenue, the east side of Tenth Street from Delta Avenue to Minnesota Avenue and the east side of Ninth Street from Minnesota Avenue to Superior Avenue. 
(Code 1976, § 92.12) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-112. - In business district. 
(a)	The owners of lots or premises in the business district of the city shall be required to remove all snow and ice from the sidewalks in front of and adjacent to the lots and premises. The snow and ice may be left in a compacted pile along the curb to facilitate removal by the city. 
(b)	If any owner fails to remove, or cause to be removed, the snow and ice from the sidewalk in front of and adjacent to his lot and premises within 24 hours after such snow has fallen or accumulated upon the sidewalk, the city manager may cause the snow and ice to be removed. The expense of the snow removal, together with a penalty of ten percent, shall be charged to the owner of the lot from which such snow was removed. 
(Code 1976, §§ 92.13, 92.14) 
Sec. 46-113. - In areas outside business district. 
(a)	All parts of the city zoned as residential and commercial, except the portion of the city denominated as the business district, shall be governed by this section and section 46-114. 
(b)	The owners of all lots or premises in the parts of the city as set forth in subsection (a) of this section are required to remove snow and ice from the sidewalks in front of and adjacent to their lots and premises. 
(c)	If such owners fail to remove, or cause to be removed, the snow and ice from the sidewalks in front of and adjacent to their lots and premises within 48 hours after such snow has fallen or accumulated upon the sidewalks, the city manager may cause the snow and ice to be removed and the expense of such removal, together with a penalty of ten percent, shall be charged to the owner of the lot from which such snow was removed. 
(Code 1976, §§ 92.15-92.17) 
Sec. 46-114. - Special assessments. 
(a)	Within six months after snow and ice shall have been removed by the city from sidewalks in areas outside of the business district within the city, the city manager shall proceed to collect the amount (or amounts if snow and ice were removed from the same lot more than once) due as a special assessment in the manner provided by the city Charter. 
(b)	If any owner of any lot or premises shall become liable to the city for the removal of snow and ice from the same lot or premises on more than one occasion, all liabilities may be treated by the city as one debt and may be collected in one special assessment. 
(Code 1976, §§ 92.18, 92.19) 
Secs. 46-115-46-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-151. - Guarding excavations and obstructions. 
    Any person making, or causing to be made, an excavation or opening in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the city, or within five feet of the line of any street or public place, shall, between sunset and sunrise on every night that the excavation or opening remains open or danger exists from such excavation or opening, keep such excavation or opening fenced or barricaded and properly lighted so as to warn all persons of such excavation or opening and any obstructions. Unauthorized persons shall not remove or interfere with any such lantern, electric light bulbs, danger signal or any such barriers. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(H)) 
Sec. 46-152. - Notification of public utilities. 
    Whenever it becomes necessary to tunnel under utility installations within the city, such as tracks, mains, ducts, pipes, etc., notification shall be given to the utility, and it shall be the duty of the applicant to properly protect such other utility property in a safe condition so that the public may not be endangered or unnecessarily inconvenienced. At no time shall the utility or contractor be permitted to build on top of other utility property or be permitted to use backfill materials, such as, but not limited to, rocks, asphalt, concrete, wood, metal, wire or utility scraps, that have a deleterious effect upon subsurface pipes and structures or which might damage such other property, unless an agreement has been reached between the city and the utilities upon a type and method of construction that shall at all times safeguard the public interest. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(I)) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 58. 
Sec. 46-153. - Backfill. 
    Excavated material, if suitable and in proper condition, may be used for backfilling openings and paved streets and alleys in the city, except when otherwise directed by the city manager. The backfilling of openings shall be made as directed by the city manager or his designated agent. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(J)) 
Sec. 46-154. - Replacement of pavement, sidewalks and curbs. 
    Replacement of pavement, sidewalks and curbs disturbed in the making of an opening in street or alley within the city shall be done in accordance with standard specifications of the city, and notice shall be given to the city manager or his duly authorized agent when such work is completed. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(K)) 
Charter reference- Restoration of street openings, ch. XIII, § 1. 
Sec. 46-155. - Exceptions. 
    Facilities for bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users, and people of all ages and abilities are not required to provide in instances where a documented exception is provided by the city manager and granted by the city commission based on findings of one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)	Where their establishment would be contrary to public health and safety; 
(2)	Where the city commission determines the cost would be disproportionate to the need or probable use; 
(3)	When the cost would result in unacceptable diminishing of other city services; 
(4)	Where there is no identified long-term need; 
(5)	Where the length of the project does not permit a meaningful addition to the non-motorized network; or 
(f)	Where reconstruction of the right-of-way is due to an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 1, 1-9-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 586, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2012, enacted new provisions to read as § 46-152. Seeing as provisions have already been set out as § 46-152, these provisions were herein incorporated as a new § 46-155, at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 46-156-46-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 46-181. - Required. 
    Unless acting under a contract with the city and excluding city-owned utilities, it shall be unlawful for any person to make any openings or excavations or occupy any street, alley or public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, in the city for any purpose until a permit therefor shall have been obtained from the city manager or his duly authorized agent pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(B)) 
Sec. 46-182. - Application. 
(a)	Applications for a permit under this division shall be made to the city manager or his duly authorized agent at least 48 hours prior to the time proposed to begin any work, which application shall fully set forth the extent, nature, purpose, location and expected completion time, in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, as near as can be determined. 
(b)	The permit shall describe the time within which the work described in the application shall be completed and the length of time within which the streets and alleys shall be restored to a condition satisfactory to the department of public works after such permitted work is completed. The applicant shall complete such work and effect the restoration of the streets, alleys or sidewalks within the completion time set forth in the permit. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(C), (D)) 
Sec. 46-183. - Bond. 
    After a permitted excavation is complete, all street repair work shall be done by the city under the direction of the city manager or his duly authorized agent; provided, however, that any public utility which shall deposit a bond with the city clerk in the amount of $1,000.00 shall be permitted to resurface at its own expense all excavations under the supervision of the city manager or his duly authorized agent. All such repair work that will not be performed by the city will be deemed guaranteed to the city for a period of three years by such public utility, which time shall commence from the time of refilling or paving to a condition equally as good as before such work began, at the sole and absolute discretion of the department of public works. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(E)) 
Sec. 46-184. - Deposit. 
    Before a permit under this division shall be issued, the city manager shall require the applicant to deposit a sum of money as shall be deemed sufficient by the city manager to cover and pay all of the expenses for furnishing materials, doing such work, making inspections and taking such measures as shall be required to properly restore and secure against settlement of the street, alley or sidewalk, pavement, curb and gutter necessary to be replaced because of such excavation, opening or disturbance. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(F)) 
Sec. 46-185. - Emergency street and alley cuts. 
    When an immediate excavation may become necessary in the case of any emergency arising after office hours, such emergency shall be reported to the public safety department, which shall contact the city manager or his duly authorized agent for permission to make the necessary excavation upon the express condition that a permit application be made before noon of the next following business day. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(G)) 
Sec. 46-186. - Protection of the city from liability. 
    Any person to whom a permit is granted under this division, and any person performing operations which should have secured a permit but failed to do so, shall not injure in any manner any street, avenue, alley, lane, sidewalk, park or other public place; do any damage to shade trees, shrubs, lawns, concrete paving or sidewalks, or other similar improvements; or in any manner disturb or interfere with any sewer, water main, pipe, conduit or other public or private appliances constructed by authorized persons. All persons acquiring permits under this division, and all persons performing operations who should have acquired permits but failed to do so, shall agree or be deemed to have agreed to indemnify and save harmless the city, its agents, officers and employees from all claims, suits, losses, damages or expenses, including costs of suit and actual attorney fees, on account of injuries to or death of any persons, including such persons themselves, their agents, employees, servants or employees and the claims of any and all persons for damage to property, to whomsoever belonging, including property owned by, rented to or in the care, custody or control of such persons, arising or growing out of, or in any manner connected with, such work, or caused or occasioned in whole or in part by reason of the presence of the person or property of such persons, their employees or agents, or by any negligent act or omission of the city, its agents, officers or employees; provided, however, that such person's responsibility to indemnify and save harmless the city, its officers, agents or employees shall not apply with respect to bodily injury to or death of persons or damage to property caused by or resulting from the sole negligence of the city, its agents, officers or employees within the meaning of MCL § 691.991, the provisions of which are incorporated by reference in this section for greater certainty. Such indemnity shall lie in all cases where the city, its agents, officers or employees are finally determined to have been partially, but not solely, negligent with respect to any occurrence giving rise to bodily injury, death or property damage, as more specifically described in this section. Such agreement shall lie for all expenses incurred by the city, its officers, agents or employees, including costs of suit and actual attorney's fees in the successful defense of a claim in which neither the city or such persons are found negligent as to the occurrence complained of and that the city shall be entitled to indemnity for expenses incurred by it, including, but not limited to, court costs and actual attorney's fees in enforcing the indemnification rights granted to them under such agreements, or to which they are deemed entitled by virtue of such statute. The acceptance of a permit by any person under the provisions of this section shall be an agreement by such person to bind himself to indemnify the city, in accordance with this section, for any sum of money for which the city might be found liable by reason of any injury. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(L)) 
Sec. 46-187. - Noncompliance. 
    If any person to whom a permit has been granted under this division shall fail to comply with the terms of this division, such permit shall be revoked, and any and all expense which may be incurred by the city in refilling the excavation or restoring the street or sidewalk to its proper condition shall be borne by the permittee. If a permittee shall fail to leave the street or sidewalk in as good a condition as it was previous to any work being done under such permit, any expense which may be incurred by the city in restoring the street to its proper condition shall be borne by the permittee. In case any person shall, in contravention of this section, begin work in the absence of a permit, the city shall be authorized to refill such excavation and do such restoration work as shall be necessary to return the street or sidewalk to its proper condition, with all expenses for such restoration to be borne by the person who failed to secure the proper permit. 
(Code 1976, § 94.09(M)) 
Secs. 46-188-46-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TELEPHONE INSTALLATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Use of public places by utilities, ch. VII, § 6. 

Sec. 46-221. - Pole requirements. 
    All telegraph and telephone poles erected or maintained by any person in pursuance of a permission franchise by the city commission shall be at least 30 feet in height above the grade of the street, straight, smooth shaven and painted, if required by the city commission. The city commission may at any time order such poles to be of any additional height as the general welfare of the city and inhabitants may require. 
(Code 1976, § 92.50) 
Sec. 46-222. - Application to install poles. 
    In the enjoyment of the privileges granted to the person set forth in 46-221, telephone and telegraph poles shall be erected at such places in the street and alleys of the city as the city manager may direct and the necessary wires strung at such height as the city manager may prescribe. Whenever any person to whom a franchise has been granted shall desire to occupy any highways, streets and alleys for the purpose of the installation of telephone and telegraph poles, application therefor shall be filed with the city commission, and the application, if approved by the city commission, shall be deemed as permission by the city to occupy the streets, highways and alleys, and the person desiring to erect such poles shall acquire no rights to occupy them until permission shall be given. 
(Code 1976, § 92.51) 
Sec. 46-223. - Resetting poles. 
    Whenever any street or highway within the city on which any telephone and telegraph poles have been set shall be graded or paved, the person, when required by the city manager, at his own cost, shall reset the poles so as to conform to the street as reconstructed. 
(Code 1976, § 92.52) 
Sec. 46-224. - Location of poles and wires. 
    All telephone and telegraph poles and wires placed east or west, or in an easterly or westerly direction, shall be placed along the existing alley ways of the city, and when any other alleys are opened in the city, all poles and wires thereafter erected and constructed shall be placed along the alleys as far as practicable but in every case the poles and wires shall be erected, placed and trained so as to cause the least possible obstruction in any street, alley or other public place, and so as not to interfere with or injure any water, gas or sewer pipe, fire telegraph lines or apparatus. Poles and wires shall be removed whenever, in the opinion of the city commission, the public interests shall require. 
(Code 1976, § 92.53) 
Sec. 46-225. - Subject to legislation; right to place fire alarm wires. 
    Any person who obtains permission to erect telephone and telegraph poles and wires within the city shall be subject to any ordinance which may be passed by the city commission concerning such poles and wires. The city shall have the privilege of placing upon the telegraph poles of such person, free of charge, at least four fire alarm wires. 
(Code 1976, § 92.54) 
Sec. 46-226. - Removal of poles. 
    The city commission shall have the right to remove telephone and telegraph poles and wires at the expense of the licensee in case of any failure to comply with any regulation of the city commission. 
(Code 1976, § 92.55) 
Chapter 50 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation, ch. X. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-5(13); administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 10. 
State Law reference- General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 

Sec. 50-1. - Tax exemption for specific low income housing project; fee in lieu of taxes. 
(a)	Preamble. 
(1)	It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its low income citizens and encourage the development of low income housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (MCL § 125.1401 et. seq.). The city is authorized by this act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under such act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid if not for such act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of such housing by providing certain real estate tax exemptions therefor is a valid public purpose; further, the continuation of the provisions of this section for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the period contemplated in this section are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such tax exemption. 
(2)	The city acknowledges that Human Resources Authority, Inc., a state nonprofit corporation, in its own behalf and on behalf of a limited dividend housing association limited partnership to be formed (the "sponsor") has offered, subject to receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) program and a mortgage loan, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as the Thorntree Development on certain property located (see attached exhibit "A," on file in the city offices,) in the city to serve persons of low income, and the sponsor has offered to pay the city, on account of this housing development, an annual service charge for public service in lieu of taxes. 
(b)	Definitions. All terms not defined in this subsection shall have the meanings given to them in the state Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.). 
    Act means the state Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.). 
    Annual shelter rent means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or occupancy charges, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and/or permanent financing of the housing development. 
    Sponsor means persons or entities which have applied to the authority for a mortgage loan or an allocation under the low income housing tax credit program to finance a housing development. 
    Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
(c)	Class of housing development. It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption under this section shall apply, and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes, shall be housing developments which are financed or assisted pursuant to the act. It is further determined that the Thorntree Development is of such class. 
(d)	Annual service charge established. The housing development known as the Thorntree Development, and the property on which it shall be constructed, shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and the qualification of the housing development for the exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this section, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan and an allocation under the LIHTC program to construct, own and operate the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to four percent of the difference between the annual shelter rents actually collected and utilities. 
(e)	Limitation on payment of the annual service charge. Notwithstanding subsection (d) of this section, the service charge to be paid each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low income persons or families shall be equal to the full amount of the taxes which shall be paid on the portion of the housing development if the housing development were not tax exempt. The term "low income persons or families," as used in this subsection, shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 15a(7) of the act (MCL 125.1415a(7)). 
(f)	Contractual effect of section. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15a(5) of the act (MCL 125.1415a(5)) to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor, with the authority as a third party beneficiary under the contract, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu of taxes, as set forth in this section, is effectuated by enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(g)	Payment of service charge. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this section shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city, except the annual payment shall be paid on or before July 10 of each year. 
(h)	Duration. This section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate as long as the authority's mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property; or the housing development remains subject to income and rent restrictions pursuant to Section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, provided that construction of the housing development commences within one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Ord. No. 531, §§ 2-9, 2-28-2000) 
Chapter 51 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 51-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way be [to] telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 1, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-2. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 2, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-3. - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    City means the City of Gladstone. 
    City commission means the City Commission of the City of Gladstone or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city commission. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to section 3 of the Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunications facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1065, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services means those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 Public Act No. 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 322(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1)	A cable television operator that provides a telecommunication service. 
(2)	Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)	A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 3, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-4. - Permit required. 
(a)	Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)	Application. Telecommunication providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the city manager, and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city shall make copies of the application and distribute a copy to department heads. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)	Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as a part of its application contain trade secrete, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)	Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)	Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information, which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city of [or] the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)	Previously-issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 Public Act No. 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter. 
(g)	Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization of a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 Public Act No. 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (c) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 4, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-5. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)	Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under subsection 51-4(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which the permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)	Form of permit. In an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)	Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)	Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable costs to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 5, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-6. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunication provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under chapter 46 of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 6, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-7. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 7, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-8. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in provision format unless and until the commission determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 8, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-9. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 9, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-10. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 4(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 10, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-11. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby modifies to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees sand charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 11, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-12. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification fees under section 51-11 shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 12, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-13. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to Section 9(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or local street fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 13, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-14. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 14, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-15. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator receive for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 15, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-16. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 16, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-17. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 Public Act No. 442, MCL 15.231, 215.246, as provided in subsection 51-4(c) of this chapter; 
(2)	Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with subsection 51-4(f) of this chapter; 
(3)	Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with subsection 51-4(g) of this chapter; 
(4)	Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access and to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with subsection 51-5(a) of this chapter; 
(5)	Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with subsection 51-5(a) of this chapter; 
(6)	Not unreasonably denying an application of a permit, in accordance with subsection 51-5(a) or this chapter; 
(7)	Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in subsection 51-5(b) of this chapter; 
(8)	Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with subsection 51-5(c) of this chapter; 
(9)	Not requiring a bond of a telecommunication provider, which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with subsection 51-5(d) of this chapter; 
(10)	Not charging a telecommunications provider any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 51-6 of this chapter; 
(11)	Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with section 51-11 of this chapter; 
(12)	Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 51-15 of this chapter; and 
(13)	Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 51-15 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 17, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-18. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 18, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-19. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 19, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-20. - Authorized city officials. 
    The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violations notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 20, 10-28-2002) 
Sec. 51-21. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to a civil fine of $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 541, § 21, 10-28-2002) 
Chapter 54 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 573, adopted June 23, 2008, amended ch. 54, §§ 54-1-54-6, 54-61-54-68, 54-101-54-104, in its entirety as set out herein. The former ch. 54, §§ 54-1-54-6, 54-61-54-68, 54-101-54-104, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 70.41, 70.53, 70.54, 70.61(A)-(C), 75.40-75.49; Ord. No. 460, adopted Oct. 24, 1988; Ord. No. 474, §§ 2, 3, adopted June 22, 1992; Ord. No. 554, §§ 1-5, adopted Oct. 10, 2005. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations saved from repeal, § 1-5(16)a; any ordinance ordering, requiring or authorizing the erection or installation of traffic control signs, signals devices or markings saved from repeal, § 1-5(16)b; reckless driving in cemeteries, § 14-47; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 34; obstructing traffic in parks, § 38-84; traffic and vehicles in parks, § 38-98; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Interpretation. 
    In the event of a conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this article and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.), the Michigan Vehicle Code shall control. In the event of a conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this article and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.), the Michigan Vehicle Code shall control. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-2. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this article and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-3. - Michigan Vehicle Code adopted. 
    The Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.) is adopted by reference. 
(1)	The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 Public Act No. 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923, and all future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. 
(2)	References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Gladstone. 
(3)	The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the City of Gladstone may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt Michigan Vehicle Code by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 54-4. - Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages adopted. 
(a)	The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the administrative procedures act of 1969, 1969 Public Act No. 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328 and made effective October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. 
(b)	References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Gladstone. 
(c)	The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt Uniform Traffic Code by reference, MCL 257.951. 
Sec. 54-5. - Truck and commercial vehicle restrictions. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to operate, stop, stand or park, at any time, any truck or commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on signs erected giving notice of such weight limits upon any of the streets, or parts thereof, on which such signs have been posted. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, stop, stand or park, at any time, any truck or commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess of ten tons, except by permit, upon the road designated as the South Bluff Road and Blackwell Avenue in the city when signs are erected giving notice thereof. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, stop, stand or park any truck or truck trailer combination having a loaded gross weight greater than 10,000 pounds or an overall length of more than 34 feet on any street in the city, except on established truck routes. However, where the loading or unloading destination of a truck is off the established truck route, the truck shall proceed to and return from its loading and unloading destination on the established truck route as far as possible and thereafter on the shortest, direct route to and from the established truck route to the destination point of such loading or unloading. 
(d)	There is established a truck route in the city as follows: 
(1)	Highways U.S. 2 and 41 and M-35; 
(2)	Fourth Avenue; 
(3)	Ninth Street; 
(4)	Railway Avenue; and 
(5)	Delta Avenue east of Fourth Street. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-6. - Snowmobile/ORVS and off-road vehicles. 
(a)	Definitions. 
    Off-road vehicle (ORV) means a motor-driven off-road recreation vehicle capable of cross-country travel without benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. A multitrack or multiwheel drive vehicle, a motorcycle or related two-wheel vehicle, a vehicle with three or more wheels, an amphibious machine, a ground effect air cushion vehicle, or other means of transportation may be an ORV. An ORV does not include a registered snowmobile/ORV, a farm vehicle being used for farming, a vehicle used for military, fire, emergency, or law enforcement purposes, a vehicle owned and operated by a utility company or an oil or gas company when performing maintenance on its facilities or on property over which it has an easement, a construction or logging vehicle used in performance of its common function, or a registered aircraft. 
    Snowmobile means any motor-driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow or ice of a type that utilizes sled-type runners or skis, an endless belt tread, or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, but is not a vehicle that must be registered under the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923. 
(b)	Purpose. The intent of this section is to establish access routes along the streets within the city for use by snowmobile/ORV; establish the terms and conditions upon which such access routes may be used; and provide penalties for the violations thereof. 
(1)	Designation of streets for snowmobile/ORV use. 
a.	Unless specifically designated otherwise as provided herein, all city streets and alleys within the city are hereby designated to be access routes upon which snowmobile/ORVs may be operated for the purpose of providing access to and from trails where snowmobile/ORV operation is permitted. Such access routes do not include or involve U.S. 2 and 41 and M-35 unless approved as a MDOT connector route. 
b.	The city commission by resolution is hereby authorized to designate those streets or alleys under its jurisdiction, or parts or sections thereof, upon which the operation of snowmobile/ORVs shall be prohibited. 
(2)	Regulations on snowmobile/ORV operation. 
a.	Snowmobile/ORVs shall only be operated on any approved street or alley for the following reasons: 
1.	For the purpose of gaining access to or from trails where snowmobile/ORV operation is permitted, using the most direct route from the home of the operator. 
(3)	A snowmobile/ORV operated on a street or alley pursuant to this section shall at all times be operated: 
a.	On the outermost right side of the roadway, but not on grassy areas or areas not normally used for vehicular travel; 
b.	In single file, with the flow of traffic; 
c.	In compliance with all the provisions of federal, state and local statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances applicable to such snowmobile/ORV operation; 
d.	At a speed not to exceed 15 miles per hour. 
(4)	An snowmobile/ORV may be operated on the roadway of a street or alley under the jurisdiction of the city, whether or not such operation has been prohibited only: 
a.	In a life-threatening emergency. 
b.	By crossing such roadway at right angles, for the purpose of getting from one area to another if the operation can be done safely. The operator shall bring the snowmobile/ORV to complete stop prior to crossing the roadway and shall yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic. 
(5)	An snowmobile/ORV may not be operated: 
a.	For the purpose of traveling to or from work or school; 
b.	On the part of a street normally occupied by ditches, front slopes, back slopes, or utilities such areas being more specifically defined as those parts of the street between the outside should point and the right-of-way boundary line; 
c.	Within city owned parks except at designated access points approved by the city commission, or any natural areas within the city; 
d.	Upon U.S. 2 and 41 and M-35; 
e.	On those shoulders, paths or areas specifically designed as non-motorized facilities; 
f.	In violation of any of the provisions of MCL 324.81101 et seq. and that various subsections thereof, as amended as well as all other statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances applicable to such snowmobile/ORV operations. 
(6)	Violations and penalties. 
a.	Any person who violates any provision of this section is committing a municipal civil infraction, and will be liable for a civil fine. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008; Ord. No. 597, 6-22-2015) 
State Law reference- Authority to allow snowmobile/ORVs on streets, MCL 324.82119; snowmobile/ORVs generally, MCL 324.82101, MCL 324.81131. 
Secs. 54-7-54-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 54-41-54-60. - Reserved. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 54-61. - Established. 
    For the purpose of handling alleged parking violations within the city, a parking violations bureau is established. The parking violations bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-62. - Location and administration. 
    The city manager shall establish a convenient location for the parking violations bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-63. - Jurisdiction. 
    Only violations set forth in section 54-66 shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. The fact that a particular violation is set forth in such section shall not in itself entitle the alleged violator to disposition by the bureau. The person in charge of the bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation; in which case, any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before the court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-64. - Issuance of traffic tickets; allegations of traffic violations. 
(a)	The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a public safety officer shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. The traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the ticket was issued must appear before the parking violations bureau. It shall also indicate the address and location of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the offense for which the ticket was issued and advise that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued may be sought if such a person fails to appear within the time limited. 
(b)	If a person fails to appear in answer to a parking violation ticket after the mailing of a notice of default, the person in charge of the traffic violations bureau may seek a warrant for arrest of the person to whom the parking ticket was issued. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-65. - Settlement of violations to be voluntary. 
    A parking violation may not be settled at the parking violations bureau, except at the specific request of the alleged violator. A penalty for any violation shall not be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense. In no event shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. All persons shall not be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau. All persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before the court having jurisdiction thereof if he so desires. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the parking violations bureau shall not prejudice him or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded to him by law. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-66. - Fines. 
    If the fine is not paid within ten days from the date of issuance, the fine shall be doubled. The fines for the indicated violations shall be as follows: 
Offense Penalty  
(1)	Parking too far from curb ..... $20.00 
(2)	Angle or parallel parking violations ..... 20.00 
(3)	Obstructing traffic ..... 20.00 
(4)	Prohibited parking (signs unnecessary): 
a.	On sidewalk ..... 20.00 
b.	In front of driveway ..... 20.00 
c.	Within the intersection ..... 20.00 
d.	Within 15 feet of a hydrant ..... 20.00 
e.	On a crosswalk ..... 20.00 
f.	Within 20 feet of a crosswalk ..... 20.00 
g.	Within 15 feet of corner lot lines ..... 20.00 
h.	Within 30 feet of a street side traffic sign or signal ..... 20.00 
i.	Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing ..... 20.00 
j.	Within 20 feet of a fire station entrance ..... 20.00 
k.	Within 75 feet of a fire station entrance on the opposite side of the street (signs required ..... 20.00 
l.	Beside a street excavation when traffic is obstructed ..... 20.00 
m.	Double parking ..... 20.00 
n.	Within 200 feet of an accident where public safety officers are in attendance ..... 20.00 
o.	In front of a theater ..... 20.00 
p.	Blocking an emergency exit ..... 20.00 
q.	Blocking a fire escape ..... 20.00 
r.	In an alley ..... 20.00 
(5)	In a prohibited zone (signs required) ..... 20.00 
(6)	Wrong side a boulevard roadway ..... 20.00 
(7)	Loading zone violation ..... 20.00 
(8)	Meter violations and/or two-hour parking zones: 
a.	Paid within 24 hours ..... As set by 
city commission 
b.	Paid within 15 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays 
and holidays ..... As set by 
city commission 
c.	Paid after 15 days ..... As set by 
city commission 
(9)	Meters, not parked within space ..... 20.00 
(10)	Failure to set brakes ..... 20.00 
(11)	Parked on grade, wheels not turned to curb ..... 20.00 
(12)	All night parking (as per ordinance governing winter rules) ..... 20.00 
(13)	Private property, without owner's consent ..... 20.00 
(14)	School property, without authorized consent ..... 20.00 
(15)	No person shall stop, stand, leave or park any vehicle as defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code on the City right of way, that area defined as from the curb to the sidewalk, commonly referred to as the parkway, be it paved or unpaved except during the months of December 1 through 
April 1 ..... 20.00 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-67. - Repealing clause. 
    All ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions set forth in this article are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-68. - Method of payment of fines. 
    Penalties in payment of violations as set forth in subsections 54-66(8), (9), and (12) may be voluntarily paid by depositing such payments in collection boxes located at the city treasurer's office, city hall and designated areas in metered parking zones. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Secs. 54-69-54-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING 

Sec. 54-101. - Parking meter zones. 
    As traffic conditions may require, parking meter zones may be created or eliminated on such streets and avenues, or other locations, as selected by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Cross reference- Required off-street loading spaces, § 30-583. 
Sec. 54-102. - Methods. 
    All drivers and operators of vehicles desiring to park on Delta Avenue between Sixth Street and 11th Street and on Central Avenue (South Tenth Street) between Delta Avenue and Wisconsin Avenue shall park such vehicles at an angle of 45 degrees to the curb line of such streets with the wheel next to the curb no more than one foot from the curb, and in such a manner as to leave such vehicle at least two feet distant from other vehicles adjacent thereto. All drivers and operators of vehicles desiring to park upon streets other than those parts of Delta Avenue and Central Avenue (South Tenth Street) as set forth in this section shall park such vehicles parallel with the curb line of such streets and not more than one foot from such curb line, where a curb has been constructed, and in such a manner as to leave such vehicle at least three feet distant from other vehicles parked adjacent thereto. However, upon streets not having a curb constructed on such street, parking shall be in such a manner so as not to interfere with the use of the traveled portion of the highway. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a vehicle parked or unattended upon any street within the curb line of such street, except as otherwise provided in this article, from 3:30 a.m. to 6:30 a.m., except it shall be permissible to park vehicles properly between the curb lines at any time upon all streets in the city, other than trunk line highways, from April 1 to December 1 of each year. Where parking lanes are appropriately designated by the city, parking shall be legal, if the vehicle is parked within the lines of any such designated lane, and no vehicle or vehicle and trailer with an overall length of more than 19 feet shall be parked upon any pavement where parking is required in this section to be at an angle of 45 degrees to the curb line of such street. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-103. - Restricted parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a vehicle parked or unattended at any time on the south side of the avenues and the west side of the streets in the city from December 1 through April 1, except vehicles may be left parked or unattended on both sides of Delta Avenue and on other sides of streets and avenues as posted by the director of the department of public safety. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a vehicle parked or unattended on the side of any avenue or street from December 1 through April 1 if such parking is prohibited by a sign posted by the director of the department of public safety. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall pay a penalty of $20.00 to the city. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-104. - Winter restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a vehicle parked or unattended from 3:30 a.m. to 6:30 a.m. on Delta Avenue from Sixth Street to 14th Street; Eighth Street from Superior Avenue to Minnesota Avenue; Ninth Street from Superior Avenue to Minnesota Avenue; Tenth Street from Superior Avenue to Lake Shore Drive; and 11th Street from Superior Avenue to Minnesota Avenue from December 1 through April 1. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall have his vehicle towed away at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 6-23-2008) 
Sec. 54-105. - Parking and storage of recreational vehicles and recreational equipment. 
    The parking and storing of recreational vehicles and recreational equipment shall be subject to the following provisions in order to enhance the value of residential districts, protect property values, reduce hazards to motorists and pedestrians and to promote the public safety and general welfare: 
(a)	Recreational vehicles and equipment defined: 
(1)	When used in this section, "recreational vehicle" shall mean a motorized home which is a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle and an off-road vehicle that is not licensed for general operation on public highways. 
(2)	When used in this section, "recreational equipment" shall include: 
a.	Boats and boat trailers which shall include boats, jet-skis, floats and rafts plus the normal equipment to transport the same on the highway. 
b.	Folding tent trailer which is a folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation. 
c.	Pickup camper which is a structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use. 
d.	Travel trailer which is a vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses, permanently identified 'travel trailer' by the manufacturer. 
e.	Utility trailer whether open or enclosed. 
(b)	No person shall stop, stand, leave or park any recreational vehicle and or recreational equipment on a city street or city right-of-way or that area as defined as from the curb to the sidewalk commonly referred to as the boulevard be it paved or unpaved, except as follows: 
(1)	Recreational vehicles and/or equipment may be parked on the city street or alleyway, subject to all of the following: 
a.	For a period of time not to exceed one 48 hours period in a one week time frame and only for the purpose of loading and unloading. 
b.	No electric cable, water or waste lines or other connections shall be laid on or over the public sidewalk. 
c.	Where possible not parked directly across the street from another recreational vehicle and/or equipment. 
d.	Where possible it shall be parked in front of owner's residence and not across the street or in front of any other person's residence. 
e.	It shall not create any obstruction issues for streets, alleys, crossways, signs or hydrants. 
f.	It shall be located in a legal zone for parking. 
(c)	Front yard storage prohibited; exception; recreational vehicles and/or equipment shall not be parked or stored in the front yard of the property, except that it may be parked or stored on an area established as a driveway, and the vehicle and/or equipment is at least two feet from the sidewalk or where no sidewalk exists does not exceed the front property line. For the purpose of this section an established driveway is defined as a driveway which shall be either paved or graveled and, in a situation where the entrance to the driveway is from a street which has curb and gutter, also has a properly approved curb cut in compliance with city code requirements. For the purpose of this section in the case of corner lots which abut both a street and an avenue, the side of the lot facing the avenue shall be considered the front yard and the side facing the street shall be considered the side yard. In the case of a corner lot which does not abut an avenue, the side of the lot facing the main entrance where the street number is displayed pursuant to Code section 30-75 shall be considered the front yard and the side facing the other intersecting street shall be considered the side yard. 
Upon written request by a property owner of a corner lot, the zoning administrator may grant a waiver to designate as the front yard a side of the lot which under the provisions of this section would otherwise be deemed a side lot, where the zoning administrator makes a finding that the configuration of the lot or the location of the buildings on the lot or the location of buildings on adjacent lots support such waiver and that the waiver will better comply with the objectives and spirit of this Code section 54-105. 
(d)	Side and rear yard storage: Recreational vehicles and/or equipment may be parked or stored on the owner's side or rear yard but shall not be parked or stored closer than five feet to the side and rear lot lines. 
(e)	No recreational vehicle or equipment shall be used as a place of temporary or permanent residence while parked or stored, except as follows: 
(1)	A recreational vehicle or equipment may be used as a temporary dwelling by visitors of the property owner for a period not to exceed two weeks in any 12 consecutive months subject to the following: 
a.	The vehicle or equipment is self-contained and is not connected to gas, storm or sanitary sewer facility. Electrical and water hookup is permitted. 
b.	Holding tanks of the vehicle or equipment shall be disposed of properly and not on the property premises or into the sewer system. 
(f)	All recreational vehicles and recreational equipment must be kept in good condition and have a current year's license and registration. 
(g)	Recreational vehicles and equipment capable of being locked shall be kept locked to prevent unauthorized access and so as not to create an attractive nuisance to children. 
(h)	Nothing in this section 54-105 shall be construed to authorize or permit a property owner to allow others to rent parking or storage space on the owner's property. 
(i)	In addition to any other penalty provided for a violation of the requirements of this section, the city may file an action to secure compliance as an abatement of a public nuisance. 
(j)	Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine as provided for in section 54-66 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 593, 5-12-2014; Ord. No. 602, § 1, 1-23-2017) 
Chapter 58 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Utilities, ch. XVI. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 10; environment, ch. 22; land development regulations, ch. 30; flood damage prevention, § 30-261 et seq.; subdivisions and other divisions of land, § 30-341 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46; notification of public utilities for excavations, § 46-152. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICITY 

Sec. 58-31. - Management. 
    The care and management of furnishing electrical current to the citizens of the city shall be the responsibility of the city manager, and the rates charged for electrical service shall be determined by the city commission in accordance with the provisions of the Charter. 
(Code 1976, § 51.01) 
Sec. 58-32. - Nonpayment for services. 
    When electric bills are not paid, the city may cut off the supply of current to the consumer until all arrearages have been paid. 
(Code 1976, § 51.02) 
Sec. 58-33. - Application for service. 
    If any person desires to have his premises connected for service to purchase electric current from the city, he shall make a written application and file such application in the office of the city clerk. The application shall contain a correct description of the premises to be served and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will pay all charges imposed and abide by the provisions of this article, and all subsequent amendments to this article, and shall keep and maintain any electric wiring device, material and appliance to be used and maintained in accordance with state standards which shall be in force from time to time. The applicant shall also deposit a fee with the city treasurer as set by the city commission. The deposit shall be returned when such service ceases and all amounts due the city have been paid; otherwise, it shall be retained and be applied upon any indebtedness due the city in connection with such service. 
(Code 1976, § 51.11) 
Sec. 58-34. - Denial of service for violation of state statute. 
    The city shall not furnish electrical service for use upon any premises where electrical construction shall have been done in violation of state statute. 
(Code 1976, § 51.07) 
Sec. 58-35. - Inspection and approval. 
    Electric current shall not be furnished to any premises upon which new electrical construction work shall have been done, until such electrical construction shall have been inspected and approved by the city electrician or a duly authorized representative of the state. 
(Code 1976, § 51.06) 
Sec. 58-36. - Payment required for use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, other than the city electrician or his duly authorized representative, to connect any electrical device, material, fixture or appliance with electric conductors belonging to the city, or to tamper or interfere with any meter belonging to the city, or in any way procure current from the electric conductor of the city except by payment of lawful charges therefor and compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 51.12) 
State Law reference- Tampering with utility property, MCL 750.383a. 
Sec. 58-37. - Aggregation of retail customer demand response. 
(a)	The WPPI Energy, as City of Gladstone's authorized designee, is the sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the city directly into any commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized electric markets. 
(b)	Retail customers served by the city wishing to bid their demand response into a commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized electric markets may do so by participating in the program established by the city or its authorized designee. Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the demand response program of any other entity without the express prior authorization of the city. 
(Ord. No. 575, § 2, 4-27-2009) 
Sec. 58-38. - Ancillary services provided by demand response resources. 
(a)	The WPPI Energy, as City of Gladstone's authorized designee, is the sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by city directly into any commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's tariff). 
(b)	Retail customers served by the city wishing to bid their demand response into a commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's tariff) may do so by participating in the program established by the city or its authorized designee. Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the demand response program of any other entity without the express prior authorization of the city. 
(Ord. No. 575, § 3, 4-27-2009) 
Secs. 58-39-58-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consumer means any individual, firm, partnership, trust, joint venture, legal entity or corporation using or consuming water, or an individual, firm, partnership, copartnership or corporation leasing or permitting occupancy of premises on which water is used or consumed. 
    Water connection means the part of the water distribution system connecting the water main with a point between the roadway line and the lot line of abutting property. 
    Water main means the part of the water distribution system intended to serve more than one water connection. 
    Water service means the part of the water distribution system extending from the water connection into the premises served. 
    Water service contract means the written agreement providing that the city shall provide a water connection, water service and water for usage by the consumer in consideration of the payment by the consumer for the costs of providing any water connection or water service and for the cost of any water service charges. 
(Code 1976, § 52.03) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-72. - Installations and extensions. 
(a)	Water connections by city. Water connections to the city water main shall be installed only by the city. Water service shall be made by the plumber selected by the property owner who is licensed to do such work or by the owner after approval or designation by the water department superintendent. The cost of providing a water connection shall be billed to the applicant at the actual cost incurred by the city for the time, materials and equipment used in making such connection. 
(b)	Paving of streets. All necessary water connections shall be installed in advance of the paving or resurfacing of any street or alley, or any part thereof, when such paving or resurfacing shall have been determined as a necessity by the city commission. Fees established therefor shall be charged against the premises served on the owner thereof as a part of the paving and resurfacing cost. 
(c)	Application by owners. Property owners of the city who wish to have water connections made to the property owned by them may have such connections made if the water main shall extend to within 60 feet of the property to be served on making application for such connection and agreeing to pay the cost of the making of such connection as fixed by the city commission. 
(d)	Large connections. Property owners in the city who wish to have water connections which are larger than one inch shall be entitled to have such connections made if the property owned by such persons is within 60 feet of any water main on entering into a similar contract with the city as the water service contract is defined in section 58-71 and which is of a like kind and character as provided in subsection (c) of this section. The cost of such connection shall be paid in such a manner as shall be determined by the city commission. 
(e)	Approval of materials. Water connections or water meters shall not be attached to a water extension unless, prior to any work, service line sizing and materials to be used are approved by the water department superintendent or his representative. 
(f)	Inspection by superintendent. Water mains, connections or water service shall not be covered until inspected and approved by the water department superintendent or his employees who shall be notified when such construction is ready for inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 52.04) 
Sec. 58-73. - Water department superintendent. 
    The city manager, with the approval of the city commission, shall appoint a superintendent of the water department, who shall be known as the "water department superintendent," whose duties shall be to have charge of the water system and the distribution and supplying of water to the inhabitants of the city. The water department superintendent shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 52.02) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 58-74. - Water contracts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be served directly or indirectly by the water distribution system of the city unless the person so served, or his authorized representative, has entered into a water service contract with the city. If the property to be served is located outside the city limits, such contract shall be approved by the city commission. If the property to be served is located within the city limits, such water service contract shall be approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 52.05(A)) 
Sec. 58-75. - Inspection. 
    The city manager or his duly authorized representative shall have free access at proper hours of the day to all parts of every building or premises where water is delivered or consumed to examine pipes and fixtures and to ascertain if there is any waste or any unlawful diversion of water. Any consumer as defined in section 58-71, authorizes such entry. 
(Code 1976, § 52.14) 
Sec. 58-76. - Water system. 
(a)	Supervision and control. The extension, improvement, alteration, repair and maintenance of the city water system shall be under the supervision and control of the city commission and its designated officers and employees. The city commission may make such rules, orders and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the water system. 
(b)	Operating year. The water system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on April 1 and ending on March 31. 
(Code 1976, § 52.20) 
Sec. 58-77. - Liability of city. 
    The city shall not be liable to any person for any failure or deficiency in the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting off water for any purpose, including the making of repairs or connections, or for any other cause. 
(Code 1976, § 52.19) 
Sec. 58-78. - Reimbursement for expenses. 
    Any person or consumer who violates any provision of this article shall reimburse the city for all costs and expenses caused by such violation. 
(Code 1976, § 52.99(C)) 
Sec. 58-79. - Connection with city system. 
    Any person may apply to the water department superintendent for permission to lay pipes and connect the city mains with fire hydrants or hose connections to be used only in case of fire. The water department superintendent, subject to the approval of the city commission, may grant a permit in writing to do so at the expense of such applicant under the condition that such installation shall be made under the direction and to the satisfaction of the water department superintendent or his duly authorized agent. The permit, however, may be revocable at any time at the option of the city commission. Each pipe laid for such purposes shall have a gate valve of the kind and size used by the city water department installed at a point outside of the private property of the applicant. 
(Code 1976, § 52.13) 
Sec. 58-80. - Responsibilities of consumer. 
    Each water consumer shall keep his own service pipe, stop cocks and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at his own expense, and shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water. A claim shall not be made against the city by reason of the freezing or breaking of any service pipes, stop cocks or their apparatus, and the consumer shall provide a safe place for all meters which shall reasonably protect such meters from damage, jarring, freezing, excessive heat or other outside interference of any kind. 
(Code 1976, § 52.11(A)) 
Sec. 58-81. - Responsibility for leaks. 
    The city shall have no responsibility for excessive water bills occasioned by a leak in a water service. 
(Code 1976, § 52.11(B)) 
Sec. 58-82. - Tampering; fraudulent use. 
    Any person who willfully or fraudulently injures, or causes to be injured, any meter, stop cock, service pipe, hydrant or other apparatus, or prevents any water meter belonging to the city from duly registering the quantity of water supplied to such meter, or in any way hinders the proper action or just registration of such meter, or attaches any line or pipe to any line belonging to the city, or otherwise uses, or causes to be used, any water supplied by the city, unless such water passes through a meter located and installed under the direction of the water department superintendent, or fraudulently uses or wastes water, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In all prosecutions under this section, it shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of the provisions of this section to show that the defendant has control of or occupied premises where the offense was committed, or received the benefit of such water so used. Any person, unless he is a firefighter or city employee, or other person authorized in writing by the water department superintendent, who opens or tampers with a fire hydrant is subject to a similar penalty. Any such person shall also be required to pay for any costs incurred by the water department superintendent or fire department in repairing the fire hydrant, replacing any parts or any other action which is necessitated by the opening and tampering with the fire hydrant by such person. 
(Code 1976, § 52.99) 
State Law reference- Tampering with utility property, MCL 750.383a. 
Sec. 58-83. - Turning service on or off. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized city employee, to turn on or off any water service, except that a licensed plumber may turn on a water service for testing his own work. After such testing, the water service shall be immediately turned off. 
(Code 1976, § 52.05(B)) 
Sec. 58-84. - Multiple services. 
    If one water connection and one or more water meters serve a multiple-family dwelling or two or more single-family dwellings, the meter shall be in the name of the property owner owning the connection, who shall be responsible for all water service charges and any and all costs and fees connected with such service. An owner contracting to furnish water to one or more tenants in such case shall not discontinue furnishing water to any unit as long as the unit is occupied. 
(Code 1976, § 52.11(C)) 
Sec. 58-85. - Private swimming pools. 
    The city will, on approval by the city manager, fill private swimming pools from a fire hydrant. The cost of providing such service shall be determined by the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 52.11(D)) 
Sec. 58-86. - Lawn sprinkling systems. 
    All lawn sprinkling systems within the city shall have an antisiphon breaker installed at least three feet above the highest sprinkling head. 
(Code 1976, § 52.11(E)) 
Sec. 58-87. - Physical connections. 
    Physical connections shall not be installed or maintained within the city between lines carrying potable public water supplies and pipes, or tanks supplied, or capable of being supplied, from any nonpotable source, except as otherwise provided in this article. Where dual supplies are necessary or desirous, lines carrying water from the public water supply shall be protected against the backflow of polluted water by such methods as may be approved by the state public health department. 
(Code 1976, § 52.11(F)) 
Sec. 58-88. - Fast closing valves. 
    All fast closing valves within the city shall be compensated by surge chambers. 
(Code 1976, § 52.11(G)) 
Sec. 58-89. - Water meters. 
(a)	Required. All premises to which city water is supplied shall be metered. Water meters shall remain the property and under the control of the city. No more than one residence, business, industry or commercial institution shall be served by one meter. All metered premises shall have separate water supply lines and shutoff valves located in the street or alley. 
(b)	Location. Water meters shall be located at the point where the water service first enters the basement wall of the building. Where there is no basement, the meter shall be located where the water service first enters the building, or in a meter pit between the curb and the sidewalk, if the water department superintendent deems it necessary. Such pits shall be constructed by or at the expense of the owner, in conformity with standard plans on file in the office of the city engineer. Such construction shall be approved by an authorized inspector of the water department. 
(c)	Inaccessible locations. Water meters shall not be set in inaccessible locations or enclosed unless written permission is obtained from the water department superintendent. If a meter is inaccessible or enclosed, making maintenance and reading difficult or impossible, the water department superintendent may order the customer to move the meter to an accessible location. Any cost of relocation shall be at the expense of the water customer, and such expense may be added to the charge for water usage. 
(d)	Valves. The water service shall be provided with a valve on both sides of each water meter. No fittings, except a coupling or union, shall be placed between a meter and a curb stop. Such valves shall be roundway, and shall be of gate type with an operating wheel. 
(e)	Responsibility for damages. Owners or persons in possession of premises housing water meters shall be responsible for damages to a meter by heat, frost or other causes not controlled by the city. The cost of such damages shall be added to the consumer's charges for water connections or water usage. 
(f)	Breaking seals. Only authorized employees of the city shall break a seal on a meter or meter bypass. 
(g)	Reading, repairing and removing. Authorized city employees shall have the right to enter any premises on which city water is used to inspect, adjust, read, repair or remove water meters or appurtenances in connection with such water meters at any reasonable time. Any consumer, as defined in section 58-71, authorizes such entry. 
(h)	Electrical grounding. It shall be unlawful for any person to ground or electrically connect any radio, telephone or other electrical system to the discharge side of any water meter unless: 
(1)	A shunt is placed around the water meter that will bypass any electrical current so connected; 
(2)	At least ten feet or more of metal water pipe is connected to and buried in moist earth on the discharge side; and 
(3)	Any shunt placed around the water meter shall be placed so that the meter may be removed without disturbing the shunt. Electrical connections shall not be made to the water meter, meter union or meter tailpiece. 
(i)	Alterations or changes. It shall be unlawful for any person to change the location of a water meter or meter pit, alter the ground so that it will cover up or create a hazard around a meter pit or stop box, or in any way obstruct the free access to any water meter, meter pit or stop box without the written permission of the water department superintendent. 
(j)	Bypasses. Water meters which are two inches or larger shall have a meter bypass installed with proper gate valves that can be sealed by the city. 
(k)	Spacer pipes. Only authorized water department personnel shall be allowed to install meter spacer pipes. 
(Code 1976, § 52.06) 
Sec. 58-90. - Remote water meter registers. 
(a)	Outside registers. All outside registers installed in city water meters shall be furnished by the city and remain the property and under the control of the city. 
(b)	Installation. All outside water meter register installations shall be made by authorized employees of the water department with equipment and materials specified and furnished by the water department. 
(c)	Responsibility for damages. Owners or persons in charge of premises having outside water meter registers shall be responsible for protecting the register from damage. The city reserves the right to discontinue the outside water register service if maintenance of such register is a problem due to damage not under the control of the city or due to vandalism. 
(d)	Location. Outside water meter registers shall be located so that the reading can be obtained without entering any portion of the building, including garages and enclosed or fenced yards. The area around the register shall be kept clear of shrubbery, plantings and other obstacles which would make reading difficult. 
(e)	Alterations or changes. The location of an outside water meter register shall not be changed without the written permission of the water department. 
(Code 1976, § 52.07) 
Sec. 58-91. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully do, or cause to be done, any act whereby any work, materials or other property erected or used within or without the city for the purpose of procuring, transmitting or keeping a supply of water shall be injured. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully throw or place, or cause to be thrown or placed, any deleterious or filthy substance, including sewage, into any reservoir, pipe or aqueduct through which water for private or public use is transmitted, kept or received. 
(Code 1976, § 52.09) 
Sec. 58-92. - Water emergency. 
(a)	Determination. When the city manager shall determine that the consumption of water by the city and its wholesale raw and treated water users has or is about to equal or exceed the total supply being received by the city from the city water supply system, he may determine that a critical water consumption period exists and place in effect a maximum daily allotment water schedule approved by the city commission. 
(b)	Declaration. At such time as the city manager shall determine that water consumption within the city has or is about to equal the supply available to the city for use by its water customers in the city on a continuing basis, he may declare that a water emergency exists. 
(c)	Uses prohibited during water emergency. When the city manager has declared that a water emergency exists as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the use and withdrawal of water by any person from the city water distribution system for any of the following purposes shall be prohibited: 
(1)	Watering of yards. The sprinkling, watering or irrigation of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, garden vegetables, flowers or any other vegetation. 
(2)	Cleaning outdoor surfaces. The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, porches and other outdoor services. 
(3)	Swimming pools. The supplying or renewing of swimming and wading pools not employing a filter and recirculating system. 
(4)	Escape through defective plumbing. The escape of water through defective plumbing, which means knowingly permitting defective plumbing to remain out of repair. 
(d)	Notice. When the city manager has declared that a water emergency exists as provided in subsection (b) of this section, notice of such water emergency shall be given by publishing such notice in a newspaper serving the city. Such notice shall advise of the time of commencement of such water emergency and that the water emergency will continue until notice of termination of the emergency is given by the city manager by the same means. 
(e)	Termination. When the city manager determines that the conditions which caused the declaration of the water emergency under subsection (b) of this section no longer exist, he shall declare and give notice of such determination as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 52.10) 
Sec. 58-93. - Private wells. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Well means a shaft or hole sunk or dug in the ground to obtain water. 
(b)	Cross connection prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to cross connect private wells to the same piping as the city water supply. 
(c)	Registration and inspection. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or utilize a private well within the corporate limits of the city without prior registration with the city. All new private wells shall be registered and inspected before construction. All existing wells located within buildings or structures shall be inspected at least twice per year. All existing private wells, other than those located within a building or structure, shall be inspected once per year. 
(d)	Restrictions on the creation of new private wells. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct or operate a new private well within any building or structure, except where the city has no existing water mains. New private wells shall be located not less than 15 feet away from any building or structure. Pipes may not be run from new wells into a building or structure; provided, however, that a person may dig or locate a well in a garage or shed if such garage or shed is unattached to any other building or structure and if the well is located not less than 15 feet from any other building or structure. 
(e)	Restrictions on the use of fittings and the location of pipes on existing private wells. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or allow to remain, a fitting other than a coupling or union between a well pump and the outside wall of a building or structure, except where there is a preexisting well that is the sole water supply of a building or structure, or where the city has no existing water mains. All pipes shall run directly out of the building or structure from the well pump. 
(f)	Contact between well water and sanitary sewer prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit well water to be placed or be present in the city's sanitary sewer, except where there is a preexisting well that is the sole water supply of a building or structure, or where the city has no existing water mains. 
(g)	Posting of faucets. All faucets connected with private wells shall be posted with a sign indicating that the water is unsafe for use as drinking water, except where there is a preexisting well that is the sole water supply of a building or structure, or where the city has no existing water mains. 
(h)	Fees. Fees for the inspection of private wells shall be set by the city commission. 
(i)	Inspection rights. The city may inspect all private wells, whether or not such wells are located within buildings and structures, at all reasonable times. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse the city such inspection rights. The city may disconnect any city water or sewer services to any person denying the city its inspection rights. 
(j)	Violation; penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense. In addition, the city may disconnect any city water or sewer services to any person who violates the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 52.12; Ord. No. 585, 1-9-2012) 
Sec. 58-94. - Cross connection. 
(a)	That the City of Gladstone adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(b)	That it shall be the duty of the Gladstone Water Department to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the Gladstone Water Department and as approved by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(c)	That the water/wastewater superintendent and/or his designated agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the City of Gladstone for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of a cross connection. 
(d)	That the Gladstone Water Department is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(e)	That all testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested at the time of installation or relocation and after any repair. Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified by the Gladstone Water Department and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals that hold a valid Michigan plumbing license and have successfully passed an approved backflow testing class shall perform such testing. Each tester shall also be approved by the Gladstone Water Department. Individual(s) performing assembly testing shall certify the results of his/her testing. It is the responsibility of the property owner to schedule and pay for all testing. 
(f)	That the potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state and city plumbing code. It is the responsibility of the property owner to protect any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the city's potable system. Posting or labeling these outlets as unsafe for drinking is recommended. 
(g)	That this section does not supersede the state plumbing code and city Code, but is supplementary to them. 
(h)	That any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section or any written order of the City of Gladstone or Gladstone Water Department, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished for each violation. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this Act shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 585, §§ 1-8, 1-9-2012) 
Secs. 58-95-58-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 58-111. - Establishment, review and adjustment. 
    All charges, costs and fees provided for in this division shall be established, reviewed and adjusted by the city commission, unless such power is vested elsewhere. 
(Code 1976, § 52.15) 
Sec. 58-112. - Special rates. 
(a)	Rate by commission. For water furnished other than through water meters, the city commission shall fix a special rate and require an adequate deposit therefor. 
(b)	Water meter for construction. The city shall install a water meter for construction purposes on the application of the contractor or owner, provided an adequate deposit to cover the cost of the meter, plus 20,000 gallons of water, is made by the contractor or owner to the city treasurer. On completion of the construction and upon the permanent installation of a water meter on the premises the contractor or owner will be refunded the deposit, minus the charge for actual water used, plus the meter rental charge. If such deposit was inadequate, the contractor or owner shall pay any amount still owed to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 52.16) 
Sec. 58-113. - Billing. 
(a)	Monthly charges. Charges for city water service shall be collected monthly. Bills shall become due and payable on the date specified on the bills, and if not paid on that date, a penalty will be added. 
(b)	Hydrant fee. For fire protection and other use of water through fire hydrants, the city shall pay out of its appropriate funds a fee per year for each hydrant, payable in equal quarterly installments. 
(c)	Payment by department. The city shall not permit free water service to be supplied by the system to the city or any department or agency thereof, or to any person, firm, partnership, copartnership or corporation, whether public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. The reasonable cost and value of all water services rendered to the city and its various departments shall be charged against the city and shall be considered revenues of the system and shall be applied in the manner provided in this article for the application of the revenues of the system. 
(Code 1976, § 52.17) 
Sec. 58-114. - Incorrect charges due to defective water meters. 
(a)	Water meter failure. If a city water meter shall fail to register properly, the water department superintendent shall be empowered to estimate the quantity of water used on the basis of former consumption and bill any consumer accordingly. 
(b)	Test by consumer. If any consumer shall desire to have his water meter tested, he shall deposit with the water department superintendent a fee as determined by the city commission. The water department superintendent shall, upon such deposit, cause the meter to be tested, if the consumer is present at the test. 
(c)	Test by water department superintendent. If the water department superintendent wishes to test a water meter himself, he or his representative shall be empowered to test the meter in the absence of the consumer. 
(d)	Accuracy of water meter. A water meter shall be considered accurate if, when subjected to a standard test by the water department superintendent, its register indicates not more than two percent more or less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If the meter indicates less than the actual quantity passing through it, it shall be considered to be slow. If the meter register indicates more than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered to be fast. 
(e)	Correction of account. If a water meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and shall have been determined to register fast, the city shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to the percent such meter was fast multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by the consumer within three months prior to the test. If a water meter has been tested and it is determined to register slow, the water department superintendent shall be empowered to collect from the consumer a sum equal to the percent such meter was slow multiplied by the amount of all of the bills incurred by the consumer over the prior three months. When the water department superintendent makes a test of a water meter at his own instigation, it shall be done without cost to the consumer, other than for the amount due the city for water used by the consumer as provided in this subsection if the meter is found to be slow. 
(f)	Records. A record of the date when each water meter was furnished to the consumer, its number, cost and location shall be kept in the office of the water department superintendent, as well as an accurate record of the amount each consumer is credited on account of his meter, and, if a test is made, a record of the date and result of such test. 
(Code 1976, § 52.08) 
Sec. 58-115. - Collection. 
(a)	Charges added to bills. Charges for city water service and other charges, costs and fees provided for in this article shall be added to the bills submitted to the consumer. 
(b)	Charges as lien. Charges for water service and supply and any other charges, costs or fees provided for in this article shall constitute a lien on the property served, and if such charges are not paid within 30 days, such amounts shall be placed in the next general tax roll and collected as part of the general city taxes. The entry on the tax rolls of the amount certified as water charges, costs and fees which are more than 30 days past due shall constitute notice of the pendency of the lien. 
(c)	Enforcement of lien. Enforcement of the lien as set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall be made as provided by state law. 
(d)	Certification of charges. On or before May 1 of each year, the city treasurer shall certify to the city clerk, who shall certify to the city assessor the amount of water charges, costs or fees of any kind which are more than 30 days past due, and the city assessor shall enter the amount so certified on the tax roll for that year for collection. 
(e)	Termination of service. The city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water to any premises for the nonpayment, when due, of water charges, costs or fees. If any such water billing is not paid within 30 days after it has become due and payable, the water to such premises may be shut off by the city and services need not be restored until the delinquent bill and penalty, plus a turn-on charge, as set by the city commission, has been paid. 
(Code 1976, § 52.18) 
Secs. 58-116-58-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Streets, sidewalks, sewers and drains, ch. XII. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    B.O.D. (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius. 
    Building drain means the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from a building drain to the public sewer or other places of disposal. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Pollution Control Act of 1972 (PL 92-500), as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (PL 92-217). 
    Combined sewer means a sewer which receives both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater treatment plant, such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit for the publicly owned treatment facility, which facility was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, fat and oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin. 
    Debt service charge means charges levied to customers of the wastewater system and which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the wastewater system. The debt service charge shall be in addition to the user charge as defined in this section. 
    Federal grant means a grant to aid in construction of a wastewater treatment facility as provided under PL 92-500. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
    Industrial cost recovery means recovery by the local agency from industrial users of the treatment facility, or the portion of the federal grant amount allocable to the construction of facilities for the treatment of wastes from such users. 
    Industrial waste means the wastewater discharges from industrial manufacturing trade or business processes, as distinct from their employees' domestic waste or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    Local agency means the City of Gladstone, or its designated official or department. 
    Major contributing industry means any industrial user of the publicly owned treatment facility that: 
(1)	Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day; 
(2)	Has a flow greater than five percent of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; 
(3)	Has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in the standards issued under Section 307(a) of PL 92-500; or 
(4)	Is found by the permit issuance authority in connection with the issuance of an NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment facility receiving the waste to have significant impact, whether singly or in combination with other contributing factors, on that treatment facility or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment facility. 
All major contributing industries shall be monitored. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as prescribed in PL 92-500. 
    Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities and other efforts required to operate and maintain the wastewater transportation and treatment system consistent with ensuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement. 
    PL 92-500 means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 being Public Law 92-500 of the 92nd Congress and adopted on October 18, 1972. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking or dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by the local agency. 
    Replacement means the replacement, in whole or in part, of any equipment in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters as may be present; also referred to as "wastewater." 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit used for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer service charge means the sum applicable of the user charge, surcharges, industrial cost recovery and debt service charges. 
    Storm sewer and storm drain mean a sewer which carries stormwaters, surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Surcharge means a part of the service charge; any customer discharging wastewater having a strength in excess of 250 mg/l BOD, 300 mg/l suspended solids, or 18 mg/l phosphorus will be required to pay an additional charge to cover the cost of treating such excess strength wastewater. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    User charge means a charge levied on users of a treatment facility for the cost of operation and maintenance of sewerage facilities pursuant to section 204(b) of PL 92-500, and includes the cost of replacement. 
    User class means the kind of user connected to sanitary sewers, including, but not limited to, residential, industrial, commercial, institutional and governmental. 
(1)	Commercial user means an establishment involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by the local agency, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences and which is not a residential user or an industrial user. 
(2)	Governmental user means any federal, state or local government user of the wastewater treatment facilities. 
(3)	Industrial user means any nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment facilities who discharges more than 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary waste or a volume of process waste, or combined process and sanitary waste, equivalent to 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary waste. 
(4)	Institutional user means any establishment involved in a social, charitable, religious or educational function which, based on a determination by the local agency, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
(5)	Residential user means a user of the treatment works whose premises or buildings are used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons, including dwelling units as detached, semidetached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments or permanent multifamily dwellings (transient lodging is not included; it is considered commercial). 
    Wastewater treatment facilities means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1976, § 53.01) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-152. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the local agency, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any natural outlet any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)	The owner of any house, building or property which is used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the local agency and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer is required, at his own expense, to install suitable sewage facilities in such house, building or property and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article and sections 12751-12758 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.12751-333.12758). Such connection shall be completed no later than during the following construction year, which begins April 1 and ends November 1. 
(Code 1976, § 53.03) 
Sec. 58-153. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)	Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 58-152(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system which complies with county health department regulations. 
(b)	At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 58-152(d), direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned for sanitary use, filled with suitable material and sealed. 
(c)	The owner of the property upon which a private sewage disposal system is located shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner, at all times, at no expense to the local agency. 
(Code 1976, § 53.04) 
Sec. 58-154. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)	An unauthorized person shall not cover, make any connections with or openings into, or alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the local agency. Building sewers shall not be covered until after they have been inspected and approved by the authorized official. 
(b)	All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of a building sewer to the public sewer shall be borne by the owner. The city shall assume the cost for repair of a sewer lateral from the right-of-way line to the public sewer only if such lateral has totally collapsed. If the city digs up a lateral and finds the sewer is not collapsed, the property owner shall pay for all expenses or such bill shall be a lien against the property. 
(c)	A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. 
(d)	Old building sewers may be used in connection with the new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(e)	A newly constructed building sewer shall be schedule 40 PVC, cast iron, vitrified clay sewer pipe or asbestos cement pipe. Joints shall be tight and waterproof, and materials and joints shall be as approved by the local agency. Any part of a building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that the nonmetallic material may be accepted if it is laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle. Transitions or connections will be constructed only with fabricated connection fittings approved by the local agency. 
(f)	The size and slope of a building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the local agency, but the diameter shall not be less than six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted. 
(g)	Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. A building sewer shall not be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might be weakened by such installation. The depth of such building sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in a straight line. 
(h)	In all buildings in which a building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by a pumping system approved by the local agency and discharged to the building sewer. 
(i)	A sewer connection will not be permitted unless there is capacity available in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the wastewater treatment plants, including the capacity for treatment of BOD and suspended solids. 
(Code 1976, § 53.05) 
Sec. 58-155. - Protection from damage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any sewage treatment works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under a charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1976, § 53.07) 
State Law reference- Tampering with utility property, MCL 750.383a. 
Sec. 58-156. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)	Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 58-155, shall be served by the local agency with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit, not exceeding 60 days, for the satisfactory correction of such violation. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all such violations. 
(b)	Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the local agency for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1976, § 53.09) 
Secs. 58-157-58-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 58-181. - Operating year. 
    The sanitary sewer system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year commencing on April 1 and ending March 31. 
(Code 1976, § 53.13) 
Sec. 58-182. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
    Duly authorized employees or representatives of the local agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all premises for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 53.08) 
Sec. 58-183. - Records and accounts; annual review and audit; insurance. 
(a)	The local agency shall maintain and keep proper books of records and accounts, separate from all other records and accounts, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the sanitary sewer system. The local agency will cause an annual audit of such books of record and accounts for the preceding operating year to be made by a recognized independent certified public accountant and will supply such audit to authorized public officials on request. 
(b)	In conjunction with the audit, there shall be an annual review of the sewer charge system of adequacies meeting expected expenditures for the following year. 
(c)	Classification of old and new industrial users shall also be reviewed annually. 
(d)	The local agency will maintain and carry insurance on all physical properties of the sanitary sewer system, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the operation of wastewater disposal systems. All monies received for losses under any such insurance policies shall be applied solely to the replacement and restoration of the property damaged or destroyed. 
(Code 1976, § 53.14) 
Secs. 58-184-58-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 58-201. - Generally. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, water from footing drains or roof water to any sanitary sewer or sewer connection, except as otherwise provided in this article. Downspouts and roof leaders shall be disconnected from sanitary sewers within one year from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)	Stormwater, groundwater, water from footing drains and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into sewers specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet, except as otherwise provided in this article. Industrial cooling waters or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon application and approval of the local agency and the appropriate state agency to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the following waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or lower than 32 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees Celsius). 
(2)	Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight of fat, oil or grease. 
(3)	Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(5)	Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, woods, paunch manure or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities. 
(6)	Any waters or wastes having corrosive properties capable of causing drainage which is hazardous to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater facility. 
(7)	Any waters with a pH lower than 6.5 or greater than 9.5. 
(8)	Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the treatment plant. 
(9)	Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plant. 
(10)	Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(11)	Industrial wastes will not be permitted to be discharged into the sanitary sewers that may cause a deviation from the NPDES permit requirements, pretreatment standards and all other state and federal regulations. 
(d)	Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when liquid wastes contain grease in excessive amounts or other harmful ingredients, except such interceptors shall not be required for single-family or multiple-family dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the local agency and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspections. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers, which, when bolted into place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(e)	Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation, at all times. 
(f)	The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes containing more than 250 mg/l of BOD, 300 mg/l of suspended solids or 18 mg/l of phosphorus, or containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in subsection (c) of this section, or having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily flow of the local agency shall be subject to review and approval of the local agency. Preliminary treatment shall be provided at no expense to the local agency as may be necessary to reduce the BOD to 250 mg/l, suspended solids to 300 mg/l, phosphorus to 18 mg/l or to reduce objectionable characteristics for constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in subsection (c) of this section, or control the quantity and rates of discharges of such waters or wastes. A person may be required to remove, exclude or require pretreatment of any industrial waste, in whole or in part, for any reasons deemed to be in the interest of the local agency. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his expense. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval, and construction of any facility shall not be commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing. The local agency may elect to treat industrial wastes discharged in excess of normal domestic concentrations on a basis prescribed by written agreement and for an established surcharge to cover the added cost. 
(g)	The owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the local agency. The manhole shall be installed by the owner, at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(h)	All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which references are made in this section shall be determined in accordance with the Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater and other guidelines approved by the regulatory agency and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in subsection (g) of this section, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(i)	Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement between the local agency and an industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern, provided such agreement shall not violate NPDES requirements and provided user charges, surcharges and industrial cost recovery payments as provided in this article are agreed to in the agreement. 
(Code 1976, § 53.06) 
Sec. 58-202. - Filing of statement, etc., of materials discharged. 
    Any industry or structure discharging process flow to the sanitary sewer, storm sewer or receiving stream of the city shall file the following with the local agency. The local agency may require each person who applies for or receives sewer service, or through the nature of the enterprise creates a potential environmental problem, to file the following: 
(1)	A written statement setting forth the nature of the enterprise, the source and amount of water used, the amount of water to be discharged, with its present or expected bacterial, physical, chemical, radioactive or other pertinent characteristics of the wastes. 
(2)	A plan map of the building, works or complex with each outfall to the surface waters, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, natural watercourse or groundwaters noted and described and the identification of the waste stream. 
(3)	Sample test and reports filed with the local agency and the appropriate state agencies on appropriate characteristics of wastes on a schedule at locations and according to methods approved by the local agency. 
(4)	Evidence of placement of waste treatment facilities, process facilities, waste streams or other potential waste problems under the specific supervision and control of persons who have been certified by an appropriate state agency as properly qualified to supervise such facilities. 
(5)	A report on raw materials entering the process or support systems, intermediate materials, final products and waste byproducts as such factors may affect waste control. 
(6)	Records maintained and reports filed on the final disposal of specific liquids, solids, sludges, oil, radioactive materials, solvents or other wastes. 
(7)	Written notification to the local agency, subject to approval, if an industrial process is to be altered so as to include or negate a process waste or potential waste. 
(Code 1976, § 53.10) 
Secs. 58-203-58-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 58-221. - Established; applicability; basis for computation. 
(a)	Rates and charges for the use of the wastewater system of the city are established. Such charges and rates shall be made against each lot, parcel of land or premises which may have sewer connections with the sewer system of the city or which may otherwise discharge sewage or industrial waste, either directly or indirectly, into such system or any part thereof. Such charges shall be based upon the quantity of water used. 
(b)	The rates and charges for the services furnished by the city wastewater system shall be levied upon each lot or parcel of land, building or premises, having a sewer connection with such system, on the basis of the quantity of water used thereon or therein by meters, by such equitable method as shall be determined by the city, and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as provided for the payment of charges for water used, except in cases where the character of the sewage from a manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises is such that unreasonable burden is placed upon the system greater than that imposed by the average sewage delivered to the system plant, the additional cost of treatment created thereby shall be an additional charge over the regular rates set forth in this section, or the city may, if it deems it advisable, compel such manufacturing or industrial plant, building or premises to treat such sewage in such a manner as shall be specified by the city before discharging such sewage into the wastewater disposal system. Rates for all users obtaining all or part of their water supply from sources other than the city's water system may be determined by gauging or metering the actual sewage entering the system or by metering the water used by them in a manner acceptable to the city. 
(c)	There shall be an additional charge for laboratory testing or wastewater sampling. The laboratory charge shall be for the cost of such testing and will be determined for each user. 
(d)	The rate to be billed for use of the wastewater disposal system shall be set and reviewed annually by the city commission. 
(e)	In case the fees set forth in this section shall not be paid within 30 days, they may be collected by special assessment, suit or otherwise. On or before May 1 of each year, the city treasurer shall certify to the city clerk, and the city clerk shall certify to the city assessor, the amount of any wastewater charges which are more than 30 days past due, and the city assessor shall enter the amount certified on the tax roll for that year for collection. 
(f)	Where a sewer or sanitary sewer is constructed by a landowner, such landowner shall pay the cost of construction. Such construction shall not be commenced until all required permits are obtained and connection charges are paid to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 53.15) 
Sec. 58-222. - Additional charges. 
(a)	If the character of the sewage of any manufacturing or industrial plant or any other building or premises shall be such as to impose an unreasonable burden upon the sewers of the wastewater disposal system or the wastewater treatment plant in excess of a maximum limit prescribed in this article, an additional charge shall be made over and above the regular rates, or the local agency shall require that such sewage be treated by the person responsible therefor before being emptied into the sewer, or the right to empty such sewage shall be denied, if necessary, to protect the system or any part thereof. Surcharges required shall be computed as the prorated share of the annual costs of operation and maintenance, including replacement, attributable to treating a substance, multiplied by the ratio of weight of surchargeable excess of the discharged substance to the total weight of surchargeable excess of the discharged substance to the total weight of such substance that is treated in that year. Such amount shall be collected on the basis of estimated surchargeable amounts with each billing and shall be adjusted annually to reflect actual operation, maintenance and replacement costs. If any premises connected to the wastewater disposal system discharge a large portion of total water used into the storm sewer and not into the sanitary sewer, all such discharges shall comply with the requirements of state and federal agencies. 
(b)	Any wastewater discharged into the sewer system which has a substance in excess of that prescribed in section 58-201 shall be permitted only if provided for in a special agreement with the industrial concern discharging the wastewater, and only if such agreement provides for the payment by the industrial concern for the full cost of treating such excess constituents in the wastewater. 
(Code 1976, § 53.11) 
Chapter 62 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Shrubs and trees in cemeteries, § 14-42; environment, ch. 22; land development regulations, ch. 30; subdivisions and other divisions of land, § 30-341 et seq.; zoning, § 30-471 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 46. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-31-62-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADJACENT TO PUBLIC PROPERTY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 62-51. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person who permits any tree to remain or allows it to grow on his property which interferes in any manner with or causes any injury or damage to any of the sewers, water mains, electric light or power wires or other utilities of the city violates the provisions of sections 62-52-62-56 and shall be subject to the payment of a civil fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.99), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 62-52. - Location of trees. 
    Any person owning or occupying any land adjoining any public street in the city may plant, set or maintain shade or ornamental trees in accordance with the policies governed by the city forester. Tree roots or branches may extend into the public streets under the conditions set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.70), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 62-53. - Interference with public trees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any trees or branches to grow or remain on his land, or in the portion of the street abutting his land, which in any manner interfere with the use of the streets or avenues for the purpose of travel, furnishing of electricity, telephone, fire alarm, water or sewer service to the inhabitants of the city, or which interfere with any other proper public use of streets. Any such interference shall be declared a public and common nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.71), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 62-54. - Constitution of interference. 
    The following shall constitute an interference with the use of the streets or avenues within the meaning of section 62-53 and shall constitute a violation of this article: 
(1)	Any tree whose branches extend over any sidewalk or over the traveled portion of any street at a height of less than eight feet from the street level; 
(2)	Any tree whose branches touch or are so close to any electric light or power wire, fire alarm wire, telephone wire, telegraph wire, or whose roots touch or are so close to any portion of the sewer system or water system of the city as to endanger the service through any of such mediums or interfere with the use of any of such mediums or injure or endanger the health or safety of any person or property. 
(Ord. No. 486 § 1(91.72), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 62-55. - Public nuisances; removal. 
    All trees, or portions thereof, which are permitted to exist contrary to the provisions of this division may be deemed a public hazard and may be abated at any time without notice to the owner or occupant of the abutting property by the city manager or his duly appointed agents. Removal costs shall be levied as a special assessment against the property from which the trees were removed. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.73), 9-26-1994) 
Sec. 62-56. - Injury of trees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, wantonly or maliciously destroy or unnecessarily injure any tree in the city, either in the public streets or upon the property of any person. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1(91.74), 9-26-1994) 
Secs. 62-57-62-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOXIOUS WEEDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq. 

Sec. 62-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inflammable vegetation means all weeds, grass, brush, plants and other vegetation which, in the opinion of the director of the public safety department, are a fire hazard to the lives or property of the citizens of the city. 
    Noxious or poisonous vegetation means poison ivy, ragweed or other poisonous plants, and all weeds, grass, brush and plants which are detrimental to health. 
    Owner means any person, firm or corporation who is the owner, occupier or possessor of land within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Unsightly vegetation means all grass and weeds permitted to grow over six inches in height, and all shrubs, bushes and brush permitted to grow in any unkept and disorderly fashion. 
(Code 1976, § 93.11) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-92. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of the public safety department to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 93.10(B)) 
Sec. 62-93. - Duty to remove. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of land within the city to cut and remove, or destroy by lawful means, all unsightly, inflammable, noxious or poisonous vegetation at least three times every summer and whenever a fire hazard exists. 
(Code 1976, § 93.12) 
Sec. 62-94. - Notice to remove. 
(a)	The director of the department of public safety or his authorized agents shall make periodic inspection of all properties within the city, shall make note of violations of section 62-93, and shall serve, or cause to be served, upon the owner, personally or by registered mail to his last known address, a notice to cut or cause to be cut down and destroyed or removed all inflammable, noxious, poisonous or unsightly vegetation growing upon his property. The owner shall comply with such notice within a period of five days from receipt of the notice. 
(b)	If the owner shall continue to neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions set forth in section 62-93 after the service of notice and the expiration of the specified time limit, then the director of the department of public safety shall order the superintendent of public works to cut down and remove or destroy all such inflammable, noxious, poisonous or unsightly vegetation on the property of the owner and certify the cost of such removal or destruction to the city assessor, who shall record it as a lien upon such land, to be collected in the same manner and at the same time as other special assessments and city taxes are collected. 
(Code 1976, § 93.13) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1976 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976 Code, as updated through July 13, 1987, which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1976 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 10.01(A) 1-1 10.01(C) 1-3 10.03 1-3 10.04 1-2 10.05 1-7 10.06 1-3 10.07 1-2 10.12 1-5 10.14 1-9 10.15 1-11 10.99 1-11 13.07 30-35 30.01-30.04 2-81-2-84 30.06 2-1 30.10-30.12 2-61-2-63 30.15-30.17 2-221-2-223 30.20-30.24 2-141-2-145 30.40, 30.41 2-121 30.45, 30.46 2-171, 2-172 30.50, 30.51 2-191, 2-192 31.01 30-31 31.02-31.04 30-32 31.05, 31.06 30-33, 30-34 31.08-31.14 30-36-30-42 31.20-31.23 2-301-2-304 31.30(A)-(D) 2-331 31.30(E), 31.30(F) 2-332, 2-333 50.02 42-32 50.03, 50.04 42-31 50.05-50.07 42-35-42-37 50.08-50.10 42-40 50.12, 50.13 42-33 50.14 42-41 50.17 42-38 50.18 42-34 50.19 42-39 50.20 42-42 51.01, 51.02 58-31, 58-32 51.06 58-35 51.07 30-173 58-34 51.08 30-173 51.11 58-33 51.12 58-36 52.02 58-73 52.03, 52.04 58-71, 58-72 52.05(A) 58-74 52.05(B) 58-83 52.06, 52.07 58-89, 58-90 52.08 58-114 52.09, 52.10 58-91, 58-92 52.11(A), 52.11(B) 58-80, 58-81 52.11(C)-52.11(G) 58-84-58-88 52.12 58-93 52.13 58-79 52.14 58-75 52.15-52.17 58-111-58-113 52.18 58-115 52.19 58-77 52.20 58-76 52.99 58-82 52.99(C) 58-78 53.01 58-151 53.03-53.05 58-152-58-154 53.06 58-201 53.07 58-155 53.08 58-182 53.09 58-156 53.10 58-202 53.11 58-222 53.13 58-181 53.14 58-183 53.15 58-221 70.41 54-101 70.53 54-5 70.61(A)-(C) 54-5 75.40-75.42 54-61-54-63 75.43 54-65 75.44 54-64 75.45 54-66 75.46 54-68 75.47-75.49 54-102-54-104 90.01(A), 90.01(B) 22-31, 22-32 90.01(C) 22-32 90.02-90.06 22-33-22-37 90.08 22-38 90.11-90.16 22-39 91.01 14-31 91.02-91.05 14-36-14-39 91.06 14-33 91.07-91.09 14-40-14-42 91.11-91.13 14-43-14-45 91.14, 91.15 14-34, 14-35 91.16-91.19 14-46-14-49 91.21 14-50 91.22 14-35 91.23-91.29 14-71-14-77 91.30, 91.31 14-32, 14-33 92.01 46-51 92.02 46-81 92.03 46-31 92.04 46-52 92.05 46-82 92.06, 92.07 46-32 92.08 46-53 92.09-92.11 46-54 92.12, 92.13 46-111, 46-112 92.14 46-112 92.15-92.17 46-113 92.18, 92.19 46-114 92.30-92.32 46-1 92.33-92.35 46-2 92.36-92.38 46-3 92.50-92.55 46-221-46-226 93.01-93.04 30-201-30-204 93.10(B) 62-92 93.11 62-91 93.12, 93.13 62-93, 62-94 94.01 22-71 94.02-94.05 22-101-22-104 94.06 22-73 94.07 22-105 94.08 22-72 94.09(B), 94.09(C) 46-181, 46-182 94.09(D)-94.09(G) 46-182-46-185 94.09(H)-94.09(K) 46-151-46-154 94.09(L), 94.09(M) 46-186, 46-187 95.01, 95.02 6-2 95.07 6-3 95.99(C) 6-1 96.01 2-2 97.01, 97.02 30-71, 30-72 97.04-97.07 30-73-30-76 97.99 30-77 110.01, 110.02 10-1 110.03 10-32 110.04 10-34 110.05 10-33 110.06 10-35 110.07 10-37 110.08 10-40 110.09, 110.10 10-38, 10-39 110.11 10-45 110.12 10-31 110.13, 110.14 10-42, 10-43 110.15 10-41 110.16 10-44 110.20 10-361 110.21-110.23 10-391-10-393 110.24-110.27 10-411-10-414 110.28, 110.29 10-362, 10-363 110.30 10-241 110.31, 110.32 10-261, 10-262 110.33 10-243 110.34 10-281 110.35 10-242 110.36-110.38 10-282-10-284 110.40, 110.41 10-331, 10-332 110.60-110.62 10-101-10-103 110.70 10-131 110.71, 110.72 10-161, 10-162 110.73 10-132 110.80, 110.81 10-211, 10-212 110.82, 110.83 10-191, 10-192 110.84 10-213 110.90-110.93 30-131-30-134 110.94-110.96 30-111-30-113 130.02 34-101 130.03 34-141 130.04 34-105 130.05 34-103 130.06 34-106 130.07 34-142 130.08 34-172 130.09 34-174 130.10 34-173 130.11, 130.12 34-175, 34-176 130.13 34-32 130.14 34-35 130.15 34-31 130.16, 130.17 34-33, 34-34 131.01, 131.02 34-212 131.03 34-171 131.06 34-213, 34-214 131.07 34-215 131.08 34-211 132.03 34-71 150.02-150.04 30-471-30-473 150.05, 150.06 30-541, 30-542 150.07-150.17 30-544-30-554 150.18-150.20 30-582-30-584 150.21 30-509 150.22 30-555 150.27 30-501 150.28-150.31 30-503-30-506 150.32 30-502 150.33 30-508 150.34 30-475 150.35 30-510 150.35(C) 30-511 150.36 30-512 150.37 30-507 150.38 30-513 150.39 30-581 150.41 30-514 150.43 30-474 153.01-153.04 30-261-30-264 153.10 30-265 153.11 30-267 153.12 30-292 153.13 30-266 153.14-153.16 30-268-30-270 153.20, 153.21 30-291 153.22, 153.23 30-292, 30-293 153.25-153.27 30-311-30-313 156.01-156.05 26-31-26-35  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1976 Code, as updated through July 13, 1987, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1976 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede July 13, 1987, but which were never included in the 1976 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since July 13, 1987, and not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 453 12- 8-1986 102 30-471 103 30-472 104 30-473 201-210 30-541-30-551 301-303 30-552-30-554 304-306 30-582-30-584 307 30-509 308 30-555 401 30-601 402 30-608 403 30-607 404 30-609 501 30-501 502 30-503 503 30-504 504 30-505 505 30-506 506 30-502 507 30-508 508 30-475 509 30-510 510 30-512 511 30-507 512 30-513 513 30-581 514 30-514 459  8- 8-1988 30-542 102 30-471 460 10-24-1988 54-5 462 10- 9-1989 1(150.02) 30-471 1(150.06) 30-542 467  5-28-1991 2 30-542 468  5-28-1991 2 30-583 469  5-28-1991 1 30-585 470  5-28-1991 2 30-555 471  2-24-1992 I(B) 2-272 I(C) 2-271 I(D)-I(J) 2-273-2-279 474  6-22-1992 2, 3 54-66, 54-67 475  6-22-1992 2 54-103 486  9-26-1994 1(91.40)-1(91.52) 38-31-38-43 1(91.60) 38-1 1(91.61(a)) 38-79 38-92 1(91.61(c)) 38-78 1(91.61(d)), 1(91.61(e)) 38-92 1(91.61(f)) 38-75 1(91.61(g)) 38-74 1(91.61(h)) 38-80 1(91.61(i)) 34-102 1(91.61(j)), 1(91.61(k)) 38-81, 38-82 1(91.61(l)) 38-83 1(91.61(m)) 38-84 1(91.61(o)) 34-104 38-85, 38-86 1(91.61(p))- 
1(91.61(s)) 38-87-38-90 1(91.61(t)) 38-92 1(91.61(u)) 38-73 1(91.61(v)) 38-77 1(91.61(w)) 38-93 1(91.61(x)) 38-94 1(91.61(y)) 38-95 1(91.61(z)) 38-76 1(91.61(aa)) 38-96 1(91.61(bb)) 38-97 1(91.61(cc))- 
1(91.61(jj)) 38-98 1(91.61(kk)) 38-91 1(91.61(ll)) 38-97 1(91.61(mm)) 38-72 1(91.61(nn)) 38-98 1(91.62) 38-71 1(91.63), 1(91.64) 38-2 1(91.65) 38-44 1(91.70)-1(91.74) 62-52-62-56 1(91.80) 38-121 1(91.82) 38-122 1(91.86) 38-123 1(91.99) 62-51 498  5-22-1995 30-543 301 30-552 303 30-554 499 10-23-1995 202-A 30-543 503  2-26-1996 207 30-548 209, 210 30-550, 30-551 506  6-24-1996 1 30-471 2 30-542 3 30-545 509  8-26-1996 1 38-121 507  9- 9-1996 2 30-512 1 30-513 513  8-25-1997 1 30-542 514  8-25-1997 1 30-471 515  2- 9-1998 1 2-302 516  3-23-1998 1-5 18-2 517  3-23-1998 1-5 18-1 521 12-28-1998 1 30-553 527  6-14-1999 1 30-231 3 30-232 530  1-24-2000 1 30-232 531  2-28-2000 2-9 50-1 532  3-27-2000 1, 2       Added 30-174 534 11-27-2000 I 30-602 II 30-601 III-VII 30-603-30-607 IX-XI 30-608-30-610 535  1- 8-2001 1       Rpld 30-601, 30-608(1), 30-607(c), 30-609 536  2-26-2001 1.1 30-342 1.3-1.5 30-344-30-346 2.1, 2.2 30-341 3.1-3.3 30-371-30-373 3.4 30-375 3.5 30-374 4.1-4.6 30-401-30-406 5.1-5.3 30-431-30-433 6.1 30-343 539  9-24-2001 1 30-171 541 10-28-2002 1-20       Added 51-1-51-23 542 10-28-2002 Adopting ord. 
pg. xi 547 10-27-2003 1 30-471       Added 30-509(1)g., 30-556 550  3- 8-2004 1 38-32 553 10-25-2004 42-31-42-42 554 10-10-2005 1 54-66 2       Added 54-66(15) 3-5 54-102-54-104 556  5-14-2005 1 30-601 2 30-603(k)(3), (l)(1)       Rpld 30-603(m) 558 11-28-2005 1-7 30-583 562 11-27-2006 2 30-341 3       Added 30-441-30-449 563 11-27-2006 2 30-582 564  3-26-2007 2 30-32, 30-33, 30-36, 30-37, 30-471, 30-475       Added 30-476 30-503, 30-508-30-513, 30-541, 30-542, 30-544, 30-545, 30-551-30-555, 30-583       Added 30-586, 30-587 567  6-25-2007 1 30-503, 30-509 568  8-13-2007 1 6-1-6-4       Added 6-5, 6-6 569  8-13-2007 1 30-551 570  2-25-2008 1 30-553(e), 30-601-30-610 573  6-23-2008 1 54-1-54-6, 54-61-54-68, 54-101-54-104 574 10-27-2008 30-471, 30-475, 30-501, 30-507, 30-509, 30-510, 30-512, 30-513, 30-542, 30-586 575  4-27-2009 2       Added 58-37 3       Added 58-38 577  5-22-2009 2 30-31-30-40       Rpld 30-41, 30-42 30-172, 30-174, 30-345, 30-372       Added 30-37(c), (d), 
30-583(g) 581  4-11-2011 1       Added 30-557 582 11-22-2010 1       Added 30-451-30-460 584  8-22-2011 1 30-510 585  1- 9-2012 58-93 1-8       Added 58-94 586  1- 9-2012 1 46-1(a)       Added 46-4       Added 46-155 587  4-23-2012 1 30-557 589  6-25-2012 1 30-374(d) 590  6-10-2013       Rpld 2-221-2-223       Added 2-221, 2-222 592 12- 9-2013 1-6       Added 34-72 594  3-10-2014 30-509 593  5-12-2014       Added 54-105 597  6-22-2015 54-6 602  1-23-2017 1 54-105(c)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 8.3u 1-8 8.4 1-4 8.4a 1-4 8.4b 1-3 8.5 1-7 15.231 51-17 15.231 et seq. 2-335 15.261 et seq. 2-334 Char. Ch. II, § 5 24.201-24.328 54-4 28.451 et seq. 34-72 28.601 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 28.609 et seq. 2-146 29.1 et seq. 18-2 Ch. 30, Art. V, Div. 2 29.361 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 30.401 et seq. Ch. 18 35.441 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. IV 37.2101 et seq. Ch. 26 37.2501 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 26-31-26-33 46.401 et seq. Char. Ch. II, § 25 Char. Ch. II, § 26 54.211 30-454(c) 117.1 Char. Ch. II, § 1 Ch. 2 117.1 et seq. Char. Ch.I-Ch. XVIII Ch. 2 117.3(a) Char. Ch. II, § 1 Char. Ch. II, § 7 Char. Ch. II, § 13 117.3(b) Char. Ch. II, § 3 117.3(c) Char. Ch. III 117.3(d) Char. Ch. II, § 7 Char. Ch. II, § 14 Char. Ch. II, § 15 Char. Ch. II, § 17 Char. Ch. II, § 19 Char. Ch. II, § 20 117.3(e) Char. Ch. I, § 2 117.3(g) Char. Ch. VIII, § 9 Char. Ch. VIII, § 13 Char. Ch. VIII, § 14 117.3(h) Char. Ch. VIII, § 8 117.3(i) Char. Ch. X, § 2 117.3(k) Char. Ch. V Char. Ch. V § 5 30-201 30-231 54-3 117.3(n) Char. Ch. VIII, § 2 117.4(k) 1-11 117.4a et seq. Char. Ch. XI 117.4a(1) Char. Ch. IX § 1 117.4a(2) Char. Ch. IX, § 5 117.4h(1) Char. Ch. XII 117.4l 1-11 117.5(i) Char. Ch. VII, § 2 117.5b Char. Ch. V, § 1 1-1 117.5c Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 4 117.5c(a)-117.5c(e) 2-331-2-335 117.5h 34-141 117.6 Char. Ch. I, § 3 117.41 1-11 123.51 et seq. Ch. 38 123.501 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 123.1102 38-96 125.581 et seq. Char. Ch. V, § 17 Ch. 30, Art. VIII 125.582 Ch. 30, Art. VIII, Div. 3 125.583a 30-507 125.583b 30-546-30-548 125.583c 30-546-30-548 125.584b 30-555 125.651 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 3 125.653 et seq. 2-301 125.654 2-302 125.657 et seq. 2-303 125.660 2-304 125.1104 34-71 125.1401 50-1 125.1401 et seq. 50-1 125.1415a(5) 50-1 125.1415a(7) 50-1 125.1501 et seq. 30-171 125.1508a Char. Ch. V, § 17 125.1508b 30-171 125.1651 2-271 125.1651 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2 2-271-2-276 2-278 125.1652 2-273 125.1653 2-272 2-274 125.1654 2-276 125.1657 et seq. 2-275 125.3101 et seq. 30-508 30-510 125.3103 30-513 125.3202 30-475 125.3204 30-544 30-545 125.3206 30-542 30-544 30-545 125.3401 30-475 125.3407 30-501 125.3501 30-509 125.3502 30-508 125.3503 30-555 125.3601 30-510 125.3602 30-510 125.3602(2) 30-513 125.3603 30-510 30-513 125.3604 30-511 30-512 30-513 125.3604(7) 30-508 30-511 125.3605 30-511 125.3606 30-511 125.3607 30-511 125.3801 et seq. 30-31 30-35 125.3807 30-37 125.3839 30-35 30-36 125.3841 30-36 125.3843 30-36 125.3845 30-36 126.1651 et seq. 2-277 128.1 Ch. 14, Art. II, Div. 2 133.1a Char. Ch. IX 141.121 et seq. Char. Ch. VIII, § 7 141.907 30-471 168.1 et seq. Char. Ch. III Char. Ch. III, § 1 168.24a Char. Ch. III, § 11 Char. Ch. III, § 13 168.323 Char. Ch. III, § 10 168.491 et seq. Char. Ch. III, § 2 168.492 Char. Ch. III, § 2 168.544a Char. Ch. III, § 6 168.631 Char. Ch. III, § 5 168.639 Char. Ch. III, § 5 168.647 et seq. Char. Ch. III, § 7 168.674 Char. Ch. III, § 3 168.720 Char. Ch. III, § 9 168.852 Char. Ch. III, § 13 168.951 et seq. Char. Ch. IV, § 1 211.1 et seq. Char. Ch. X Ch. 50 211.2 Char. Ch. X, § 6 211.29 Char. Ch. X, § 3 211.29 et seq. Char. Ch. II, § 2 211.30a Char. Ch. X, § 2 211.40 Char. Ch. X, § 6 211.44 Char. Ch. X, § 6 Char. Ch. X, § 7 Char. Ch. X, § 12 211.161 Char. Ch. X, § 2 Char. Ch. X, § 3 Char. Ch. X, § 6 Char. Ch. X, § 7 Char. Ch. X, § 12 211.501 Char. Ch. XI, § 25 211.741 et seq. Char. Ch. XI, § 5 Char. Ch. XI, § 12 213.1 et seq. Char. Ch. XVI 213.21-213.25 30-507 213.54 30-512 215.246 51-17 247.61 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. III 247.321-247.329 30-452 257.1-257.923 54-3 257.1d 34.72 257.1 et seq. 38-98 54-1-54-3 257.707a et seq. 34-106 257.86 34.72 257.951 54-4 259.10 30-471 259.86 30-471 259.151 30-471 259.431-259.465 30-471 287.261 et seq. 6-5 287.321 et seq. 6-5 324.2140 30-471 324.8901 et seq. 38-87 42-36 324.11101 et seq. 18-2 324.11501 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II 324.40101 et seq. 34-214 324.43501 et seq. 34-214 324.82101 54-6 324.82119 54-6 333-6101-333.6523 30-586 333.6523 34-104 333.12751-333.12758 58-152 338.41 et seq. 10-36 338.881 et seq. 30-173 339.2001 et seq. 30-341 380.501 et seq. 30-471 400.701-400.737 30-471 30-586 400.701 et seq. 30-471 30-586 433.51 et seq. 6-1 445.371 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. IV Ch. 10, Art. VI 484.2102 51-3 484.2251 51-4 560.101 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. VII 30-341 30-372 30-374 560.101-560.293 30-372 30-453(b)(4) 30-503 560.102(2) 30-341 560.102(a) 30-341 560.102(c) 30-341 560.102(f)-560.102(h) 30-341 560.102(n), 560.102(o) 30-341 560.102(s) 30-341 560.101(v) 30-341 560.102(w) 30-341 560.102(bb) 30-341 560.102(cc) 30-341 560.102(dd) 30-341 560.105 et seq. 30-372 560.107 30-371 560.108, 560.109 30-341 560.112 30-372 560.120 30-373 560.131-560.141 30-374 560.172 30-374 560.182 Ch. 30, Art. VII, Div. 4 30-374 560.241 30-374 560.241 et seq. 30-374 560.246 30-346 600.601 et seq. Char. Ch. V, § 14 600.2940 Ch. 22, Art. II 600.3801 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II 600.8311 Char. Ch. V, § 14 600.8701 et seq. 1-11 600.8703 et seq. 2-3 600.9921 Char. Ch. V, § 9-Char. Ch. V, § 11 600.9930 Char. Ch. V, § 9-Char. Ch. V, § 11 691.991 46-186 691.1401 et seq. Char. Ch. XVII, § 2 711.111-711.128 30-471 722.111 30-471 722.111 et seq. 30-586 750.167 38-97 750.167(1)(c) 34-104 750.234f 34-214 750.301 et seq. 38-89 750.356 et seq. 34-33 750.377a et seq. 34-31-34-34 34-172 38-91 750.383a 58-36 58-82 58-155 750.448 et seq. 34-142 750.479 38-72 750.502c 38-92 750.535a 34-141 750.546 et seq. 34-35 38-73, 38-74 750.552 34-176 750.751 et seq. 34-212 764.9c et seq. 2-3  
