Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions; Construction; General Penalty
[Adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 137 as Ch. 1 of the Grosse Ile
Township Code]
§ 1-1. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of the Code, the following definitions or rules of
construction shall control unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
A. Definitions. As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COUNTY — Wayne County, Michigan.
OWNER — As it applies to a building or land, includes any part owner,
land contract vendor or vendee, joint owner, owner by any type of
tenancy and in general any person that has any interest in the subject
building or land.
PERSON — Includes any individual, copartnership, association,
unincorporated club, joint venture or corporation, any trust or any
other group or combination of persons acting as a unit and in general
any entity or organizations through which more than one person can
act.
PROPERTY — Includes both real and personal property unless a
particular section indicates otherwise.
PUBLIC ACTS — The public acts of the State of Michigan.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public roadway, any public park, any public
building or public place of assembly and in general any place open to
or frequented by the public whether such place is owned by a public
agency or by a private individual.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Grosse Ile, Wayne County, Michigan.
TOWNSHIP BOARD OR BOARD — The legislative body of the Township
of Grosse Ile.
B. Rules of construction.
(1) Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring an
officer or head of a department of the Township to do some act or to
make certain inspections, it is to be construed as authorizing the
officer or head of the department to designate, delegate and
authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the
required inspection unless the terms of the particular chapter or
section designate otherwise.
(2) Gender. A word implying or identifying the masculine gender shall
extend and be applied to females and to other legal entities such as
corporations, firms, partnerships, etc., unless the context of a
particular section requires a limited construction.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
§ 1-2. Headings of sections.
The headings of the sections of this Code are intended to indicate the
contents of the sections and shall not be deemed to be the titles of such
sections nor any part of the section itself.
§ 1-3. General penalty.
§ 1-4. Aiding and abetting.
Whenever any act or omission to act is a violation of this Code or of any rule
or regulation adopted hereunder, any person who causes, secures, aids or
abets such violation may be prosecuted and any conviction thereof shall be
punished as if he had directly committed such violation.
(3) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this Code, such provision shall be held to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
safety and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code
imposes a greater restriction upon a particular subject matter than
a general provision imposed elsewhere by the Code, the provision
imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to
be controlling.
(4) Names of commissions. The name or title of any officer, board,
commission or agency when appearing alone in the Code is to be
construed as if the words "of the Township of Grosse Ile, Wayne
County, Michigan" followed it.
(5) Number. A word implying the singular number shall be applied to
several persons and things in addition to one person and thing,
unless a specific section requires a limited construction.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided in this Code or in any
amendment thereof, a person convicted of a violation of any section or
chapter or provision of this Code or convicted of the commission of any
act declared to be a misdemeanor or an offense by this Code shall be
punished by a fine which shall not exceed the sum of $500 or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each act of violation and every day upon which such
violation shall occur or continue shall constitute a separate offense.
B. This Code may also be enforced by suit for injunction, action for
damages, or by or through any other legal process appropriate to the
enforcement thereof.
§ 1-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 1-4
1:4
ARTICLE II
Municipal Civil Infractions
[Adopted 10-12-1998 by Ord. No. 250]
§ 1-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended.
AUTHORIZED TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL — A police officer or other personnel
of the Township authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal
civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices or
appearance tickets.
BUREAU — The Township of Grosse Ile Municipal Ordinance Violations
Bureau as established by this article. This Bureau will be the Township
Treasurer's office.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION — A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION — A written complaint or notice
prepared by an authorized Township official, directing a person to appear
in district court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil
infraction violation by the person cited.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION NOTICE — A written notice
prepared by an authorized Township official, directing a person to appear
at the Township of Grosse Ile Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau and to
pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule
of civil fines adopted by the Township, as authorized under §§ 8396 and
8707(6) of the Act.
§ 1-6. Commencement of action.
A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by
an authorized Township official of:
§ 1-7. Citation issuance and service.
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized
Township officials as follows:
A. A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to
appear in court; or
B. A municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged
violator to appear at the Township of Grosse Ile Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau.
A. The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a
reasonable time after the citation is issued.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-8. Contents of citation.
B. The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the 33rd
District Court.
C. Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form
approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be
filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by
the Township and issued to the alleged violator as provided by § 8705 of
the Act.
D. A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized
Township official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation
alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing
the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement
immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare
under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the
best of my information, knowledge, and belief."
E. An authorized Township official who witnesses a person commit a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as
possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies
of a citation.
F. An authorized Township official may issue a citation to a person if:
(1) Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to
believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or
(2) Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly
witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is
responsible for an infraction and if the Township attorney approves
in writing the issuance of the citation.
G. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized
Township official as follows:
(1) Except as provided by Subsection G(2), an authorized Township
official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged
violator.
(2) If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or
occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged
violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land,
building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching
the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the
citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land,
building, or structure at the owner's last known address.
§ 1-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 1-8
1:6
A. A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of
the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place
where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number
of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.
B. Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may
do one of the following:
(1) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in
person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for
appearance.
(2) Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with
explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance, or in
person or by representation.
(3) Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either
of the following:
(a) Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a Judge or
District Court Magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a
Judge is requested by the Township.
(b) Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a Judge, with
the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
C. The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following:
(1) That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with
explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator
must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by
representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain
a scheduled date and time for an appearance.
(2) That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by
telephone, or by representation within the time specified for
appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a
hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation.
(3) That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing
is requested by the alleged violator or the Township.
(4) That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a Judge or District Court Magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney.
(5) That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person
before a Judge with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
§ 1-9. Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.
D. The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of
the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or
at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor
and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged
violator on the municipal civil infraction.
A. Bureau established. The Township hereby establishes a Municipal
Ordinance Violations Bureau ("Bureau") as authorized under § 8396 of
the Act to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil
infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices
issued and served by authorized Township officials, and to collect and
retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance
or resolution.
B. Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The Bureau
shall be located at Township Hall, and shall be under the supervision
and control of the Township Treasurer. The Township Treasurer, subject
to the approval of the Township Board of Trustees, shall adopt rules and
regulations for the operation of the Bureau.
C. Disposition of violations. The Bureau may dispose only of municipal civil
infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which
a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a
citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a
particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the
violation at the Bureau if a citation was issued. Nothing in this article
shall prevent or restrict the Township from issuing a municipal civil
infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in
a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to
dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the Bureau and may
have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction.
The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the
Bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the
person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law.
D. Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of
the Bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of
responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and
retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The
Bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies
having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with
explanation, and in no event shall the Bureau determine, or attempt to
determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an
alleged violation.
E. Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction
violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized Township
officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as
provided for citations as provided in § 1-7F and G of this article. In
§ 1-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 1-9
1:8
§ 1-10. Schedule of civil fines established.
A schedule of civil fines payable to the Bureau for admissions or
responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices
may be adopted by resolution by the Township Board of Trustees.1
§ 1-11. Designation of authorized Township officials.
The following officials of Grosse Ile Township are hereby authorized to issue
and serve appearance tickets as authorized under 1968 Public Act 147,
as amended (MCL § 764.9c) and to issue and serve municipal ordinance
violation notices and municipal civil infraction citations as authorized under
1994 Public Act 12, as it may from time to time be amended (MCL
§ 600.8701 et seq.) when said persons are assigned as part of their
employment duties to conduct an investigation or to enforce the ordinance
in question:
addition to any other information required by this Code or other
ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the
alleged violator must appear at the Bureau, the methods by which an
appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the
Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is open, the amount of
the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for
failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time.
F. Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a
municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the Bureau
and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for
appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An
appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation.
G. Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid.
If an authorized Township official issues and serves a municipal
ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not
made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of
fines for the violation are not paid at the Bureau, a municipal civil
infraction citation may be filed with the district court and a copy of the
citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at
the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the
court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements
for citations as provided by §§ 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall
consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the
municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged
violator how to respond to the citation.
A. Police officer.
B. Zoning Officer.
1. Editor's Note: The current schedule of civil fines is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:9
§ 1-12. Enumeration of municipal civil infractions.
C. Zoning Inspector.
D. Building Inspector.
E. Building Official.
F. Animal Control Officer.
G. Director of Public Works.
H. Ordinance Officer.
I. Fire Marshal/Fire Inspector.
J. Code Enforcement Officer. [Added 7-22-2002]
A. A first violation of any of the following listed ordinances shall constitute
a municipal civil infraction:
(1) Chapter 8, entitled "Alarm Systems."
(2) Chapter 16, entitled "Amusements," and Chapter 59, entitled
"Certificates of Occupancy."
(3) All of Chapter 20, entitled "Animals," except for § 20-5 entitled
"Keeping vicious animals."
(4) Chapter 29 entitled "Auction of Abandoned Property."
(5) Chapter 34, entitled "Bicycles."
(6) Chapter 40, Article II, entitled "Building, Mechanical and Plumbing
Codes," except for Section 118.2 entitled "Unlawful continuance."
The provisions of the Property Maintenance Code and One- and
Two-Family Dwelling Code also adopted by Chapter 40, Article I,
are now converted to a municipal civil infraction.
(7) Chapter 40, Article III, entitled "Electrical Code."2
(8) Chapter 44, entitled "Buildings, Dangerous."
(9) Chapter 49, entitled "Buildings, Numbering of."
(10) Chapter 53, entitled "Burning, Outdoor."
(11) Chapter 71, entitled "Condominium Projects."
(12) Section 80-8, entitled "Abandoned refrigerators."
(13) Section 80-12, entitled "Fireworks."
2. Editor's Note: Original Section 8U, regarding the Refrigeration and Heating Code, which
followed this subsection was deleted 7-22-2002.
§ 1-11 GROSSE ILE CODE § 1-12
1:10
(14) Section 80-16, entitled "Spitting in public places."
(15) Section 80-19, entitled "Malicious use of service provided by
communications common carrier."
(16) Chapter 103, entitled "Fences and Walls."
(17) Chapter 110, Article I, entitled "BOCA National Fire Prevention
Code." [Added 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 252]
(18) Chapter 110, Article II, entitled "Life Safety Code." [Added
12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 252]
(19) Chapter 110, Article III, entitled "National Fire Code." [Added
12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 252]
(20) Chapter 113, entitled "Fishing and Recreational Activities."
(21) Chapter 116, entitled "Flood Control."
(22) Chapter 124, entitled "Grading."
(23) Chapter 130, entitled "Horses."
(24) All of Chapter 146, entitled "Littering."
(25) Chapter 155, Article I, entitled "Curfew."
(26) Section 155-10, entitled "Purchase or possession of smoking device
products or tobacco products by underaged persons."
(27) Chapter 167, entitled "Nuisances."
(28) Chapter 170, entitled "Observation Deck."
(29) Chapter 183, entitled "Parking Violations Bureau."
(30) Chapter 185, entitled "Peddling and Soliciting."
(31) Chapter 197, entitled "Public Works."
(32) Chapter 205, entitled "Roads and Driveways."
(33) Chapter 209, entitled "Sewage Disposal Systems," and Chapter
210, entitled "Sewer Use."
(34) Chapter 220, entitled "Smoke Detectors."
(35) Chapter 226, Article I, entitled "Construction Site Debris."
(36) Chapter 226, Article II, entitled "Garbage and Refuse."
(37) Chapter 238, entitled "Subdivision Control."
(38) Chapter 241, entitled "Swimming Pools."
(39) Chapter 258, Article I, entitled "Essential Services."
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:11
§ 1-13. Fines and costs.
A defendant who is found responsible for an ordinance violation designated
as a municipal civil infraction whether by admission or by court
determination is subject to all of the following fines and costs:
(40) Chapter 258, Article II, entitled "Public Right-of-Way." [Added
4-7-2001 by Ord. No. 298]
(41) Chapter 268, Article I, entitled "Watering Ban."
(42) Chapter 268, Article II, entitled "Water Service Lien."
(43) Chapter 271, entitled "Water District."
(44) Chapter 275, entitled "Wetlands and Drainageways."
(45) Chapter 278, Winter Emergencies. [Added 7-22-2002]
(46) Chapter 285, Zoning.
(47) Chapter A293, entitled "Cable Television Franchise."
B. If any person commits a second offense, or subsequent violation of the
same ordinance listed above, such a violation constitutes a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 and/or
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, provided the authorized Township
official issues an appearance ticket (and not a municipal civil infraction
citation or notice) and marks it as a misdemeanor. However, nothing
herein requires the authorized Township official to charge a repeat
offense of the same ordinance by the same individual as a misdemeanor.
Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation.
A. A civil fine not less than $25 and not more than $500; and
B. The Judge or Magistrate shall summarily tax and determine the costs of
the action (which are not limited to the costs taxable in ordinary civil
actions) and may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the
Township has been put in connection with the municipal civil infraction,
up to the entry of judgment. Expenses include but are not limited to the
time of the authorized Township official; the time of the Township
Attorney; witness and mileage fees; and postage. Costs may not be less
than $9 or more than $500. Costs shall be payable to the Township
general fund except as otherwise provided by law.
C. In addition to ordering the defendant to pay a civil fine, costs, damages
and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate may issue a writ or order as
permitted by MCL § 600.8302.
D. The District Court Judge may establish a schedule of civil fines and
costs to be imposed for municipal civil infractions. The schedule need
not include all municipal civil infractions and may exclude a case on the
basis of a defendant's prior record of municipal civil infractions.
§ 1-12 GROSSE ILE CODE § 1-13
1:12
§ 1-14. Default in payment; civil contempt; imprisonment.
E. A default in the payment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses
ordered under this article, or an installment of the fine, costs or
damages or expenses, may be collected by a means authorized for the
enforcement of a judgment under MCL § 600.4001 et seq., or MCL
§ 600.6001 et seq.
F. In any citation involving land, buildings or property, the District Court
Judge may issue and enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to
enforce the ordinance. The District Court Judge may enter an order that
if the defendant does not comply with the ordinance requirements,
judgment, writ, or order, the Township employees or their agents are
authorized to enter onto the land, building, or property involved for the
purpose of enforcing the ordinance requirements, judgment, writ or
order. The defendant shall be responsible to reimburse the Township for
all its costs incurred in enforcement as provided by this section.
G. If the defendant in a municipal civil infraction is determined
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, the district court, in
addition to any fine and cost imposed under this article, may assess
additional costs incurred in compelling the appearance of the
defendant, which additional costs shall be returned to the general fund
of the Township of Grosse Ile.
A. If a defendant defaults in the payment of a civil fine, costs, or, if
applicable, damages or expenses, or any installment, as ordered, the
court, upon the motion of the plaintiff or upon its own motion, may
require the defendant to show cause why the defendant should not be
held in civil contempt and may issue a summons, order to show cause,
or a bench warrant of arrest for the defendant's appearance.
B. If a corporation or an association is ordered to pay a civil fine, costs, or
damages or expenses, the individuals authorized to make disbursement
shall pay the fine, costs, or damages or expenses, and their failure to do
so shall be civil contempt unless they make the showing required in this
section.
C. Unless the defendant shows that the default was not attributable to an
intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his or
her part to make a good faith effort to obtain the funds required for
payment, the court shall find that the default constitutes a civil
contempt and may order the defendant committed until all or a
specified part of the amount due is paid.
D. If it appears that the default in the payment of a fine, costs, or damages
or expenses does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an
order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the
amount of payment or of each installment, or revoking the fine, costs, or
damages or expenses.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:13
§ 1-15. Failure to pay fine or costs; lien.
E. The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil
fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall be specified in the order of
commitment, and shall not exceed one day for each $30 due. A person
committed for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses
shall be given credit toward payment for each day of imprisonment and
each day of detention in default of recognizance before judgment at the
rate of $30 per day.
F. A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for
nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall not be
discharged from custody until one of the following occurs:
(1) The defendant is credited with the amount due pursuant to
Subsection E;
(2) The amount due is collected through execution of process or
otherwise;
(3) The amount due is satisfied pursuant to a combination of
Subsection F(1) and (2).
A. If a defendant does not pay a civil fine or costs or an installment
ordered within 30 days after the date on which payment is due in a
municipal civil infraction action brought for a violation involving the use
or occupation of land or a building or other structure, the Township may
obtain a lien against the land, building, or structure involved in the
violation by recording a copy of the court order requiring payment of
the fine and costs with the Register of Deeds for the county in which the
land, building or structure is located. The court order shall not be
recorded unless a legal description of the property is incorporated in or
attached to the court order. The lien is effective immediately upon
recording of the court order with the Register of Deeds.
B. The court order recorded with the Register of Deeds shall constitute
notice of the pendency of the lien. In addition, a written notice of the
lien shall be sent by the Township by first-class mail to the owner of
record of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known
address.
C. The lien may be enforced and discharged by the Township in the
manner prescribed by state law, by the general property tax act, Act No.
206 of the Public Acts of 1893, being §§ 211.1 to 211.157 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws, or by an ordinance duly passed by the
governing body of the Township. However, property is not subject to
sale under § 60 of Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, being § 211.60
of the Michigan Compiled Laws, for nonpayment of a civil fine or costs
or an installment ordered under § 8727 unless the property is also
subject to sale under § 60 of Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893 for
delinquent property taxes.
§ 1-14 GROSSE ILE CODE § 1-15
1:14
D. A lien created under this section has priority over any other lien unless
one or more of the following apply:
(1) The other lien is a lien for taxes or special assessments.
(2) The other lien is created before the effective date of the
amendatory act that added this section.
(3) Federal law provides that the other lien has priority.
(4) The other lien is recorded before the lien under this section is
recorded.
E. The Township of Grosse Ile may institute an action in a court of
competent jurisdiction for the collection of the fines and costs imposed
by a court order for a municipal civil infraction. However, an attempt by
the Township to collect the fines or costs by any process does not
invalidate or waive the lien upon the land, building, or structure.
F. A lien provided for by this section shall not continue for a period longer
than five years after a copy of the court order imposing a fine or costs is
recorded, unless within that time an action to enforce the lien is
commenced.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:15

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-22-2002]
§ 1-16. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to MCL § 41.186, the ordinances of the Township of Grosse Ile
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Board of the
Township of Grosse Ile, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 285, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Grosse Ile,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-17. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1980 Code and all general
and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-18. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect 30 days after the publication of this
ordinance.
§ 1-19. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Grosse Ile by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-20. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Grosse
Ile" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:17
§ 1-21. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Grosse Ile, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-22. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-23. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Township Board or may be furnished electronically. The Clerk
may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the
Code.
§ 1-24. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Grosse Ile to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not
more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-25. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-21 GROSSE ILE CODE § 1-26
1:18
§ 1-26. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-27. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter saved from repeal.
§ 1-28. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-27 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 3-11-2002.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Township's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-28
1:19
§ 1-29. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map; and any chart,
table, figure, diagram or other attachment to the Zoning Ordinance.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Township Board that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)3
C. Nomenclature changes. The following changes in nomenclature have
been made throughout the Code of the Township or Grosse Ile:
(1) Throughout the Code, all references to the "Building Department,"
"Building Division," "Department of Safety and Engineering" and
"Department of Engineering and Building" are amended to
"Department of Community Development."
(2) Throughout the Code, all references to "9505 Groh Road" are
updated to read "9601 Groh Road."
(3) Throughout Ch. 16, Art. II, Mechanical Amusement Devices, all
references to "owner/proprietor" are revised to "owner/operator."
D. Fees. In the following sections, the specific fee amounts were removed
and replaced with the provision that fees shall be as set from time to
time by the Township Board: §§ 8-2, 16-18, 16-31, 16-32, 59-5, 185-4,
197-5, 209-7, 209-9, 258-11A and 268-10.
E. Penalties. In the following sections, the penalty was added or amended
to refer to the general penalty in § 1-3 (and, where appropriate, to the
municipal infraction provisions of Ch. 1, Art. II): §§ 8-6, 12-7, 16-28,
16-48, 20-22, 20-25, 34-10, 40-5, 40-10, 40-16, 44-15, 49-2, 53-3, 59-6,
3. Editor's Note: Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file
in the Township offices.
§ 1-28 GROSSE ILE CODE § 1-29
1:20
71-11, 80-21, 88-3, 103-10, 107-6, 110-10, 113-5, 124-8, 132-4, 139-5,
142-3, 150-10A, 153-28A, 155-8, 155-10, 167-10, 185-10, 185-23,
205-31, 209-12B, 210-7A, 220-4B, 226-10, 226-16, 238-16, 241-11,
255-12, 258-5, 258-21, 268-6, 275-27B, 278-10, 282-8A and 285-20.6D.
§ 1-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-29
1:21

ARTICLE IV
Delay of Sentencing; Leniency
[Adopted 3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-03]
§ 1-30. Adoption of provisions by reference.
The Township hereby adopts by reference Public Act Number 175 of 1927,
as amended (MCL § 771-1).
§ 1-31. Explanation of references.
All references in the act to "governmental unit" or "township" shall mean
the Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 1-32. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to allow the court under certain limited
circumstances to accept a plea and to delay sentencing to provide the
defendant with an opportunity to prove his eligibility for probation or for
other leniency compatible with the ends of justice.
§ 1-33. Publication required.
This article shall be published within 30 days after passage in a newspaper
circulating within the Township.
§ 1-34. When effective; copies available.
A. This article shall take effect the day after the publication in a
newspaper generally circulated in the Township of Grosse Ile.
B. A true copy of this article may be inspected or obtained at the Township
Clerk's office at 9601 Groh Road, Grosse Ile, Michigan, during regular
business hours.
§ 1-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-34
1:23
Chapter 8
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 220.
§ 8-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or assembly of equipment designated for the
detection of an unauthorized entry of premises or for alerting others of
the commission of an unlawful act or for detection of fire and which, when
activated, emits a sound or transmits a signal or message. The term "alarm
system" shall include, but not be limited to, the terms "automatic holdup
alarm system," "burglar alarm system," "intrusion alarm system," "holdup
alarm system," "manual holdup alarm system," "police alarm system" and
"fire alarm system."
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, corporation or other entity on whose
premises an alarm system is maintained within the Township, except for
alarm systems on motor vehicles or boats. If, however, an alarm on a motor
vehicle or boat is connected with an alarm system at a premises, the person
using such alarm system is an alarm user. Excluded from this definition and
from coverage of this chapter are persons who use an alarm system to alert
or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located
of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt unless such a
system also employs an audible signal emitting sounds or flashing light or
beacon designated to signal person(s) outside the premises.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm condition which is registered at the Police
Department or Fire Department or elsewhere not resulting from criminal
activity or a fire for which the alarm was intended. It shall also include any
alarm condition which is activated and registered at the Police Department
or Fire Department for the purpose of summoning Police Department or
Fire Department personnel to respond to some event other than what is
reasonably believed to be an unlawful act, or unauthorized entry onto the
premises, or of the existence of a fire or potential fire condition. In the case
of a fire alarm, a false alarm is any alarm condition which is registered at
the Police Department or Fire Department or elsewhere not resulting from
a fire or potential fire condition. Not included in this definition is any alarm
caused by weather conditions.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership or corporation or other entity, but
not including any governmental unit.
§ 1-34 GROSSE ILE CODE § 8-2
1:24
§ 8-2. False alarm fee. [Amended 7-22-2002]
The alarm user shall be required to pay the Township a sum as set from time
to time by the Township Board for each false alarm after the first two in a
given calendar year. No alarm user shall be required to pay said fee on the
first two occasions of a false alarm during any one calendar year (January
1 through December 31), but shall be advised in writing of said false alarm
and of the existence of the chapter from which this section is derived.
§ 8-3. False alarm procedure.
Following the response of police personnel or fire personnel to an alarm
call deemed to be false, a representative of the Police Chief or Fire Chief
shall mail such alarm notification form to the alarm user on which shall be
indicated the number of alarms received within the calendar year and any
fee due in accordance with this chapter.
A. Exemptions.
(1) Alarm conditions caused by the following circumstances shall not
constitute a false alarm, and no false alarm fee shall be charged by
the Township:
(a) Alarm system malfunctions, if corrective measures have been
instituted within 96 hours of notification by the Police
Department or Fire Department, provided that the alarm user
presents documentation of repair service having been
performed by the alarm company to remedy malfunction.
(b) Storm conditions.
(c) Alarm activated by disruption of electrical power or
disturbance of telephone or other communication systems.
(d) Alarm conditions being activated by persons working on the
alarm system with prior notification to the Police Department
or Fire Department.
(2) In Subsection A(1)(a) through (d), it shall be the responsibility of
the alarm user to notify the Police Department or Fire Department
by filling out the alarm notification form and returning it to the
Police Department or Fire Department within 10 days of receipt of
the alarm notification form. Failure to notify the Police Department
or Fire Department will result in an automatic billing to the user.
B. If, upon receiving a false alarm notice, the alarm user wishes to request
a waiver of the assessment of the fee due to extenuating circumstances,
he may do so in writing within 10 days of the assessment date. The
notice to the Police Department or Fire Department shall contain
documentation of the extenuating circumstances involved. Within 10
days of the receipt of the waiver request by the Police Department or
the Fire Department, the Police Chief or the Fire Chief, or their
§ 8-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3
1:25
§ 8-4. Shutoff devices required.
Alarm systems employing audible signals, as of the effective date of this
chapter, shall be equipped with shutoff devices that automatically silence
the audible signal after 15 minutes.
§ 8-5. Knowingly filing a false alarm.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly communicate, publish, file,
or participate in the communication or publication or filing of any false
alarm.
§ 8-6. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 12
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 16.
Drugs — See Ch. 88.
Minors — See Ch. 155.
Operation of motor vehicles — See Ch. 161.
designee, shall make a determination on the waiver request and shall
notify the alarm user of the decision.
§ 8-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 8-6
1:26
ARTICLE I
Consumption, Possession and Transportation
[Adopted 3-24-1986 by Ord. No. 156]
§ 12-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Includes any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented
liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary,
patented, and by whatever name called, containing 1/2 of 1% or more of
alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes, including,
but not limited to, such varieties as beer, wine, and spirits.
§ 12-2. Consumption in public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic liquor or
beverage, beer or wine on any roadway, in any public park, public place, or
in any place open to the public unless such place or premises is licensed to
sell or dispense alcoholic liquor or beverages, beer or wine for consumption
in such place or premises. A person who violates this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.
§ 12-3. Furnishing or sale to minors; allowing consumption by
minors; social gatherings. [Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-03]
A. Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person unless that
person has attained 21 years of age. Any person who knowingly sells or
furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age,
or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less
than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. In an action for the
violation of this section, proof that the defendant or the defendant's
agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing
alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, a motor vehicle
operator's license or a registration certificate issued by the federal
selective service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age of
the person being at least 21 years of age and the identity of that person,
shall be admissible as a defense to an action under this section. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to legally protected religious
observances or protected educational activities. A "minor" means an
individual less than 21 years of age.
B. Allowing consumption by minor at social gathering.
(1) As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — An alcoholic liquor as defined in
Section 2 of the Michigan Liquor Control Act, Act No. 8 of the
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:27
Public Acts of the Extra Session of 1933, being Section 436.2 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws.
ALLOW — To give permission for, or approval of, possession or
consumption of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, by
any of the following means:
CONTROL OVER ANY PREMISES, RESIDENCE OR OTHER REAL
PROPERTY — The authority to regulate, direct, restrain,
superintend, control, or govern the conduct of other individuals
on or within that premises, residence, or other real property, and
includes, but is not limited to, a possessory right.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — That term as defined in Section
7104 of the Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of
1978, being Section 333.7104 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
CORRECTIVE ACTION — Any of the following:
MINOR — An individual less than 21 years of age.
PREMISES — A permanent or temporary place of assembly, other
than a residence, including, but not limited to, any of the following:
(a) In writing.
(b) By one or more oral statements.
By any form of conduct, including a failure to take corrective
action, that would cause a reasonable person to believe that
permission or approval has been given.
(c)
Making a prompt demand that the minor or other individual
depart from the premises, residence, or other real property,
or refrain from the unlawful possession or consumption of
the alcoholic beverage or controlled substance on or within
that premises, residence, or other real property, and taking
additional action described in Subsection (b) or (c) if the minor
or other individual does not comply with the request.
(a)
Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to a
law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the violation.
(b)
Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to
another person having a greater degree of authority or control
over the conduct or persons on or within the premises,
residence, or other real property.
(c)
(a) A meeting hall, meeting room, or conference room.
(b) A public or private park.
§ 12-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 12-3
1:28
RESIDENCE — A permanent or temporary place of dwelling (which
includes any of the real property that the residence is located on),
including, but not limited to, any of the following:
SOCIAL GATHERING — An assembly of two or more individuals for
any purpose, unless all of the individuals attending the assembly
are family members of the same household or immediate family.
(a) A house, apartment, condominium, or mobile home.
(b) A cottage, cabin, trailer, or tent, or any type of watercraft.
(c) A motel unit, hotel unit, or bed-and-breakfast unit.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B(3), an owner, tenant,
or other person having control over any premises, residence, or
other real property shall not do either of the following:
(a) Knowingly allow a minor to consume or possess an alcoholic
beverage at a social gathering on or within that premises,
residence, or other real property.
(b) Knowingly allow any individual to consume or possess a
controlled substance at a social gathering on or within that
premises, residence, or other real property.
(3) This section does not apply to the use, consumption, or possession
of a controlled substance by an individual pursuant to a lawful
prescription, or to the use, consumption, or possession of an
alcoholic beverage by a minor for religious purposes.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(5), a person who violates
Subsection B(2) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by a fine of not more
than $500, or both.
(5) For a second or subsequent violation of Subsection B(2), the person
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or both.
(6) Evidence of all of the following gives rise to a rebuttable
presumption that the defendant allowed the consumption or
possession of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance on or
within a premises, residence, or other real property, in violation of
this section:
(a) The defendant had control over the premises, residence, or
other real property.
(b) The defendant knew that a minor was consuming or in
possession of an alcoholic beverage or knew that an individual
was consuming or in possession of a controlled substance at a
social gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other
real property.
§ 12-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-3
1:29
§ 12-4. Possession or transportation in vehicles by minors.
A person less than 21 years of age shall not knowingly transport or possess
alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle unless the person is an employee or agent
of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission and is possessing, transporting
or having such alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under the person's control
during regular working hours and in the course of the person's employment.
A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 12-5. Purchase, consumption or possession by minors. [Amended
8-26-1996 by Ord. No. 228; 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-03;
7-21-2018 by Ord. No. 18-001]
(c) The defendant failed to take corrective action.
(7) This section does not authorize selling or furnishing an alcoholic
beverage to a minor.
(8) A criminal penalty provided for under this section may be imposed
in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other
criminal offense arising from the same conduct.
C. Duty to supervise premises and the prevention of consumption by minor
at social gathering. During any social gathering, an owner, tenant or
other person having control over any premises, residence, or other real
property has an affirmative duty to supervise the premises and is
responsible to prevent the possession and/or consumption of alcohol by
a minor on or within that premises, residence or other real property.
Any person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction.
A. A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor,
consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to
possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as
provided in this section. For purposes of this section, a person under
the age of 21 is deemed a "minor." A minor who violates this subsection
is responsible for a civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by the fines and sanctions set forth in this section.
(1) For the first violation of this Subsection A, MCLA § 436.1703(1), or
other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute,
the minor is responsible for a civil infraction, shall be fined not
more than $100, and shall be subject to the court orders described
in Subsection A(4). A minor may be found responsible or admit
responsibility only once under this Subsection A(1), MCLA
§ 436.1703(1)(a), or other local ordinance substantially
corresponding to that statute.
(2) If a violation of this Subsection A, MCLA § 436.1703(1), or other
local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, occurs
after one prior judgment for an alcohol or controlled substance
§ 12-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 12-5
1:30
violation identified in Subsection A(6), the minor is guilty of a
misdemeanor, which is punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 30 days if the court finds that the minor violated an order
of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment,
screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to
pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine
of not more than $200, or both, and the court orders described in
Subsection A(4). A minor who pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile
delinquency proceeding to a violation of this Subsection A(2), may
request deferral of proceedings and placement on probation under
Subsection C.
(3) If a violation of this Subsection A, MCLA § 436.1703(1), or other
local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute occurs
after two or more prior judgments for an alcohol or controlled
substance violation identified in Subsection A(5), the minor is guilty
of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 60 days if the court finds that the minor has violated an
order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment,
screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to
pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine
of not more than $500, or both, as applicable, and the court orders
described in Subsection A(4).
(4) The court may order a minor that is responsible for or guilty of a
violation under this Subsection A to:
(a) Participate in substance use disorder services as defined in
MCLA § 333.6230 and designated by the administrator of the
office of substance abuse services;
(b) Perform community service; and
(c) Undergo screening and assessment to determine whether the
person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services,
including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug
treatment programs as provided in MCLA § 436.1703(5), all of
which shall be at the minor's own expense.
(5) A minor that is subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile
adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of
Subsection A(2) or (3) may be ordered by court to submit to random
or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis, which may be
requested by the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian as
provided in MCLA § 436.1703(5).
(6) For purposes of Subsection A(2) and (3), "prior judgment" means a
conviction, juvenile adjudication, or finding or admission of
responsibility for a violation of the statutes listed in this subsection,
or any federal or state law or local ordinance that substantially
corresponds to any of those listed statutes:
§ 12-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5
1:31
(a) This Subsection A or MCLA § 436.1703.
(b) A misdemeanor violation that is dismissed under Subsection C,
MCLA § 436.1703(3), or other local ordinance substantially
corresponding to that statute.
(c) MCLA § 436.1701 (Sale/furnish alcohol to minors).
(d) MCLA § 436.1707 (Sale/service/furnish alcohol to intoxicated
persons).
(e) MCLA § 257.624a (Transport/possess open alcohol in motor
vehicle).
(f) MCLA § 257.624b (Transport/possess open alcohol in motor
vehicle by minor).
(g) MCLA § 257.625 (Operating motor vehicle while intoxicated/
impaired).
(h) MCLA § 324.80176 (Operating boat while under influence).
(i) MCLA § 324.81134 (Operating off-road vehicle while under
influence).
(j) MCLA § 324.82127 (Operating snowmobile while under
influence).
(k) MCLA § 750.167a (Hunting with firearm/weapon while
intoxicated).
(l) MCLA § 750.237 (Carry/possess/use/discharge firearm while
under influence).
B. A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a minor or,
notwithstanding Subsection A, a minor who uses fraudulent
identification to purchase alcoholic liquor is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not
more than $100, or both.
C. If a minor pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile delinquency proceeding
to a violation of Subsection A(2), the court may defer further
proceedings and place the minor on probation under MCLA
§ 436.1703(3), which provides for dismissal of the proceedings upon the
terms and conditions of probation being fulfilled. An individual may only
obtain one dismissal under MCLA § 436.1703(3).
D. A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has
consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may
request the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis.
If a minor does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis,
the analysis shall not be administered without a court order, but a peace
officer may seek to obtain a court order. A peace officer may initiate
civil infraction or misdemeanor charges for a violation of Subsection A
§ 12-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 12-5
1:32
based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical
breath test analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath test
analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a
civil infraction or criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor
has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol
content.
E. This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing alcoholic liquor
during regular working hours and in the course of his or her
employment if employed by a person licensed under the Michigan
Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, as amended, by the
Liquor Control Commission, or by an agent of that Commission, if the
alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or for personal consumption.
F. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled in a
course offered by an accredited postsecondary educational institution
in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a
faculty member is not prohibited by this section if the purpose of the
consumption is solely educational and is a requirement of the course.
G. The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection with
religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited by
this section.
H. Subsection A does not apply to a minor who participates in an
undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives
alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with
the prior approval of the prosecutor's office as part of an employersponsored
internal enforcement action or under the direction of the
state police, Liquor Control Commission, or Police Chief as part of an
enforcement action.
I. In a civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution for the violation
of Subsection A concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content,
it is an affirmative defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor
in a venue or location where that consumption is legal.
J. As used in this section, "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the
following:
(1) An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
(2) Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the
consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of
alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service
or ceremony.
K. Should any section, subdivision, sentence, clause or phrase of this
section be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect
the validity of this section as a whole or any part thereof other than the
part as invalidated.
§ 12-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:33
§ 12-6. Transportation in vehicles.
A person, who is not a minor, shall not transport or possess any alcoholic
liquor or beverage, beer or wine in a container which is open, uncapped
or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of
a vehicle on any roadway within the Township. If the vehicle does not
have a trunk or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, a
container which is open, uncapped or upon which the seal is broken shall
be encased or enclosed. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
employee or agent of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. A person
who violates this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 12-7. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Except as provided in § 12-5, penalties for violation of this article shall be
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3.
§ 12-6 GROSSE ILE CODE § 12-7
1:34
ARTICLE II
Purchase, Consumption or Possession by Minor
[Adopted 1-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-02]
§ 12-8. Adoption of standards by reference.
Section 436.1703 (2004 Public Act 63) of the Michigan Compiled Laws, as
amended, concerning the purchase, consumption, or possession of alcoholic
liquor by a minor is adopted by reference.
§ 12-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the purchase, consumption, or
possession of alcoholic liquor by a minor.
§ 12-10. Inspection of article.
A person may inspect or obtain a copy of MCL § 436.1703 (2004 Public Act
63), the state law that is incorporated by reference by this article, at the
Township Clerk's Office located at 9601 Groh Road, Grosse Ile, Michigan
48138 during regular business hours.
§ 12-11. Issuance and marking of citation.
The officer who issues a citation under this article shall mark the local
ordinance box on the citation and may make reference to the offense being
charged by writing the description of the offense and/or by citing MCL
§ 436.1703 (2004 Public Act 63), or by any other manner which would
reasonably inform the defendant of the charge.
§ 12-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-11
1:35
Chapter 16
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 12.
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 80.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
Minors — See Ch. 155.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 12-11 GROSSE ILE CODE § 12-11
1:36
ARTICLE I
Arcades
[Adopted 12-12-1983 by Ord. No. 149]
§ 16-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings:
ARCADE — Any premises open to the public wherein are assembled five or
more mechanical amusement devices as herein defined.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person, partnership, joint venture, corporation or
organization who places a mechanical amusement device in any place or
establishment, including an owner.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine, electronically
controlled device, game or contrivance which, upon the payment of a fee,
either before or after use, or upon the insertion of a coin, token, slug, plate
or disc, permits a person or operator to use the device as a game contest
of skill or amusement, whether or not registering a score, which may cause
the operator to secure some amusement, enjoyment or entertainment, and
which is not a gambling device or a device which tends to encourage
gambling. The term "mechanical amusement device" shall include by way of
example, but not by way of limitation, electronic video games, mechanical
game machines, skill ball games, marble machines, mechanical grab
machines, or any other mechanical or electronic game or operation similar
thereto under whatever name they may be indicated. The term shall not
include pay telephones, coin-operated pool tables, juke boxes or vending
machines which dispense merchandise.
OPERATOR — Any person who is in charge of or has control over any
mechanical amusement device or arcade, and may include the owner as
herein defined.
OWNER — Any person, partnership, joint venture, corporation or
organization who owns, operates, maintains or conducts any place or
establishment in which any mechanical amusement device may be operated
or has control over the premises in which are located any mechanical
amusement devices or arcade and who has contracted or permitted such
mechanical devices to be installed in such premises for business purposes.
PERSON — Any corporation, association, partnership or one or more
individuals.
§ 16-2. Gambling.
No person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall, directly or indirectly, or through any servant, agent or
employee, have upon the premises any game machine or device which,
according to federal or state law, constitutes a gambling device or permit
gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling paraphernalia on
the premises.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:37
§ 16-3. Indecent and immoral language or conduct.
No person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall, directly or indirectly, or through any servant, agent or
employee permit any indecent, immoral or profane language, or indecent,
immoral, disorderly, vulgar, lewd, obscene or improper conduct on the
license premises.
§ 16-4. Disorderly persons.
No person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall directly or indirectly, or through any servant, agent or
employee, permit the licensed premises to become a resort for disorderly
persons of any type.
§ 16-5. Minors.
No person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall:
§ 16-6. Alcohol on premises.
No person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall, directly or indirectly, or through any servant, agent or
employee, permit the possession or use of any alcoholic liquor on the
premises, nor shall the licensed premises be accessible in any way with any
place where alcoholic liquor is kept, sold, distributed, or given away. This
prohibition shall not apply while a Michigan Liquor Control Commission
license is in effect at the licensed premises.
§ 16-7. Intoxicated persons.
No person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall, directly or indirectly, or through any servant, agent or
employee, permit intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises.
§ 16-8. Drugs.
No person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall, directly or indirectly, or through any servant, agent or
employee, permit the possession or use of any drug or narcotic, including
marijuana, on the premises.
A. Permit any person under the age of 17 years to be upon the premises
after 12:00 midnight unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
B. Permit any person under the age of 14 years to be upon the premises
after 10:00 p.m. unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
C. Permit operation of any mechanical amusement device by any person
under 18 years of age between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on
school days as established by the Grosse Ile Board of Education.
§ 16-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 16-9
1:38
§ 16-9. Noise.
No person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall, directly or indirectly, or through any servant, agent or
employee, permit noise to emerge from licensed premises which is
disturbing to the surrounding area.
§ 16-10. Hours of operation.
No person who has been issued a license pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall, directly or indirectly, or through any servant, agent or
employee, permit any person to operate or cause to be operated in the
Township the amusement arcade between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. except on Fridays, Saturdays and legal holidays, when the prohibited
hours shall be between 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.; provided, however, that
this section shall not apply to a business which is licensed by the State
Liquor Control Commission, in which event the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission regulations shall apply.
§ 16-11. Traffic control.
All parking and other use of streets and alleys by the operators of motor
vehicles at amusement arcades shall conform to the provisions of the State
Motor Vehicle Code and the Township's traffic ordinances,4 zoning
ordinance,5 and directions of the Chief of Police (or his designated
representative) as provided from time to time.
§ 16-12. Inspections.
A person holding a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article at
all times shall keep the licensed premises open for inspection by members
of the Police Department and Fire Department or other Township
departments for the purpose of enforcing any ordinance relating to the
health, safety and welfare of the public.
§ 16-13. Identification marks required.
Each mechanical amusement device shall have affixed thereto, in a
conspicuous place, a suitable and permanent identification stamp, mark or
plate bearing the name and address of the distributor thereof.
§ 16-14. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, distributor, operator or owner to
operate, cause to be operated or in any way give permission or consent to
the operation of any amusement arcade, whether said arcade is operated
independently as a business or as an incidental part of some other type of
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 251, Traffic and Parking, and Ch. 261, Vehicles and Traffic.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Zoning.
§ 16-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-14
1:39
business, without first having procured a license and paying the required
fees therefor.
§ 16-15. Application; information required.
§ 16-16. Qualifications for license.
No amusement arcade license shall be granted to a person who is under 18
years of age, or to any person who has been convicted of any crime involving
A. An application for a license to operate an amusement arcade shall be
made and filed with the Township Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk.
Such application shall be made by the owner of the arcade proposed to
be operated and shall state the full name and address, including the
street and number, of the owner or owners, if more than one, and if the
owner is an association, firm, partnership, or other type or
organization, the application shall state the full names and addresses of
all parties who have a financial or ownership interest in the said arcade
or any of the mechanical amusement devices to be installed therein.
B. If the owner-applicant is a club, society or corporation, the application
shall contain a complete list of the officers of such applicant with their
names and addresses, and such application will also give the state in
which such club, society or corporation is organized and the names of
one or more persons whom such club, society or corporation desires to
designate as its manager or person in charge of the operation of the
arcade together with their address.
C. The application shall also state the following:
(1) The location or premises where such arcade is to be operated,
including the street and number, and the location owner of such
premises.
(2) The name and address, including the street and number, of the
proposed operation of the arcade proposed to be operated on the
premises listed in the application, if such operator is a person
different from the owner of the arcade.
(3) Whether the applicant-owner or the location owner has ever
engaged in the business of operating mechanical amusement
devices and/or an arcade and when, where and for how long a
period of time in each place within the last five years.
(4) The proposed number of mechanical amusement devices and their
proposed location in the premises.
D. The application shall be signed by the owner-applicant or, in the case of
a club, corporation or association, shall be signed by its president and
secretary. Any false or incorrect statements made on any such
application shall be immediate and substantial grounds for revocation
of a license granted pursuant to such application.
§ 16-14 GROSSE ILE CODE § 16-16
1:40
moral turpitude, or to any person who has been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor involving gambling or fraud or to any person found not to
be of good moral character or any person who shall have previously been
connected with any mechanical amusement device and/or arcade operation
where the license for such operation has been revoked.
§ 16-17. Approval by Township officials.
§ 16-18. License fees. [Amended 7-22-2002]
The initial annual fee for an amusement arcade, and for each renewal
thereof, shall be as set from time to time by the Township Board. In addition,
A. Prior to the issuance of a license pursuant hereto, an inspection of the
premises involved shall be made by the Township Engineer (or his
designated representative) and by the Chief of Police (or his designated
representative) and by the Chief of the Fire Department (or his
designated representative) and their approval or disapproval noted on
the application before consideration by the Township Board.
(1) Before the Township Engineer approves the same, he shall
determine that the construction of the building involved is in full
compliance with Building Code6 and other pertinent Township
ordinances. The Township Engineer shall also determine whether
the proposed arcade complies with all requirements of the Chapter
285, Zoning.
(2) Before the Chief of Police (or his designated representative)
approves the same, he must determine that the applicant is
providing sufficient traffic aids and regulations whereby the
vehicular traffic shall not constitute a nuisance or danger. The
Police Department shall take a traffic study and also determine
whether sufficient parking spaces are provided for the proposed
arcade pursuant to the State Motor Vehicle Code and the
Township's traffic ordinances and traffic-control orders, zoning
ordinances, and directives of the Chief of Police (or his designated
representative) as provided from time to time before approving the
application.
(3) Before the Chief of the Fire Department (or his designated
representative) approves the same, he must determine that all
proposed mechanical amusement devices and all electrical
equipment proposed to be used herein comply with all applicable
ordinances, codes, statutes, rules and regulations regulating the
same.
B. The application shall be rejected if the person conducting said
investigation finds any violation of such codes, ordinances, statutes or
rules and regulations.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
§ 16-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-18
1:41
a fee for each such mechanical amusement device as required by this Code
shall be paid.
§ 16-19. Review of application by Township Board; term; conditions.
The Township Board, upon receiving an application or reapplication for an
amusement arcade license, shall pass upon the same and, if satisfied that
the applicant possesses the qualifications herein prescribed, may grant a
license for one year. The Township Board may reject any application if it
finds any of the following:
§ 16-20. Application approval by Township Board; issuance of
license.
A. The applicant does not comply fully with the requirements of § 16-16.
B. Approval has not been noted on the application by the Township
Engineer, Police Chief, and Chief of the Fire Department.
C. The applicant has previously violated any provision or requirement of
the Township ordinance regarding mechanical amusement devices and/
or arcades.
D. The proposed arcade would be harmful to the public safety, health,
morals or welfare of the Township.
E. The proposed location of the arcade (including its parking facility) is
within 500 feet from the nearest point of the property line of a public or
private elementary, middle, junior or senior high school.
F. The proposed location of the arcade (including its parking facility) is
within 500 feet from the nearest point of the property line of an already
existing arcade in the Township.
G. The applicant has failed to provide all the information required by
§ 16-15, and the Township Board finds that such failure to provide the
requested information prohibits the Township Board from making a
determination of the applicant's qualifications for an arcade license.
H. The proposed arcade would cause the number of presently existing
arcades within the Township to exceed the ratio of one arcade for every
4,000 population in the Township as determined by the latest federal
census and the Township Board finds that the addition of any more
arcades would be harmful to the public safety, health, morals or welfare
of the Township.
A. All applications for the licensing of an arcade shall be approved by a
majority vote of the Township Board. The matter of approving or
rejecting the license application shall be set only after the applicant and
the premises have been approved by the Engineer, Fire Chief and the
Police Chief.
§ 16-18 GROSSE ILE CODE § 16-20
1:42
§ 16-21. Display of license; identification stickers.
A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be displayed
at all times in the licensed premises, and the licensee shall also place
an identification sticker issued by the Township Clerk on each mechanical
amusement device.
§ 16-22. License assignment or transfer. [Amended 7-22-2002]
No amusement arcade license shall be assignable or transferable.
§ 16-23. Change of location.
If the holder of an amusement arcade license desires to change the location
of the arcade he shall so notify the Township Board and file a new
application for a license, provided that the Board may dispense with proof
of good character.
§ 16-24. Number of machines.
All licensed arcades shall be limited to the number of mechanical
amusement devices set forth in its application for a license unless it receives
prior consent from the Township Clerk to place additional devices in the
arcade. The Township Clerk, before giving said approval, must first send the
applicant's request for additional devices to the Police Department and Fire
Department to conduct an investigation as required in § 16-17 and obtain
their approval concerning the additional machines.
§ 16-25. Obstructions to public view prohibited.
No mechanical amusement device arcade licensee shall permit any
obstruction of a public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, screens,
posters, or walls of a permanent or movable nature.
§ 16-26. Application for renewal.
An application for renewal of an amusement arcade license shall be
considered in the same manner as an original application.
§ 16-27. Revocation of license.
The Township Board may revoke any license issued under this article for
any violation of any of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator,
with respect to the operation of the mechanical amusement devices or
arcades under the provisions of either this Article I or Article II hereafter.
The Township Board may revoke any license issued under this article with
respect to the operation of mechanical amusement devices for any acts or
conduct of customers, patrons, or other persons in or about the premises in
B. Upon approval of the Township Board, the Clerk shall issue the
necessary license.
§ 16-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-27
1:43
which the mechanical amusement devices are being operated which (acts
or conduct) are in violation of any of the terms or provisions of this article
and which (acts or conduct) are known to the owner, distributor or operator.
The Township Board may also revoke any license issued under this article
upon a determination by the Fire Marshal of the Fire Department that the
premises in which the mechanical amusement device and/or arcade are
being operated or the manner in which the business is being conducted
therein constitutes a fire hazard or any violation of the applicable fire
regulations or code of the Township of Grosse Ile or other statutes of the
State of Michigan pertaining to fire prevention or safety. Any license so
revoked by the Township Board shall not be reissued to the same licensee
until at least one year has elapsed from the time of revocation. Any license
revoked under the provisions of this article by the Township Board shall be
revoked after a hearing before the Board at a time and place to be set by the
Board for such hearing. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be given to the licensee at least 10 days prior to date of hearing.
§ 16-28. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 16-27 GROSSE ILE CODE § 16-28
1:44
ARTICLE II
Mechanical Amusement Devices
[Adopted 12-12-1983 by Ord. No. 150]
§ 16-29. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the terms "arcade," "distribution,"
"mechanical amusement device," "operator," "owner," and "person" shall
have the same meanings as those ascribed to them in Article I, § 16-1.
§ 16-30. License required.
No person shall distribute, place, maintain, or offer to the public for use or
operation, any mechanical amusement device without having first obtained
an appropriate license therefor, as required by this article. Licenses issued
under this article shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
issuance, at which time they must be renewed. Such renewal may only
be had upon compliance with the inspection and fee requirements of this
article.
§ 16-31. Distributor license fee. [Amended 7-22-2002]
The license fee for each distributor shall be as set from time to time by the
Township Board.
§ 16-32. Owner/operator license fee. [Amended 7-22-2002]
The license fee for any owner/operator, as defined herein, shall be as set
from time to time by the Township Board. The referenced license fee shall
be in addition to any building inspection fees and/or electrical inspection
fees that may be required by the Township Building Code,7 which fees shall
be those as established from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
§ 16-33. Conditions for issuance of distributor's license.
A. No license shall issue for a distributor except upon written application
to the Township Clerk. Such application shall contain the following
information in detail:
(1) The name and address of the distributor;
(2) The phone number where the distributor can be reached at all
times;
(3) The proposed location for the placement of mechanical amusement
devices;
(4) The name and address of the owner of each proposed location; and
(5) The number of machines proposed for each location.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
§ 16-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-33
1:45
§ 16-34. Identification of device.
Each and every mechanical amusement device shall have affixed thereto, in
a conspicuous place, a suitable and permanent identification stamp, mark or
plate bearing the name and address of the distributor thereof. The Township
Clerk shall furnish a list containing the names and addresses of all licenses
hereunder to the Chief of Police to facilitate inspection as required by this
article.
§ 16-35. Inspection.
The Police Department and other Township departments for the purpose
of enforcing this article or any other ordinance relating to the health,
safety and welfare of the public shall have the right to enter the place
of business of any licensee under this article at any reasonable hour for
the purpose of making an inspection and survey of the premises and the
equipment therein, and it shall be unlawful for any person to resist or
attempt to prevent any of the above named officers or employees from
carrying out the purposes set forth. Said officer shall affix a seal upon each
electronic/mechanical amusement device after inspection and issuance of
license thereof indicating compliance with the applicable provisions of this
article.
§ 16-36. Conditions for issuance of owner's/operator's license.
B. The license fee shall be paid at the time of issuance. The applicant shall
not be permitted to operate until such time as the license is actually
issued by the Township Clerk.
C. Any license so issued shall be posted conspicuously at the licensee's
place of business.
A. No license shall be issued for an owner/operator except upon written
application to the Township Clerk accompanied by the payment of the
appropriate licensing fee. The application shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the owner/operator;
(2) The owner's/operator's phone number where he/she can be
reached at all times;
(3) The name, address and phone number of the distributor from whom
the owner/operator desires to obtain his mechanical amusement
devices;
(4) A set of plans and specifications indicating the proposed location of
each machine within the applicant's business establishment; the
Township Clerk shall forward the plans and specifications to the
Department of Community Development for a complete report
prior to the issuance of any license; and
§ 16-33 GROSSE ILE CODE § 16-36
1:46
§ 16-37. Additional licensing requirements.
(5) A statement specifically setting forth the number of machines
which the owner/operator seeks to maintain on the premises.
B. The licensee shall not be permitted to operate until such time as the
license is actually issued.
C. The Township Clerk may not issue a license without the approval of the
Department of Community Development. In the instance where the
applicant seeks to license two mechanical amusement devices, or less,
the Township Department of Community Development may waive the
requirement of a specific set of plans and specifications showing the
exact dimensions of the proposed location for such machines. However,
each machine shall be inspected by the Township Electrical Inspector
and appropriate fees paid pursuant to § 16-32.
D. The licensee shall post the license issued under this article in a
conspicuous place upon his premises.
A. The Township Clerk shall issue no license for the operation of more than
two mechanical amusement devices in the Township of Grosse Ile
without the prior approval of the Department of Community
Development, the Chief of Police and Fire, and all other applicable
Township officers.
B. Any applicant for three or more mechanical amusement devices must
do the following in addition to all other requirements set forth in this
article.
C. The Department of Community Development shall only give such
approval upon a complete inspection of the premises of the proposed
business housing three or more mechanical amusement devices, and a
finding that:
(1) The premises comply with all zoning requirements as set forth in
Chapter 285, Zoning, as amended.
(2) The construction and proposed mechanical amusement device
placement complies with all ordinances, codes and rules and
regulations including but not limited to the BOCA Basic Building
Code, the National Electrical Code of 1978, or its successor, and
the Michigan Plumbing Code.
(3) For each mechanical amusement device on the proposed premises
there exists at least 100 square feet of available floor space for
public use. It shall also be determined by the Chief of Police and
Fire, or his designee, that the mechanical amusement devices are
arranged in a configuration which allows the rapid and efficient
egress or ingress of the premises in the event of an emergency such
as fire.
§ 16-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-37
1:47
§ 16-38. Denial of license for three or more machines. [Amended
7-22-2002]
No license shall be issued for premises having three or more amusement
devices:
D. The Chief of Police and Fire, or his designee, shall be responsible for
inspecting the premises for the purpose of assuring fire safety and
adequate crowd control. The Chief or his designee shall inspect the
premises and require compliance with all appropriate fire code
regulations.
E. The Chief of Police and Fire, or his designee, shall also review a crowd
control plan to be proposed by the owner/operator, relative to plans and
procedures to vacate the premises in the event of a fire or other
emergency situation.
F. Upon the recommendation of the Department of Community
Development and the Chief of Police and Fire, or his designee, the
Township Clerk shall issue the requested license. The license shall
become valid only upon final inspection of all installation and placement
of the appropriate seal by the Department of Community Development.
A. Where the individual operator, managing agent of a corporation, or
active partner has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude,
a felony or misdemeanor involving gambling or fraud or any person or
persons who shall have previously been connected with any mechanical
amusement device and/or arcade operation has been revoked.
B. For any premises, unless the Building Code, Fire Code,8 and other
pertinent provisions of all Township ordinances, as far as can be
determined, are being complied with.
C. Where revocation of license, pursuant to this article, of the applicant or
corporate officer of the applicant has occurred within two years
preceding the filing of the application.
D. A false statement as to a material matter made in an application for a
permit.
E. For any premises that do not provide space for safe ingress and egress
of such premises.
F. For any premises that have living quarters with direct entry to the
premises.
G. For any premises within 500 feet of an arcade, as defined by § 16-1.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction, and Ch. 110, Fire Prevention.
§ 16-37 GROSSE ILE CODE § 16-39
1:48
§ 16-39. Gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law.
§ 16-40. Seizure and destruction of gambling devices.
If the Chief of Police and Fire, or his designee, shall discover or have reason
to believe any mechanical amusement device is being used as a gambling
device, such machine may be seized by the police and impounded and if,
upon the trial of the owner/operator and/or distributor for allowing it to
be used as a gambling device, such owner/operator and/or distributor is
found guilty, such machine shall be destroyed by the Police Department or
disposed of as otherwise provided by law, and the fact thereof recorded by
the appropriate entry made in the court records of such proceedings.
§ 16-41. Periodic police inspection.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to periodically make
inspections of all mechanical amusement devices and, if any unlawful
mechanical and/or electrical adaptation or improper practices are observed
in connection thereof, to report the same to the Chief of Police and Fire,
or his designee, for such action as may be deemed appropriate and to
recommend the immediate revocation of such license.
§ 16-42. Responsibility of licensee.
Any owner/operator licensed under the provisions of this article shall:
A. Maintain a complete and accurate list of all mechanical amusement
devices on his/her premises, the name of the distributor thereof, and
the respective serial number of each machine. The list shall be made
available to the police upon demand.
B. Permit no student who has not attained the age of 18 years to operate
mechanical amusement devices during his/her scheduled school hours.
C. Prohibit the sale, purchase, possession or consumption of any alcoholic
beverages on the premises unless otherwise permitted by law.
D. Prohibit the sale, purchase, possession or consumption of any
controlled substance, as defined by state statute, upon the premises.
E. Not permit the operation of a mechanical amusement device by a
person younger than 14 years of age except between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m., unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
F. Not permit the operation of any mechanical amusement device by a
person between the age of 14 and 17 years except between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
§ 16-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-42
1:49
§ 16-43. Off-street parking.
Any owner/operator who requests a license for the operation of three or
more mechanical amusement devices shall be required to provide sufficient
off-street parking to accommodate the vehicles and bicycles of patrons.
Such parking area shall be well-lighted after dark and maintained in a safe,
clean manner and shall not interfere with the safe, expeditious movement
of other vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
§ 16-44. Bicycle storage racks.
A licensee hereunder shall provide sufficient bicycle storage racks so as
to adequately provide for the storage of bicycles utilized by patrons of
the permitted premises if such racks be needed, as determined by the
Department of Community Development and/or the Chief of Police and Fire,
or his designee.
§ 16-45. Renewal and transferability. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Any license issued in accordance with this article may be renewed for an
additional year upon the same terms and subject to the same requirements
as provided herein for an original license. Whenever the holder of such
license desires to effect a change of place of doing business, he/she shall
apply for a license for such new place in the same manner as in the first
instance. No license issued pursuant to this article shall be assignable or
transferable, nor shall any person or entity excepting the person or entity to
which it was issued be permitted to do business thereunder either directly
or indirectly.
§ 16-46. Revocation.
The Township Clerk shall have the right to revoke any license once granted
or deny annual renewal thereof when it appears to the Clerk's satisfaction
that any operator/owner or licensee has violated this article, any ordinance
of the Township of Grosse Ile, or statute of the State of Michigan with
regard to the premises where the mechanical amusement device or machine
is located, or other ordinance of the Township of Grosse Ile, or statute of
the State of Michigan or the United States, involving controlled substances,
alcohol, minors, or any offense involving moral turpitude. The revocation of
any license or the denial of renewal thereof shall not be made without a
hearing. Notice shall first be given to the operator or licensee setting forth
the time and place of hearing and the reasons for such revocation or denial
of renewal of said license.
G. Not permit any indecent, immoral or profane language or any indecent,
immoral or profane conduct.
H. Not permit intoxicated persons on the premises, regardless of whether
the intoxication results from use of alcohol or drugs.
I. Not permit the violation of any state law or municipal ordinance.
§ 16-42 GROSSE ILE CODE § 16-47
1:50
§ 16-47. Application for five or more devices.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in §§ 16-29 to 16-46,
both inclusive, any application for five or more mechanical amusement
devices must comply with the requirements of an arcade as set forth in
§§ 16-1 to 16-28.
§ 16-48. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 16-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-48
1:51
Chapter 20
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Horses — See Ch. 130.
Hunting and trapping — See Ch. 132.
Trespassing — See Ch. 255.
§ 16-48 GROSSE ILE CODE § 16-48
1:52
ARTICLE I
General Regulations and Licensing
[Adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 137 as Ch. 4 of the 1989 Code]
§ 20-1. Presumption of harborage or keeping.
Any person allowing a dog or other animal habitually to remain and be
lodged or fed within his house or on premises owned by him or which are
under his control shall be presumed to be harboring or keeping the same
within the meaning of this article.
§ 20-2. Licensing of dogs, cats and ferrets. [Amended 5-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 263]
§ 20-3. Running at large. [Amended 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-06]
No person keeping or harboring any dog or other animal shall permit the
same to run at large. A dog or other animal shall be presumed to be running
at large under the provisions of this section when, while off the premises
owned by or under the control of the person keeping or harboring said
dog or animal, it is not under leash, or securely tied, or confined within an
enclosure. (Note: Riding of horses on private property of others is covered
by Ch. 255, Trespassing, of this Code.)
§ 20-4. Barking or howling animals.
No person shall harbor or keep any dog or other animal which by loud,
frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling shall cause annoyance to
the surrounding neighborhood or to people passing by on the roadways.
A. It shall be a municipal civil infraction for any person to own, keep or
harbor any dog, cat, or ferret four months of age or older within the
Township without having a current license therefor.
B. Application for a dog, cat, or ferret license shall be made to the
Township and shall contain a description of the dog, cat, or ferret to be
licensed, and the name and address of the owner thereof. The
application shall be accompanied by a current certificate signed by an
accredited veterinarian showing that the dog, cat, or ferret has been
vaccinated against rabies with a vaccine licensed by the United States
Department of Agriculture. [Amended 7-22-2002]
C. The Township shall issue a license with a tag to each applicant. The
license shall contain a number of the license, the year when issued, and
the date of expiration thereof. Any person keeping or harboring any
dog, cat, or ferret shall provide the dog, cat, or ferret with a durable
collar to which shall be securely attached its current tag. No person
shall remove any tag without the consent of its owner.
D. Fees for licenses shall be as established by the Township Board.
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5
1:53
§ 20-5. Keeping vicious or rabid animals.
No person shall harbor or keep a vicious dog or animal or a dog or animal
that is known to be rabid.
§ 20-6. Rabies exposure; duty to notify police.
Every person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or animal that has
been attacked or bitten by any other dog or animal known to be affected
with or having the symptoms of rabies, or which has bitten any person, or
which is suspected to have contacted rabies shall immediately notify the
Township's Police Department and upon the demand of such Department
shall immediately produce and surrender such dog or animal for
observation for a period of 10 days; however, in the discretion of such
Department, such dog or animal may be quarantined for a like period of
time on the premises of the owner or person who is keeping or harboring
such dog or animal.
§ 20-7. Quarantined animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
or animal that has been quarantined under the provisions of this article to
allow the same to be on the streets or roads of the Township or away from
the quarantined premises during the time during which such dog or animal
is quarantined.
§ 20-8. Authority to impound.
Members of the Police Department and any other person who may be
appointed by the Chief of Police for that purpose shall have the authority to
promptly seize or impound all dogs or any other animals that may be found
to be running at large or are found to be kept, harbored or owned contrary
to the provisions of this article.
§ 20-9. Redemption of impounded animals; fee.
No dog or other animal shall be released from impoundment until the owner
or person entitled to the same shall pay to the Township an impoundment
fee established by action of the Township for the care, custody, and feeding
of such dog or animal while in custody. No such dog shall be released unless
a proper license for such dog has been procured prior to release in the event
that such dog has not already been duly licensed under provisions of this
article, or unless the Township is satisfied that a proper dog license will
be procured for the impounded dog within a reasonable time after release
thereof.
§ 20-10. Disposition of unclaimed animals. [Amended 7-22-2002]
All dogs or other animals not claimed and released within three days after
being impounded shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in a manner
designated by the Township's Chief of Police; provided, however, if any such
§ 20-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 20-10
1:54
dog, cat or ferret is licensed under the provisions of this article, notice shall
be given to the owner thereof as set forth in the application for such license
informing such owner of the intended disposition of such dog, cat or ferret
and giving such owner a reasonable time within which to claim and release
the dog, cat or ferret as provided for in this article.
§ 20-11. Cruelty to animals.
It shall be unlawful to torture, torment, beat cruelly, mutilate, or cruelly kill
any animal within the Township.
§ 20-12. Animal bites; duty to notify police.
If any person is bitten by a dog or any other animal, it shall be the duty of
that person, or the owner or custodian of the animal having knowledge of
same, to report same to the Police Department as soon as possible.
§ 20-13. Abandoned animals.
No person shall abandon any dog or animal or allow any animal owned by
him or under his control, which has escaped or strayed, to remain at large
within the Township without taking reasonable steps to recover possession
of same.
§ 20-14. Sick or dead animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw or place any dead
or fatally sick or injured animal or part thereof onto any public or private
place, or into or on the banks of any stream, pond, sewer, or other body of
water in or adjacent to the Township.
§ 20-15. Poisonous substances.
It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit poisoned meat, or any poison or
harmful substances, in any street, public place, or on any private premises
within the Township for the purpose of destroying any dog, fowl, or other
animal, except vermin.
§ 20-16. Destruction or confinement of vicious animals. [Amended
11-25-1996 by Ord. No. 234]
A. Judicial proceedings (show cause) in the District Court may be
commenced by the Township to have an animal or dog destroyed if any
of the following exist:
(1) Whenever a dog or animal has bitten or attacked any person
without provocation;
(2) The dog or animal has shown vicious habits or tendencies;
(3) The animal or dog has been found to have been running at large
more than two times in the last year;
§ 20-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-16
1:55
§ 20-17. Interference with Dog Warden.
No person shall hinder, obstruct or delay the Dog Warden or any member
of the Police Department or any other person who is engaged in lawfully
taking into custody or impounding any animal pursuant to this article.
§ 20-18. Sanitary requirements.
It shall be the responsibility of the person harboring or keeping a dog or
other animal to keep the premises in which the animal is kept or housed
clean and sanitary.
§ 20-19. Defecation on public or private property; removal and
disposal. [Added 7-22-2002]
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog, cat or ferret
shall cause, suffer or allow such dog, cat or ferret to soil, defile, defecate or
to commit any nuisance on any public thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway,
bypass, play area, park or any place where people congregate or walk or
upon any public property whatsoever or upon any private property without
permission of the owner of said property unless:
(4) The dog or the animal habitually (more than two times) causes
damage by trespassing on the property of a person who is not the
owner.
B. After a hearing, the District Court Magistrate or Judge may either order
the dog or animal to be destroyed or strictly confined to the premises of
the owner. If, after the court orders the dog or animal strictly confined
to the premises of the owner, the dog or animal again gets loose, the
Court shall order the dog or animal destroyed. Costs for any of these
proceedings shall be borne by the owner of the dog or animal.
C. A summons may be personally served on the dog or animal owner at
least seven days before the show cause referred to in Subsection A. If
the owner may not be served personally, the Township may obtain a
court order for substituted service in the manner allowed by the
Michigan Court Rules.
A. The person who so owns, harbors, keeps or is in charge of such dog, cat
or ferret shall immediately remove all droppings deposited by such dog,
cat or ferret by any sanitary method. The person shall possess a
container of sufficient size to collect and remove the above-mentioned
droppings and exhibit the container if requested by any official
empowered to enforce this article.
B. The droppings removed from the aforementioned areas shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
such dog, cat or ferret in a sanitary method on the property of the
person owning, harboring or in charge of said dog, cat or ferret.
§ 20-16 GROSSE ILE CODE § 20-20
1:56
§ 20-20. Certain animals prohibited. [Added 11-25-1996 by Ord. No.
234]
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, maintain, or keep within
Grosse Ile Township any of the following described animals:
§ 20-21. Current possession of prohibited animal. [Added
11-25-1996 by Ord. No. 234]
Any person who currently may possess or maintain an animal prohibited
by this article shall remove said animal from the Township of Grosse Ile
within six months of the adoption of this section, unless it is determined
by the animal control officer that it presents an immediate danger to the
public health, safety or welfare, in which case the animal shall be removed
immediately.
§ 20-22. Penalty. [Added 11-25-1996 by Ord. No. 234; amended
7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
A. All animals and reptiles, including snakes and spiders, whose bite or
venom is poisonous;
B. Wolves, wolf hybrids or coyotes;
C. Any animal that is used or has been bred or trained for fighting,
including but not limited to gamecocks, fighting birds or dogs;
D. Crocodiles, alligators, sharks or piranha;
E. Any types of apes;
F. Lions, tigers, constrictor snakes, bears, elephants or similar types of
wild game;
G. Raccoons or skunks;
H. Any other type of exotic or wild animal which poses a threat or danger
to the public health, welfare, or safety if such animal was able to run
loose;
I. Farm animals such as chickens, roosters, hogs, pigs, cows, goats or
sheep (horses not included) if the farm animal poses a nuisance by
running at large, disturbing the quiet of a neighborhood, or causing an
offensive odor to the surrounding property owners.
§ 20-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-22
1:57

ARTICLE II
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 198]
§ 20-23. Feeding of wildlife prohibited under certain circumstances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed any bird, waterfowl, wildlife or
vermin on any public or private property if such feeding shall cause any of
the following conditions to occur:
§ 20-24. Civil infraction.
Any person who violates this article is responsible for a civil infraction.
§ 20-25. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
A. Cause any bird, waterfowl, wildlife or vermin to congregate on someone
else's property other than the person who is doing the feeding.
B. Cause or result in damage to public property or the private property of
others.
C. Create a danger to or interfere with the public health or welfare,
including but not limited to the accumulation of waste products or
excrement on any property.
§ 20-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-25
1:59
Chapter 29
AUCTION OF ABANDONED PROPERTY
§ 29-1. Request to dispose of lost, unclaimed or abandoned
property.
Whenever the Grosse Ile Township Police Department has recovered any
lost, unclaimed, or abandoned property, including any unclaimed recovered
stolen property, which remains unclaimed for six months after recovery, that
fact shall be reported to the Township Board and a request shall be made of
the Board to dispose of it as provided for in this chapter of the Code.
§ 29-2. Notice of public sale.
If the Township Board approves the request, the Township shall publish a
notice in its official newspaper at least five days before the sale. The notice
shall describe the property to be sold and shall state the time and place of
a public sale at which the lost, unclaimed or abandoned property may be
purchased by the highest bidder. Until the date of the sale, the property may
be claimed at the Township's Police Department. If ownership is proved, the
Department shall turn the property over to the owner and cancel the sale
insofar as the claimed property is concerned.
§ 29-3. Conduct of sale; proceeds.
The Chief of Police or his representatives shall conduct the sale and shall
deposit the proceeds of the sale with the Township Treasurer to the credit
of the Township's general fund.
§ 29-4. Claim of ownership after sale.
If, within six months after the sale, the owner of the property files with
the Township Board a claim for the property and proves his right thereto,
the Township Board shall direct the Treasurer to pay the money or the
amount received for the property to the owner. The Township Board shall
not approve any claims filed more than six months after the sale.
Chapter 34
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Minors — See Ch. 155. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 261.
§ 20-25 GROSSE ILE CODE § 34-1
1:60
§ 34-1. Compliance required.9
No person shall use or operate a bicycle upon any of the public roadways,
sidewalks, or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
or upon or in any other public places or places open to the public in the
Township, except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 34-2. Parental neglect.
It shall be unlawful for the parent of any minor to fail to exercise reasonable
parental control over the minor which results in the minor violating any
section of this chapter.
§ 34-3. Applicable regulations.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a public sidewalk or roadway, or upon
or in other public places or places open to the public, shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle pursuant to the traffic laws of the State of Michigan and
the Township, except as to special regulations set forth in this chapter and
except as to those provisions of said traffic laws which by their nature can
have no reasonable application to bicycle operation and use.
§ 34-4. Restrictions on use and operation.
A. A person operating, using or propelling a bicycle shall not ride other
than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto nor
carry any other person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly
attached and regular seat thereon.
B. No person in the use and operation of a bicycle shall carry more
persons at one time than the number for which said bicycle is designed
and equipped.
C. Every person operating or using a bicycle upon a public roadway shall
ride in single file as near to the right side of the traveled pavement or
other traveled surface of the roadway as is practicable, exercising due
care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same
direction; and, whenever possible, such persons shall ride on the
shoulder of such roadway.
D. Wherever usable paths for bicycles have been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such paths and shall not use the
roadway.
E. No person operating or using a bicycle upon a public roadway shall
pass between lines of traffic, but may pass on the left of traffic moving
in his direction in the case of a two-way street, or on the left or right of
traffic in the case of a one-way street, in an unoccupied lane.
9. Editor's Note: Original Section 16-1, Definition, which immediately preceded this section,
was deleted 7-22-2002.
§ 34-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-4
1:61
§ 34-5. Age restrictions; operation of tricycles.
§ 34-6. Licensing and registration.
The Treasurer's office of the Township is hereby authorized and directed to
issue bicycle licenses which, when issued, shall entitle the licensee, after
securing a corresponding registration card and a license sticker, to operate
the bicycle for which the license has been issued within the Township. The
license record shall be in three parts; one part to be filed with the Police
Department, one part to be given to the owner of the bicycle and one part
to be filed with the Township Treasurer's office. There shall also be issued
to the licensee a license sticker for the bicycle which shall be numbered.
The number shall correspond to the numbers on the registration card and
on the license. The Police Department shall keep a register showing the
date of issue, to whom issued, the number of the sticker and any other
pertinent information regarding the bicycle licenses issued by the Township
Treasurer's office. The bicycle license sticker shall be attached upon the
frame or rear fender of the bicycle and the sticker shall remain in effect
F. Persons may operate or use bicycles on the sidewalks in the Township,
but such persons shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and give
audible signals before overtaking and passing pedestrians.
G. No person riding upon or operating any bicycle shall attach the same or
himself to any vehicle upon a public roadway. No person operating a
bicycle shall operate the same in other than the normal manner for
which the bicycle was designed.
H. Any person dismounting from his bicycle and walking becomes a
pedestrian and must obey the laws concerning pedestrian traffic. Any
person walking a bicycle on the public roadways where no sidewalks or
paths are available must walk on the left side of the roadway facing
oncoming traffic.10
A. No person under the age of seven years shall operate a bicycle upon any
public roadway in the Township but such person under seven years of
age may operate a bicycle upon the public sidewalks, private driveways,
or upon or in other places or places open to the public in the Township
which are not utilized by vehicular traffic. Persons between the ages of
seven and 10 years may operate a bicycle on all public roadways within
the Township where the legal speed limit is 25 miles per hour or less
with parental consent, and may ride on other public roadways when
accompanied by another rider 18 years old or older.
B. No person shall operate a tricycle except upon sidewalks, private
driveways, and upon or in other public places or places open to the
public in the Township provided such places are not utilized by
vehicular traffic.
10.Editor's Note: Original Section 16-6, Bicycle equipment, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 7-22-2002.
§ 34-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 34-6
1:62
until revoked. Whenever a sticker becomes illegible, it shall be replaced by
a new one. No person shall operate a bicycle within the Township without a
legible license sticker attached thereto.
§ 34-7. Bicycle sale.
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any
bicycle to report the sale or transfer to the Police Department by returning
the registration card to them together with the name and address of the
person or the persons to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred within
five days after such sale or transfer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of
the person purchasing the bicycle or to whom a bicycle has been transferred
to apply for a new license of a bicycle within seven days after the sale or
transfer of the bicycle to said person.
§ 34-8. Removal of license sticker.
No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter
the number on the frame of any bicycle license and no person shall remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter any license sticker or registration card during the
time such sticker or card is operative. The Police Department shall have the
right to stamp numbers upon the frames of bicycles upon which no number
can be found or on which the number is illegible or insufficient for the
purposes of identification of said bicycles.
§ 34-9. License fee.
The license fee for each bicycle license shall be as established by the
Township, a schedule of such fees being available in the Township
Treasurer's office.
§ 34-10. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 40
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 44.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 59.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
Flood control — See Ch. 116.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 34-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-10
1:63

ARTICLE I
Property Maintenance and One- and Two-Family Dwelling Codes
[Adopted 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 261]
§ 40-1. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.11
The 1996 BOCA National Property Maintenance Code as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators (BOCA) International, Inc., is
hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Township of
Grosse Ile for the control of buildings and structures, and each and all of
the regulations of the 1996 BOCA Property Maintenance Code are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part thereof as if fully set out further
herein. Printed copies of the Property Maintenance Code are on file in the
Township's Department of Community Development and are available for
inspection and/or purchase by the public. Any violation of this code shall be
considered a municipal civil infraction.
§ 40-2. Adoption of One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code.
The CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, 1995 edition, as published
by the Council of American Building Officials, is hereby adopted as the
Township One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code for the Township of Grosse
Ile to provide minimum standards for the protection of the owners and
occupants of residential buildings, and each and all of the regulations of
the One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code of the 1995 edition are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part thereof as if fully set out further
herein. Printed copies of the One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code are on file
in the Township's Department of Community Development and are available
for inspection and/or purchase by the public. Any violation of this code shall
be considered a municipal civil infraction.
§ 40-3. References in codes. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Any reference contained in such codes to the name of a municipality shall
mean or refer to the Township of Grosse Ile, County of Wayne, State of
Michigan; any references therein to the word "state" shall mean the State
of Michigan; any references therein to local ordinances shall mean or refer
to the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code or One- and Two-Family
Dwelling Code in each respective code of the Township of Grosse Ile and
other ordinances of the Township.
§ 40-4. Purpose.
This article is deemed necessary for the health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens of the Township of Grosse Ile.
11.Editor's Note: Original Section 1, Adoption of the 1996 National Electrical Code with
technical amendments approved by the Reciprocal Electrical Council, Inc., which
immediately preceded this section, was deleted 7-22-2002.
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-5
1:65
§ 40-5. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 40-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 40-5
1:66
ARTICLE II
Building, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes
[Adopted 3-8-1999 by Ord. No. 260]
§ 40-6. Agency designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Building, Mechanical and
Plumbing Codes, in accordance with Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972,
as amended, the Building Official of the Township of Grosse Ile is hereby
designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of
the Township of Grosse Ile under Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972,
as amended, State of Michigan. The Township of Grosse Ile assumes
responsibilities for the administration and enforcement of said Act
throughout its corporate limits.
§ 40-7. Permit fees.
Fees for permits to be obtained under the Township's Building, Mechanical
and Plumbing Codes shall be as established by the Township Board and
shall be posted or made available at the Township's Department of
Community Development.
§ 40-8. References in codes.
Any reference contained in such codes to the name of a municipality shall
mean or refer to the Township of Grosse Ile, Wayne County, State of
Michigan; any references therein to the word "state" shall mean the State
of Michigan; any references therein to local ordinances shall mean or refer
to the provisions of the Building, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes of the
Township of Grosse Ile and other ordinances of the Township. Printed copies
of the Building Code, Mechanical Code and Plumbing Code are on file in the
Township's Department of Community Development and are available for
inspection and/or purchase by the public.
§ 40-9. Purpose.
This article is deemed necessary for the health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens of the Township of Grosse Ile. Any violation of this code shall
be considered a municipal civil infraction.
§ 40-10. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 40-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-10
1:67

ARTICLE III
Electrical Code
[Adopted 4-7-2001 by Ord. No. 300]
§ 40-11. Agency designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Electrical Code, in accordance
with Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of
the Township of Grosse Ile is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to
discharge the responsibilities of the Township of Grosse Ile under Act 230
of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The Township of
Grosse Ile assumes responsibilities for the administration and enforcement
of said Act throughout its corporate limits.
§ 40-12. Licensing authority.
The Township of Grosse Ile is rescinding the Reciprocal Electrical Council
Inc. as the licensing authority and referring all licensing to the State
Electrical Licensing Agency.
§ 40-13. Permit fees.
Fees for permits to be obtained under the Township's Electrical Code shall
be as established by the Township Board and shall be posted or made
available at the Township's Department of Community Development.
§ 40-14. References in codes.
Any reference contained in such Codes to the name of a municipality
shall mean or refer to the Township of Grosse Ile, Wayne County, State of
Michigan; any references therein to the word "state" shall mean the State
of Michigan; any references therein to local ordinances shall mean or refer
to the provisions of the Electrical Code of the Township of Grosse Ile and
other ordinances of the Township. Printed copies of the electrical code are
on file in the Township's Department of Community Development and are
available for inspection and/or purchase by the public.
§ 40-15. Purpose.
This article is deemed necessary for the health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens of the Township of Grosse Ile. Any violation of this code shall
be considered a municipal civil infraction.
§ 40-16. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 40-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-16
1:69
Chapter 44
BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
Nuisances — See Ch. 167.
§ 44-1. Statutory authority.
The provisions of this chapter of the Grosse Ile Township Code are
authorized pursuant to the provisions contained in MCLA § 125.538 et seq.,
as amended.
§ 44-2. Classification as dangerous building.
For purposes of this chapter, a dangerous building shall mean any building
or structure that has one or more of the following defects, or is in one or
more of the following conditions:
A. A door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit does not
conform to the approved Fire Code12 of the Township of Grosse Ile in
which the building or structure is located.
B. A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood or
other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the building or
structure is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and
does not meet the minimum requirements of the Housing Law of
Michigan, as amended, or the Building Code13 of the Township of
Grosse Ile for a new building or structure, purpose, or location.
C. A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become detached or
dislodged, or collapse and injure persons or damage property.
D. A portion of the building or structure has settled to such an extent that
walls or other structural portions of the building or structure have
materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of a new
construction by the Housing Law of Michigan, as amended, or the
Building Code of the Township of Grosse Ile in which the building or
structure is located.
E. The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure, because
of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the removal
or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support,
or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Fire Prevention.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
§ 40-16 GROSSE ILE CODE § 44-2
1:70
portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure
is likely to fall or give way.
F. The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure, is
manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
G. The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, or flood, or is
dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to
children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, or
becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or
enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a
nuisance or an unlawful or immoral act.
H. A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation,
decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise is
unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the
Health Officer determines is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is
likely to injure the health, safety, or general welfare of people living in
the dwelling.
I. A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and open at door or
window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers.
J. A building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180
consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale,
lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under Article 25 of the
Occupational Code, Act No. 299 of the Public Acts of 1980, being
§§ 339.2501 to 339.2515 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. For purposes
of this subsection, "building or structure" includes but is not limited to a
commercial building or structure. This subsection does not apply to
either of the following:
(1) A building or structure as to which the owner or agent does both of
the following:
(a) Notifies a local law enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction
the building or structure is located that the building or
structure will remain unoccupied for a period of 180
consecutive days. The notice shall be given to the local law
enforcement agency by the owner or agent not more than 30
days after the building or structure becomes unoccupied.
(b) Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and
adjoining grounds in accordance with the Housing Law of
Michigan, as amended, or the Building Code14 of the Township
of Grosse Ile in which the building or structure is located.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
§ 44-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-2
1:71
§ 44-3. Dangerous buildings prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or maintain any building,
structure, or dwelling or part thereof which is a dangerous building as
defined in this chapter of the Grosse Ile Township Code.
§ 44-4. Notice of dangerous building.
If a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building, the Building
Inspector for the Township shall issue a notice, in writing, of the dangerous
and unsafe condition of the building or structure. The notice shall be served
on the owner, agent, or lessee that is registered with the Township. If an
owner, agent, or lessee is not registered with the Township, the notice shall
be served on each owner of or party in interest in the building or structure
in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment
records.
§ 44-5. Service of notice.
The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom
the notice is directed, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown
on the tax records. If a notice is served on a person by certified mail, a copy
of the notice shall also be posted on a conspicuous part of the building or
structure. The notice shall be served upon the owner or party in interest at
least 10 days before the date of the hearing included in the notice.
§ 44-6. Contents of notice.
The notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing on whether the
building or structure is a dangerous building. The person to whom the
notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause at the hearing
why the hearing officer should not order the building or structure to be
demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained.
§ 44-7. Appointment of hearing officer.
The hearing officer shall be appointed by the Township Supervisor to serve
at his or her pleasure. The hearing officer shall be a person who has
(2) A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for
a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies a
local law enforcement agency in whose jurisdiction the dwelling is
located that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180
consecutive days or more each year. An owner who has given the
notice prescribed by this subsection shall notify the law
enforcement agency not more than 30 days after the dwelling no
longer qualifies for this exception. As used in this subsection,
"secondary dwelling" means a dwelling such as a vacation home,
hunting cabin, or summer home that is occupied by the owner or a
member of the owner's family during part of a year.
§ 44-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 44-7
1:72
expertise in housing matters, including, but not limited to, an engineer,
architect, building contractor, building inspector, or member of a
community housing organization. An employee of the Township shall not be
appointed as hearing officer.
§ 44-8. Filing of notice.
The Building Inspector shall file a copy of the notice of the dangerous and
unsafe condition of any building or structure with the hearing officer.
§ 44-9. Testimony at hearing.
At the hearing required by this chapter, the hearing officer shall take the
testimony of the Township's Building Inspector, the owner of the property,
and any interested party.
§ 44-10. Decision and order.
Not more than five days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer
shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the
building or structure demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly
maintained. If the hearing officer determines that the building or structure
should be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained, the
hearing officer shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent,
or lessee to comply with the order. If the building is a dangerous building
under § 44-2J, the order may require the owner or agent to maintain the
exterior of the building and adjoining grounds owned by the owner of the
building including, but not limited to, the maintenance of lawns, trees and
shrubs.
§ 44-11. Service of order.
A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on
each owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in this chapter for
service of the notice of the dangerous, unsafe condition of the building or
structure.
§ 44-12. Failure to appear or comply.
If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear, or neglects or refuses to comply
with the order issued under § 44-10, the hearing officer shall file a report of
the findings and a copy of the order with the Township Board not more than
five days after noncompliance by the owner, agent, or lessee, and request
that necessary action be taken to enforce the order.
§ 44-13. Review by Township Board.
The Township Board of the Township of Grosse Ile shall fix a date not less
than 30 days after the hearing described in § 44-9 for a hearing on the
findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice to the owner,
agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in this chapter for service of the
§ 44-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-13
1:73
notice of the dangerous, unsafe condition of the building or structure. At
the hearing, the owner, agent, or lessee shall be given the opportunity to
show cause why the order should not be enforced. The Township Board
shall either approve, disapprove, or modify the order. If the Township Board
approves or modifies the order, the Township Board shall take all necessary
action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner,
agent, or lessee shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date
of hearing as set forth in this section. In the case of an order of demolition,
if the Township Board determines that the building or structure has been
substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood, or other natural disaster, and
the cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state
equalized value of the building or structure, the owner, agent, or lessee
shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of
the hearing under this section.
§ 44-14. Cost of demolition; lien for costs.
The cost of the demolition or making the building or structure safe, or of
maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining
the building or structure, incurred by the Township to bring the property
into conformance with this chapter shall be reimbursed to the Township by
the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears. The
owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last
local tax assessment records shall be notified by the Assessor of the amount
of the cost of demolition, of making the building safe, or maintaining the
exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or
structure, by first class mail at the address shown on the records of the
Township. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the costs within 30
days after mailing by the Assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost,
the Township shall have a lien for the cost incurred by the Township to
bring the property into conformance with the chapter. The lien shall not
take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided by
law. A lien provided for in this section does not have priority over previously
filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the costs shall be
collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens
under the General Property Tax Act, Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893,
being §§ 211.1 to 211.157 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended.
§ 44-15. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
§ 44-16. Board of Appeals.
A. The Township Board may establish a Board of Appeals to hear all of the
cases and carry out all of the duties of the Township Board described in
this chapter. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Township
Board of the Township and shall consist of the following members:
§ 44-13 GROSSE ILE CODE § 44-16
1:74
§ 44-17. Judicial appeal and review.
An owner or party in interest aggrieved by any final decision or order of the
Township Board, or the Board of Appeals (if one is appointed), may appeal
the decision or order to the Circuit Court by filing a petition for an order of
superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision.
(1) A building contractor.
(2) A registered architect or engineer.
(3) Two members of the general public.
(4) An individual registered as a building official, plan reviewer or
inspector under the Building Officials and Inspectors Registration
Act, Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of 1986, being §§ 338.2301 to
338.2313 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. The
individual may be an employee of the Township of Grosse Ile.
B. The Board of Appeals members shall be appointed for three years;
except that, of the members first appointed, two members shall serve
for one year, two members shall serve for two years, and one member
shall serve for three years. A vacancy created other than by expiration
of a term shall be filled for the balance of the unexpired term in the
same manner as the original appointment. A member may be
reappointed for additional terms. The Board of Appeals annually shall
elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, and other officers that the Board
considers necessary. A majority of the Board of Appeals members
appointed and serving constitutes a quorum. Final action of the Board
of Appeals shall be only by affirmative vote of a majority of the Board
members appointed and serving. The Township Board shall fix the
amount of any per diem compensation provided to the members of the
Board of Appeals. Expenses of the Board of Appeals incurred in the
performance of official duties may be reimbursed as provided by law for
employees of the Township Board. A meeting of the Board of Appeals
shall be held pursuant to the Open Meetings Act, Act No. 267 of the
Public Acts of 1976, being §§ 15.261 to 15.275 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws, as amended. Public notice of the time, date, and place
of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by the Open
Meetings Act. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or
retained by the Board of Appeals in the performance of an official
function shall be made available to the public pursuant to the Freedom
of Information Act, No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, being §§ 15.231
to 15.246 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended.
§ 44-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-17
1:75
Chapter 49
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
§ 49-1. Display of numbers required.
It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house, structure,
business, or other building to have placed thereon, in a place visible from
the street, figures at least three inches high showing the number of the
address assigned for that particular location and, if the owner or the
occupant of the property has a mailbox in the front of their location, then
the address as required by this chapter must also be affixed on both sides
of the mailbox or post supporting the mailbox with reflective numbers
measuring at least one inch in height.
§ 49-2. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 53
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
§ 53-1. Open fires prohibited; exemptions. [Amended 5-13-1991 by
Ord. No. 185]
A person shall not ignite or cause or permit to be ignited, allow or maintain
an open fire. Except as hereinafter provided, the following types of open
fires are exempt from the prohibition of this section, provided such fires
are conducted in accordance with the conditions specified by the Township
and are not injurious to human health, safety or welfare, animal life, or
property, or unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life
or property, or violate any other section of this chapter:
A. For the control of crop disease when the county agricultural agent
declares that this is the only means available, provided the county
agricultural agent has issued a permit for such burning;
§ 44-17 GROSSE ILE CODE § 53-1
1:76
§ 53-2. Temporary abatement of open fire exemptions.
If the Township Fire Chief determines that climatic and/or other conditions
have created a situation of extreme fire hazard, the Fire Chief may issue an
order temporarily abating the open fire exceptions contained in § 53-1. Such
order shall be published in the official newspaper of the Township, shall be
effective immediately upon its publication, and shall be substantially in the
following form:
NOTICE OF TOTAL BAN ON OPEN FIRES AND OPEN BURNING
WHEREAS, the Township Fire Chief has determined that climatic and/or
other conditions have created a situation of an extreme fire hazard within
the Township; and
WHEREAS, the current conditions are such that any open fires or open
burning is a serious threat to the safety and welfare of persons and
property within the Township;
NOW THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the open fire
exemptions contained in § 53-1 of the Township Code are hereby
temporarily abated until further order of the Township Fire Chief.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that effective immediately there is a total ban
on all open fires and open burning within the Township.
BY ORDER OF THE GROSSE ILE TOWNSHIP FIRE CHIEF.
§ 53-3. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
B. For training firemen or for research in fire prevention, provided the
Township has given prior written approval;
C. For the health, safety and welfare of the community when such fires are
ignited by order of a municipal Fire Department;
D. For the cooking of food for human consumption in a contained
barbecue;
E. For ceremonial or recreational purposes if properly controlled by a
responsible person and the fuel used is limited to dry wood, dry paper
or smokeless fuel, provided the Township Fire Chief or his designee has
issued a permit for such activity; or
F. For warming of workers who work predominantly in the outdoors if the
ambient temperature is lower than 32° F. and the fuel is limited to dry
wood, dry paper or smokeless fuel, provided that fire is contained
within a noncombustible container, provided the Fire Chief or his
designee has issued a permit for such activity.
§ 53-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3
1:77
Chapter 59
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 53-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 53-3
1:78
ARTICLE I
Commercial and Industrial Properties
[Adopted 2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 247]
§ 59-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed:
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Department of
Community Development in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 285,
Zoning, for an approved use of occupancy and which certifies compliance
with the provisions of the codes and ordinances of the Township for
commercial and industrial premises that have been inspected pursuant to
the terms of this article.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY — Any premises which is
used for the purpose of conducting any of the following activities:
commercial, industrial, manufacturing, business office, retail, professional
services, production, wholesale, processing, cleaning, storage, testing,
repair, assembling, fabrication, or any other similar type activity.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit as well as individuals.
It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other
representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word "person"
is used in any section of this article prescribing a penalty or fine, as
to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or
members thereof, and as to corporations, shall include the officers, agents
or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereof.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, including, without
limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use
whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings,
water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents or
anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened,
anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground.
TRANSFER — The sale or conveyance of title to another for consideration,
or the lease of premises to another. A transfer subject to the terms of a
purchase agreement or lease entered into prior to the effective date of this
article is not included in this definition. A renewal or extension of a lease
(which lease is in effect prior to the adoption of this article) between the
same parties is not included in this definition.
§ 59-2. Certificate of occupancy required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer a commercial or
industrial premises or for any person to act as a broker for the transfer
§ 59-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-2
1:79
§ 59-3. Issuance of certificate of occupancy. [Amended 7-22-2002]
of any commercial or industrial premises within the Township which
does not have a current certificate of occupancy.
B. All commercial and industrial premises shall be required to obtain a
certificate of occupancy from the Township at the time of transfer.
A. The Department of Community Development shall issue a certificate of
occupancy only after the commercial or industrial premises have been
inspected and found in compliance with all applicable codes and
ordinances of the Township. The requirements set forth below are in
addition to those requirements set forth in Chapter 285, Zoning.
(1) An inspection report shall be completed by all necessary
departments. The report shall note all violations found at the
commercial or industrial premises.
(2) Correction of violations; escrow.
(a) Before a certificate of occupancy is issued all violations must
be corrected and approved. A conditional certificate of
occupancy may be issued provided funds are escrowed with
the Department of Community Development and no imminent
danger is present to the inhabitants. The escrow amount will
be determined by the Department of Community Development
as 1 1/2 times the estimated costs of repair. All violations and/
or repairs shall be corrected and reinspected within 30 days
(weather permitting) of the issuance of the conditional
certificate of occupancy. If this condition is not satisfied, the
certificate may be revoked. Upon approval of the repairs, the
escrow shall be returned.
(b) If the violations are not corrected within the thirty-day period,
the Township has the right and authorization to have said
violations corrected with the escrow funds and any additional
funds required to correct said violations shall be assessed as a
lien against the real property. An escrow agreement signed by
both the person occupying the premises and the person owning
the premises shall be executed at the time of placing money in
escrow. All signatures must be notarized. The escrowed funds
may be used to reimburse the Township for any legal costs in
order to enforce the provisions of this article.
(3) If the inspection reports indicate a dangerous or hazardous
condition and the premises are deemed to constitute an imminent
danger to the health or safety of any person, the Department of
Community Development may order the dangerous or hazardous
condition to be corrected immediately and may limit or prohibit
occupancy of the premises where necessary. If the Department of
Community Development finds unusual or questionable conditions,
§ 59-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 59-3
1:80
§ 59-4. Disclaimer of liability by Township.
§ 59-5. Application and fee. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Any person that is going to transfer a commercial or industrial premises
must file an application, prior to the transfer, with the Department of
Community Development for the purpose of setting up an inspection of
the commercial or industrial premises. The fee for the application and
inspection shall be set by resolution of the Township Board.
it may require the owner/transferee of the premises to supply the
Department with a report from a qualified inspection agency. All
reports shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer
of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. All costs
related to the reports are to be assumed by the owner/transferee.
(4) If a premises is inspected because of an expected transfer and the
transfer does not occur, the inspection report is valid for a sixmonth
period.
(5) Where there is a multiple occupancy in a commercial or industrial
premises, the change of any occupancy will require an inspection.
However, if the building has been completely inspected and all
violations corrected and a certificate of occupancy issued, only the
area to be occupied by the new transferee and the exterior of the
building need be inspected.
B. The Building Official may revoke a certificate of occupancy for a
violation of any code, ordinance, rule or regulation of the Township.
A. A certificate of occupancy is not a warranty or guarantee that there are
no defects in the commercial or industrial property and the Township
shall not be held responsible for defects or violations not noted in the
inspection report.
B. The inspection of the land use, exterior posture and interior accessories
of the structure is limited to visual inspection only. The Township does
not guarantee or approve by inference any latent structural or
mechanical defects thereto, or such other items that were not apparent
to the Township inspectors by such visual inspection.
C. Further, potential health impacts from asbestos, carbon dioxide, lead,
carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, nitrogen dioxide, radon, particulates,
water vapor, or other chemicals, vapors, fumes or inspects are not a
part of the Township's inspection.
D. The Township shall not assume any liability to any person by reason of
the inspection required by this article or the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
§ 59-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-6
1:81
§ 59-6. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 59-6 GROSSE ILE CODE § 59-6
1:82
Chapter 67
COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Committees — See Ch. 68.
§ 59-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-6
1:83

ARTICLE I
General Commission Guidelines
§ 67-1. General provisions.
The following regulations shall apply to all Township commissions:
A. Relationship to Township Board.
(1) Each Township commission is a part of the administration of the
Township, not an independent agency. In making decisions,
commissions have only those powers and authorities delegated to
them by the Board. A commission shall make its decisions within
such authority granted to it by the Township Board. The existence
of potential lawsuits with respect to commission conduct or action
shall be reported to the Township Board when the matter first
comes to the attention of the commission.
(2) There shall be a commission chairperson who shall be appointed
annually by the Township Board from among the members of the
commission; provided, however, that the Planning Commission
Chairperson shall be selected in accordance with MCL § 125.325.
No member of the Township Board shall serve as permanent
commission chairperson. A commission may select a vice
chairperson, secretary, and/or such other officers from its
membership as it deems necessary for its proper operation.
[Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. 04-03, 1-23-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-01]
(3) The commission chairman shall be the chief executive officer of the
commission and shall preside over all commission meetings. The
vice chairman shall assist the chairman and shall preside over
commission meetings in the absence of the chairman. The
secretary shall record the minutes of all commission meetings and
shall have charge of commission records. The minutes of each
meeting shall, as a minimum, show the date, time, place, members
present, members absent, any decisions made at a meeting open to
the public and the purpose or purposes for which a closed session
was held. The minutes shall include all roll call votes taken at the
meeting. Proposed minutes shall be available for public inspection
not more than eight business days after the meeting to which the
minutes refer and approved minutes shall be available for public
inspection not later than five business days after the meeting at
which the minutes are approved. The minutes shall, in all regards,
comply with the Open Meetings Act, being MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
(4) Each commission shall have as one of its members a member of the
Township Board. The Board member shall be a voting member of
the commission unless it is otherwise specifically provided in this
Code that such representative with respect to a particular
commission is a nonvoting member. The Board representative shall
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-1
1:85
be extended all privileges, courtesies, and rights and shall receive
copies of all items forwarded to regular commissioners. In addition
to the normal responsibility of a member of a commission, the
Board member shall have the responsibility of maintaining the
line of communication between the commission and the Township
Board. [Amended 7-22-2002]
(5) Each commission chairman or representative (not an employee)
shall attend special meetings with the Township Board to discuss
commission and intercommission activities as required by the
Board. The Board shall give 24 hours' notice before such a meeting
occurs except in emergency situations.
(6) Each commission shall send its department head or other
representative to the regular board meetings when requested by
the Township Board.
(7) Commission members serve at the pleasure of the Township Board
and may be removed at any time by majority action of the Township
Board, except as otherwise provided by law. Public policy dictates
that the Township Board give serious consideration to the removal
of any commission member who substantially fails, neglects, or
refuses to perform his duties or discharge his responsibilities as a
commission member without sufficient excuse for such action on
the part of the commission member. Township policy further
dictates that the Township Board seriously consider the removal
from office of any commission member who has knowingly and
willfully violated Township policies or who has knowingly and
willfully engaged in any act or conduct which has a detrimental
effect on the successful functioning of the commission of which he
is a member or who cannot work in cooperation with the Township
Board and its general policy guidelines.
(8) Any member of a Township commission who is absent at more than
three consecutive meetings or is absent in excess of 25% or more of
the official meetings of the commission in any one fiscal year may
be dismissed from membership on the commission at the discretion
of the Township Board or as otherwise provided by law.
(9) Commissions shall submit to the Township Budget Director an
annual report of the financial and other activities of the commission
during the prior fiscal year in sufficient time for inclusion in the
annual report of the Township and as otherwise necessary to
comply with and satisfy the requirements of the Michigan Uniform
Budgeting and Accounting Act (MCLA § 141.421 et seq.)
B. Relationship to the public.
(1) All meetings of commissions shall be open to the public and shall in
all respects comply with the Michigan Open Meetings Act (MCLA
§ 15.621 et seq.). At the beginning of each fiscal year of the
§ 67-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-1
1:86
Township each commission shall notify the Township Administrator
of the dates and times of their regular meetings for the ensuing
year. The Township Administrator shall prominently post in the
Township Hall and in the public building in which the commission
meetings are to be held and shall publish once for the fiscal year
in the official newspaper a public notice of the schedule of regular
meetings of the commission including the dates, the time, and
place of such meetings. Commissions shall hold at least one regular
meeting each quarter. Notice of any meeting giving the date, time
and place of such meeting, whether a special, regular or
rescheduled meeting, shall be posted prominently in the Township
Hall and in the public building in which such meeting is to be held
at least 18 hours prior to the time of the proposed meeting. It
shall be the responsibility of the commission chairman to notify the
Township Administrator of any special, rescheduled or emergency
meetings in sufficient time to allow the Administrator to comply
with the Michigan Open Meetings Act. A majority of the
membership of a commission present at a commission meeting
shall constitute a quorum for the conducting of the commission's
business. [Amended 7-22-2002]
(2) Closed or emergency meetings may be held only for the purposes
and in the manner provided for under the Michigan Open Meetings
Act of 1976 (1976 P.A. 276). Copies of the Act have been provided
to commissions and are available at the Township Attorney for
opinion.
(3) Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by three
members of the commission. Written notice of a special meeting
must be given to each commission member at least 18 hours prior
to the meeting and must state the purposes of such meeting. Any
matter not included in such notice may not be acted upon at any
special meeting unless all commission members are present at the
meeting and unanimously consent to such matter being acted upon
at the meeting.
(4) Agenda shall be posted for the public at least 18 hours prior to
meetings and copies shall be delivered to the Township Clerk.
(5) Minutes shall be kept of meetings and copies delivered to the
Township Clerk within the time periods set forth in § 67-1A(3)
above.
C. Conflict of interest.
(1) A member of a commission who deems that he has a pecuniary
interest in any matter brought before the commission shall disclose
his interest to the commission prior to the commission taking a
vote, if any, with respect to the matter. Such commission member
shall not vote on any such matter in which he has deemed himself
to have a pecuniary interest after disclosure of such fact.
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-1
1:87
§ 67-2. Commission purchases.
The following purchasing regulations shall apply to all Township
commissions:
(2) Commissioners shall not accept favors, the purpose of which could
be considered as directly or indirectly influencing a commission
decision.
D. Personnel.
(1) All commission employees are employees of Grosse Ile Township.
The Township Board has established overall comprehensive
personnel policies which include wage and fringe benefits and
which apply to all Township employees, including personnel hired
and who work for commissions. Personnel hired and who work for
commissions shall follow the comprehensive personnel policies
established by the Township Board with respect to commission
employees and personnel. The Township Board shall establish
wages, hours and all other conditions of employment with respect
to all personnel hired by commissions. Collective bargaining,
where applicable, will be conducted through representatives
appointed by the Township Board. Commissions shall make
recommendations to the Township Board as to wages, hours, and
conditions of employment of commission employees and personnel
and with respect to the contents of proposed collective bargaining
agreements, where applicable. [Amended 7-22-2002]
(2) Individuals to be hired by commissions do not have to have prior
Township Board approval unless specifically provided otherwise in
the Grosse Ile Township Code, provided, however, that the hiring of
a department head shall always require prior approval by the
Township Board.
(3) Nepotism within a department shall be avoided unless the
Township Board gives prior approval.
(4) In case of an emergency, the Township Supervisor may order any or
all commission employees, personnel and equipment to assist for
whatever time period the Supervisor deems necessary. A complete
log of this activity will be kept and the Township Board shall rule on
compensation to the Commission, if any.
(5) Hiring and termination of commission personnel and employees
shall be in accordance with comprehensive personnel policies
established by the Township Board.
A. Joint purchases with the general Township and/or commissions shall be
considered where economically feasible and practical.
B. Bid procedure.
§ 67-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-2
1:88
(1) Zero to $2,500. A commission shall have the right to make such
purchases and to obtain such work to be done as is necessary for
the proper operation, maintenance, repair, and to obtain necessary
improvements for the departments, facilities, and areas placed
under their supervision. Where the amount contemplated to be
spent is $2,500 or less, the commission may expend such funds
without the necessity of soliciting competitive bids or obtaining
public bids prior to expenditure of those funds. The commission, if
it desires, may delegate this responsibility to the department head
or retain that responsibility within the commission itself. With
respect to the expenditures of funds falling within this category, it
is still the responsibility of the commission or department head
making such purchase or expending such funds to be reasonably
assured that the purchase price to be paid is reasonable in
relationship to the item to be purchased or the services to be
secured.
(2) Two thousand five hundred dollars to $5,000:
(a) Whenever the amount proposed to be expended exceeds
$2,500 up to and including the sum of $5,000, written
competitive bids shall be obtained prior to expenditure of those
funds. "Written competitive bids" does not mean that there has
to be an advertisement placed in a newspaper soliciting bids.
The obtaining of written bids of various parties who would
reasonably be expected to be interested in submitting such
bids with respect to the proposed expenditures is sufficient to
meet the competitive bid requirement. It is recognized that
oftentimes the services sought or the product proposed to be
purchased is of a specialized nature so that the seeking of
written competitive bids is an unnecessary or useless act. In
such event a written bid should be sought from that person or
persons who can reasonably be expected to provide the
specialized service or product sought.
(b) Caution is urged in reducing or restricting the seeking of
competitive bids under the theory that the items or service
sought is specialized. Wherever possible, written competitive
bids are to be actively sought especially where the amount
involved moves closer to the $5,000 limit.
(c) The commission may retain this right within itself or delegate
all or any portion thereof to its department head. Because the
majority of purchases will probably fall within this category,
the commission, if it decides to delegate this responsibility to
the department head, should set up internal guidelines for the
department heads to operate under with respect to seeking
written bids within this category.
(3) Where any purchase or contract is contemplated to exceed the sum
of $5,000, formal public bids shall be solicited. In this situation, an
§ 67-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-2
1:89
advertisement should be placed in the Township's official
newspaper soliciting formal sealed bids for the proposed item to
be purchased or services to be performed. Bids will be opened in
public at the time and place established in the invitation to bid.
Record of all bids will be maintained and a resume of the bids will
be available on request.
(4) No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the
requirements of this section.
(5) It is recognized that there may occur an emergency situation where
to follow the foregoing bid procedure would either cause or
increase the potentiality of damage to Township properties or
facilities or would cause or would increase the danger to Township
personnel or to the public at large or would in general cause or
maintain a situation which would be injurious to the public health,
safety and general welfare. Under such situations, the commission
could bypass the bid procedure in order to secure services or such
other items needed to eliminate or arrest the situation. The
commission can delegate by internal policy this power to the
commission chairman for purposes of expediency in meeting the
particular situation. Great caution is urged in making a decision to
bypass the bidding procedures and such bypass should only be
used when to follow the bid procedure would result in the creation
or the increasing of the situations described previously herein. This
bypass procedure ought to be used only in cases of true
emergencies and not for purposes of convenience.
(6) Whenever written competitive bids are to be obtained or whenever
there is an advertisement for the submission of formal bids, the
parties from whom the bids are to be sought ought to be informed
that the commission at all times reserves the right to reject any and
all bids and to accept or adopt any bids which it finds to be in the
best interests of the commission and the Township even if that bid
is not the lowest bid submitted. The requiring of a bid bond to be
submitted or a certified check with the bid is a matter of discretion
and most certainly it ought to be considered when formal bids are
sought through published advertisements inviting or soliciting bids
for a particular project.
(7) Michigan statutes (P.A. 351 of the Public Acts of 1972) require that
before any contract exceeding $50,000 for the construction,
alteration, or repair of any public building or public work or
improvement of the Township is awarded, the proposed contractor
has to furnish, at his own cost, to the Township a performance bond
with respect to the project and a material and labor bond which
basically covers materials furnished and subcontractor work
performed on the job, such bonds to be in the full amount of the
project cost. This provision is mandatory with respect to projects
which are $50,000 or in excess thereof and bid solicitation
advertisements should indicate that such bonds will be required.
§ 67-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-2
1:90
§ 67-3. Fiscal regulations.
The following fiscal regulations shall apply to all Township Commissions:
While such provisions are not mandatory for projects under
$50,000, the commission should consider whether or not in a
particular situation a performance and material labor bond ought
to be required or not.
(8) Professional services need not be bid. Unless prior approval of the
Township Board to the contrary is obtained, commissions shall
utilize, when necessary, the duly appointed Township attorney,
planner, engineer, architect, bond counsel, and certified public
accountant.
A. When a commission budget has been adopted by the Township Board, a
commission shall make no amendments or expenditures which would
cause a deficit in that budget unless prior approval of any such
proposed action is obtained first from the Township Board. Any capital
expenditures by a commission of $25,000 or more must be approved
prior to the expenditure by the Township Board.
B. All commissions shall use the State of Michigan Chart of Accounts.
Follow and otherwise comply with the Uniform Budgeting and
Accounting Act (P.A. 1978, No. 621).
C. Fiscal years of commissions shall coincide with the Township's fiscal
year. Annual audits of the financial affairs of the commissions shall be
made by the Township.
D. Commissions shall notify the Township Treasurer of funds they desire to
invest, who shall invest such funds on behalf of such commissions.
E. Commissions shall work directly with the Township Budget Director
with regard to their respective budgets in sufficient manner to comply
with the requirements of the Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act
(P.A. 1978, No. 621), as amended from time to time.
F. Issuance of commission checks, disbursement of funds, bank deposits
and withdrawals, and, in general, the conducting of the financial affairs
of the commissions shall be in accordance with rules of procedure
established by the Township Treasurer as to manner, form and content.
G. Commissions in themselves have no authority to borrow monies or to
issue any notes or other instruments of obligation. Commissions have
no authority to mortgage, sell, pledge, encumber or otherwise dispose
of Township or commission property. Commissions have no authority to
purchase real property. Prior approval of the Township Board must be
obtained for any such commission action.
§ 67-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-3
1:91

ARTICLE II
Airport Commerce Park Commission
[Added 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 05-11]
§ 67-4. Establishment; membership and terms.
§ 67-5. Compensation; vacancies.
§ 67-6. Authority.
The Commission is created pursuant to Section 133 of the Michigan
Aeronautics Code and Chapter 67, Article I, General Commission
Guidelines, of the Grosse Ile Township Municipal Code, and is vested with
the authority for the construction, enlargement, improvement,
maintenance, equipment, operation, and regulation of the Grosse Ile Airport
and the Commerce Park.
§ 67-7. Duties.
The Commission shall exercise on behalf of the Township the general
powers and authorities conferred upon the Township pursuant to Section
133 of the Michigan Aeronautics Code with respect to the Grosse Ile
A. An Airport Commerce Park Commission ("Commission") for the
Township of Grosse Ile is established. The Commission shall consist of
seven residents of the Township to be appointed by the Township Board,
one of which shall be a member of the Township Board. Terms of office
of the Commissioners shall be for three years, ending on April 3 in the
years of expirations, except for the Township Board member whose
term shall be limited to the time he or she is a member of the Township
Board.
B. Each member appointed to the Commission shall reside in Grosse Ile
Township, Michigan.
C. If any member, for any reason, resigns or relinquishes his or her
membership on the Commission, a replacement shall be appointed by
the Township Board to fill the vacancy for the remainder of that
unexpired term.
D. Any member of a Township Commission who is absent from more than
three consecutive meetings or is absent from in excess of 25% or more
of the official meetings of the Commission in any one fiscal year may be
dismissed from membership on the Commission at the discretion of the
Township Board or as otherwise provided by law.
A. Members of the Commission shall receive such compensation as may be
determined by the Township Board.
B. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled by the Township Board for
the unexpired term of the Commissioner creating the vacancy.
§ 67-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-7
1:93
Township Municipal Airport, and includes the facilities associated with the
industrial park area and the business operations of the Airport. These
duties shall include the following by way of illustration and not by way of
limitation. The Commission:
A. Shall consult and cooperate with the Township Board, the Planning
Commission, the Police Department, the Fire Department, the
Department of Public Services and other Township officials, and any
conflict between the Commission and such other commissions,
departments, boards and officials shall be resolved by the Township
Board, whose decision shall be final.
B. Shall plan, construct, improve, operate and maintain and promote the
economic development of the Grosse Ile Township Commerce Park and
its facilities, including the building and grounds within the Airport
Commerce Park and the Landing Area of the Grosse Ile Municipal
Airport.
C. Shall represent the Township in all economic, financial, and
development matters affecting the interests of the Grosse Ile Municipal
Airport and Commerce Park.
D. May with the prior approval of the Township Board, in the name of the
Township, take and hold by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or otherwise
such real and personal properties as may be needed for carrying out the
intents and purposes for which it has been established.
E. May lease any of the buildings or land under its control, in conformity
with the master deed of the Township as approved by the Township
Board; provided, however, that no occupancy or use shall be permitted
until the Township has issued an appropriate certificate of occupancy.
F. May make contracts necessary to carry out its purposes and duties. Any
contract, not involving a capital expenditure, which involves the
expenditure of funds in excess of $5,000, must receive prior approval of
the Township Board.
G. Shall recommend ordinances and amendments to the Township Board
involving Grosse Ile Municipal Airport and Airport Commerce Park and
its facilities.
H. Shall adopt, with the approval of the Township Board, rules and
regulations governing the operation of Airport Commerce Park and its
facilities to protect the public health, safety and welfare arising from
operation of the Grosse Ile Municipal Airport and Airport Commerce
Park with the Township.
I. May not change geographical boundaries of the Airport Commerce Park
without the approval of the Township Board. Requests shall be
submitted to the Board for final approval.
§ 67-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-7
1:94
J. Shall recommend approval of the Grosse Ile Municipal Airport and
Commerce Park five-year plan and annual budget to the Township
Board.
K. Shall recommend and review, including but not limited to, capital
improvements, grant applications, special events, and the business
aspects of a fixed base operator and T-hangars.
§ 67-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-7
1:95

ARTICLE III
Police Commission
§ 67-8. Establishment; membership and terms.
§ 67-9. Compensation and vacancies.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but shall
be entitled to actual and necessary expenses approved by the Township
Board incurred in the performance of official duties. Vacancies on the
Commission shall be filled by the Township Board for the unexpired term of
the Commissioner creating the vacancy.
§ 67-10. Duties. [Amended 7-22-2002]
The Police Commission is delegated and shall exercise the following
authority, powers, duties and responsibilities with respect to the operation
of the Grosse Ile Police Department; provided, however, that the following
delegated authority, powers, duties and responsibilities shall be specified
and shall contain no implied power not otherwise specified unless a
following specific grant of power specifically provides for the existence
of such implied power as is reasonably necessary for the exercise of the
specifically delegated power:
A. A Police Commission for the Township of Grosse Ile is established. The
Commission shall consist of five residents of the Township to be
appointed by the Township Board, one of which shall be a member of
the Township Board. Terms of office of Police Commissioners shall be
for six years, ending on April 3 in the year of expiration, except for the
Township Board member whose term shall be limited to the time he or
she is a member of the Township Board, provided, however, that
nothing herein shall prohibit the Township Board from removing and/or
replacing the Township Board member from time to time during his or
her tenure of office on the Township Board.
B. No member of the Police Commission shall be a member of the Police
Department of the Township.
A. The Police Commission is delegated the responsibility of the overall and
continuous development of the proficiency and professionalism of the
Police Department of the Township of Grosse Ile and of the individual
members thereof through the development, planning and institution of
public safety and educational programs; through the development,
planning and institution of educational training and other programs
within the Township's Police Department which are designed to develop
the overall capabilities and professionalism of the Department and its
personnel; and through the development, planning and institution of
Departmental procedures designed to develop the overall efficiency of
the Department and of its individual members. The Commission shall
continually analyze and determine the current needs of the Police
§ 67-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-10
1:97
Department and shall communicate such information to the Township
Board.
B. Rules and regulations governing the operation of the Police Department
and establishing the standards of the conduct and work performance of
members of the Police Department shall be prepared, modified and
amended in concert with the Chief of Police. Such rules and regulations
(including proposed amendments thereto) shall be submitted by the
Township Administrator to the Police Commission for its approval. After
the rules and regulations have been approved by the Police Commission
they shall be submitted to the Township Board for final approval. Upon
adoption by the Township Board, such rules and regulations shall be the
rules and regulations of and which shall govern the operation of the
Township's Police Department and the conduct and work performance
of the members thereof.
C. The Police Commission is delegated the responsibility for and shall
prepare and submit to the Township Board an organizational structure
for the Township's Police Department, detailing all positions within the
Department and the duties and the responsibilities associated with
each such position. Upon adoption by the Township Board, such
organizational structure shall be the organizational structure of the
Township's Police Department and the Commission shall thereafter
periodically review such organizational structure and make
recommendations for additions, modifications, and deletions, if any,
with respect thereto to the Township Board for possible action thereon.
The Chairman of the Commission with respect to the organizational
structure of the Police Department shall be submitted to the Township
Board.
D. The Police Commission is delegated the authority to hire personnel for
available positions within the organizational structure of the Township's
Police Department; provided, however, that the appointment or
promotion of all other officers of the Township's Police Department
above the rank of sergeant shall be by the Township Board after
recommendation thereon has been received by the Township Board
from the Police Commission with respect to such appointment or
promotion.
E. The Police Commission shall have and is delegated the power and
authority to reprimand, discipline, suspend, demote or discharge any
member of the Township's Police Department after hearing thereon,
provided that involving the demotion or discharge of any member of the
Township's Police Department shall require Township Board approval
prior to implementation thereof and shall, in all respects, be subject to
the terms of the then-existing collective bargaining agreements
between the Township and the Police Officers Associations.
§ 67-10 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-10
1:98
ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)15
§ 67-11. (Reserved)
§ 67-12. (Reserved)
§ 67-13. (Reserved)
15.Editor’s Note: Former Art. IV, Public Works Commission, was removed from the Code
pursuant to the provisions of Ord. No. 05-02.5, adopted 3-14-2005. Said ordinance
consolidated the former Public Works Commission, Road Committee and Drainage Task
Force to create the Public Services Commission. For current provisions, see Art. XII,
Public Services Commission.
§ 67-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-13
1:99

ARTICLE V
Fire Commission
§ 67-14. Establishment; membership and terms.
§ 67-15. Compensation and vacancies.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but shall be
entitled to actual and necessary expenses approved by the Township Board
incurred in the performance of official duties. Vacancies in the Commission
shall be filled by the Township Board for the unexpired term of the
Commissioner creating the vacancy.
A. A Fire Commission for the Township of Grosse Ile is established. The
Commission shall consist of five residents of the Township to be
appointed by the Township Board, one of which shall be a member of
the Township Board. Terms of office of Fire Commissioners shall be for
six years ending on April 3 in the year of expiration, except for the
Township Board member of the Township Board, provided, however,
that nothing herein shall prohibit the Township Board from removing
and/or replacing the Township Board member from time to time during
his or her tenure of office on the Township Board.
B. No member of the Fire Commission shall be a member of the Fire
Department of the Township.
§ 67-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-15
1:101

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)16
§ 67-16. (Reserved)
§ 67-17. (Reserved)
§ 67-18. (Reserved)
§ 67-19. (Reserved)
§ 67-20. (Reserved)
§ 67-21. (Reserved)
§ 67-22. (Reserved)
§ 67-23. (Reserved)
§ 67-24. (Reserved)
16.Editor’s Note: Former Art. VI, Recreation Commission, added 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 163,
as amended, was removed from the Code pursuant to Ord. No. 05-02, adopted 2-14-2005.
Said ordinance decommissioned the Recreation Commission. For current provisions, see
Art. XI, Community Recreation Commission.
§ 67-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-24
1:103

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)17
§ 67-25. (Reserved)
§ 67-26. (Reserved)
§ 67-27. (Reserved)
§ 67-28. (Reserved)
§ 67-29. (Reserved)
§ 67-30. (Reserved)
17.Editor’s Note: Former Art. VII, Water’s Edge Commission, added 2-24-1992 by Ord. No.
190, as amended, was removed from the Code pursuant to Ord. No. 05-02, adopted
2-14-2005. Said ordinance decommissioned the Water’s Edge Commission. For current
provisions, see Art. XI, Community Recreation Commission.
§ 67-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-30
1:105

ARTICLE VIII
Local Officials Compensation Commission
[Added 10-12-1992 by Ord. No. 191]
§ 67-31. Establishment and purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of MCL § 41.95(4), a Local Officials
Compensation Commission is hereby created for the purpose of determining
the salaries of the elected officials of Grosse Ile Township.
§ 67-32. Membership, terms and vacancies.
The Commission shall consist of five members who are registered electors
of the Township of Grosse Ile and shall be appointed by the Supervisor
subject to the confirmation of a majority of the members elected and serving
on the Township Board. The terms of office shall be five years, except that
of the members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of
one, two, three, four and five years. The first members shall be appointed
within 30 days after the effective date of this article. Subsequent members
shall be appointed within 30 days after a term expires or a vacancy occurs.
Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of an unexpired term. An officer
or an employee of a government agency or unit or member of the immediate
family of an officer or an employee shall not be appointed to the
Commission.
§ 67-33. Powers of Commission.
The Commission shall determine the salary of each member of the Township
Board which shall be effective at the beginning of the next fiscal year. The
determination of the Commission shall be the salary unless the Township
Board by resolution adopted by 2/3 of the members elected to and serving
on the Board rejects the determination. The determination of the
Commission shall be effective 30 days following filing of the determination
with the Township Clerk unless rejected by the Township Board. If the
determination is rejected, the existing salary shall prevail. An expense
allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary
shall be for expenses incurred in the course of Township business and
accounted for to the Township.
§ 67-34. Meetings.
The Commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in each
odd-numbered year and not less than five session days, and shall make
its determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. A majority
of the members of the Commission constitutes a quorum for conducting
the business of the Commission. The business that the Commission may
perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the Commission held in
compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976,
being §§ 15.261 to 15.275 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended.
Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting shall be given in
§ 67-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-34
1:107
the manner required by Act 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended.
The Commission shall not take action nor make a determination without
a concurrence of the majority of the members appointed and serving on
the Commission. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its
members. As used in this chapter, "session days" means calendar days in
which the Commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the
Commission shall not receive compensation, but shall be entitled to actual
and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties.
§ 67-34 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-34
1:108
ARTICLE IX
Festival and Community Events Commission18
[Added 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 253]
§ 67-35. Establishment; membership and terms.
§ 67-36. Compensation and vacancies.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but shall
be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance
of official duties and approved by the Township Board. Vacancies on the
Commission shall be filled by the Township Board for the unexpired term of
the Commission member creating the vacancy.
§ 67-37. Administrative support.
The Commission shall be staffed with administrative and clerical support
from the Recreation Department. The Recreation Director shall coordinate
support and assistance from other Township departments through the
department managers such as, but not limited to, the Department of Public
Works, Public Safety, Airport, and Water's Edge. All departments, through
their department managers, shall assist in coordination and operation of the
festival, under the direction of the Recreation Director.
§ 67-38. Duties.
The Festival and Community Events Commission shall be responsible for the
establishment of an annual festival promoting Grosse Ile's economic, social,
cultural, and recreational welfare. The Festival and Community Events
Commission shall provide oversight, coordination, and direction for the
annual Township-sponsored festival and other special events approved by
the Township Board. In addition, the Commission shall carry out the
A. A Festival and Community Events Commission for the Township is
hereby established. All of the Commission members, at all times, shall
be residents of the Township. The Commission shall consist of 11
members including the Township Board liaison. [Amended 9-24-2018
by Ord. No. 18-002]
B. The initial term of the Festival and Community Events Commission shall
be as follows: four members shall serve for a term of three years each;
two members shall serve for a term of two years each; and two
members shall serve for a term of one year each. Thereafter, all
appointments to the Commission shall be for three-year terms, ending
on August 31 in the year of expiration. The term of the Township Board
member shall be limited to the time he or she is a member of the
Township Board, or until the Township Board decides to remove or
replace said member with another Township Board member.
18.Editor's Note: The title of this article was changed from "Festival Commission" to "Festival
and Community Events Commission" 9-24-2018 by Ord. No. 18-002.
§ 67-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-38
1:109
functions and responsibilities that the Township Board may delegate to the
Commission from time to time.
§ 67-39. Expenditures.
A. The Commission shall have no authority to obligate or expend funds,
unless the Commission has a fully detailed budget approved in advance
by the Township Board. All budgeted items shall be under the
expenditure and control of the Recreation Director. Expenditures not
specified in the budget must be approved by the Township Board prior
to commitment.
B. Each expenditure of funds against an approved budget shall be voted
upon by the Commission and certified by the Chairman of the
Commission as to its purpose and its applicability to the approved
budget prior to being presented for payment. All expenditures require
receipts or other proofs of purchase, regardless of the amount, and
shall be coordinated with the Recreation Department. The Recreation
Director shall insure that requisitions and expenditures are consistent
with the Township Board Administrative Policies and Procedures.
C. The Commission shall determine all fees and charges to be levied for
festival operations. These fees will be determined upon consultation
with the Township Manager or designee.
D. All funds generated by the Festival and Community Events Commission
shall be deposited with the Township of Grosse Ile.
E. A financial report shall be submitted to the Township Board no less than
90 days after the close of the festival or a special event.
§ 67-38 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-39
1:110
ARTICLE X
Communications Commission19
[Added 8-30-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02; amended 6-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-04]
§ 67-40. Establishment; membership and terms.
§ 67-41. Compensation and vacancies.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall
be entitled to actual and necessary expenses, approved by the Township
Board, incurred in the performance of official duties. Vacancies on the
Commission shall be filled by the Township Board for the unexpired term of
the Commissioner creating the vacancy.
§ 67-42. Duties and authority.
The Communication Commission shall:
A. Commission is hereby established to be known as the "Communications
Commission of the Township of Grosse Ile."
B. The Commission shall consist of seven qualified residents of Grosse Ile
Township, including, if applicable, a school liaison, appointed as voting
members for terms of three years. Nonvoting advisors may be utilized
as required by the Commission.
A. Request sufficient funds and resources to facilitate the broadcast of
access channels, to further develop the public sector uses of the cable
television system (hereafter referred to as "GITV"), to maintain an
effective and professional Township website of the highest quality, and
to utilize these and other developing capabilities as efficient means of
communication between Township government and the community.
B. Recommend a detailed budget for the Communications Department to
the Township Finance Director for presentation to the Township Board.
C. Advise the Board on franchise requirements and make
recommendations to the Board regarding amendments to applicable
ordinances or to the franchise agreements.
D. Provide oversight of the Cable Television Regulatory Ordinance,
Chapter A293 of the Grosse Ile Municipal Code of Ordinances, and
propose revisions to ensure compliance with current Michigan statutes.
E. Establish standards of quality, performance and continuous
improvement for all Township communication media.
19.Editor's Note: The Communications Commission was originally established in 1987 as the
Cable Commission. Provisions regarding the Cable Commission were subsequently
included as part of Ch. A293, Cable Television Franchise, adopted 12-11-2000 by Ord. No.
293. Ordinance No. 04-02 provided for the inclusion of said provisions as Art. X of Ch. 67.
§ 67-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-42
1:111
§ 67-43. When effective.
This article shall take effect 30 days following publication.
F. Ensure that Township communication media remain politically neutral
and unbiased in content.
G. Encourage equitable access to publicly owned communication media by
appropriate institutions, groups and individuals within the Township.
H. Assist the Administrator in providing quality programming for
broadcast via Township communication media.
I. Ensure that a timely, accurate schedule for such broadcast events is
widely available, included on but not limited to GITV and the website.
J. When appropriate, to foster cooperation and/or collaboration with other
municipalities to maximize cost effective usage of assets.
§ 67-42 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-43
1:112
ARTICLE XI
Community Recreation Commission
[Added 2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-02]
§ 67-44. Establishment; merger.
§ 67-45. Membership; first Commission.
A. A Community Recreation Commission ("Commission") for the Township
of Grosse Ile ("Township") is established.
B. The establishment of this Commission replaces and decommissions the
former Recreation Commission and the former Water's Edge
Commission.
C. The Township Board specifically charges the Community Recreation
Commission with authority for and over the objects within the charges
of the former Recreation Commission and the former Water's Edge
Commission.
A. Membership of the Commission shall include the following:
(1) Nine individuals who are appointed by the Township Board to serve
as Commissioners and who have been legal residents of the
Township for at least 30 days prior to membership and remain
residents during their appointed terms.
(2) One Township Board member selected by the Township Board, who
serves as a liaison to the Commission.
(3) The Recreation Director, who serves as a nonvoting member and is
an employee of the Township.
B. The first Commission, as appointed by resolution of the Township Board
at its January 24, 2005, meeting, shall consist of the following members:
(1) Ten individuals who have been appointed by the Township Board to
serve as Commissioners and who have been legal residents of the
Township for at least 30 days prior to membership and remain
residents during their appointed terms.
(2) Two Township Board members, selected by the Township Board,
who serve as liaisons to the Commission.
(3) The Recreation Director, who serves as a nonvoting member and is
an employee of the Township.
(4) All Commissioners from this first Commission seeking
reappointment may request reappointment from the Township
Board for an additional three-year term.
(5) Any Commissioners from this first Commission who resign or who
do not seek reappointment will not be replaced by the Township
§ 67-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-45
1:113
§ 67-46. Terms.
§ 67-47. Renewal of appointments.
A Commissioner's appointment may be renewed by the Township Board for
an additional three-year term.
§ 67-48. Removal of appointed Commissioner.
The Township Board may remove appointed commissioners upon proof
by a preponderance of evidence that the accused member committed
misconduct or gross neglect of official duties at a hearing before the
Township Board. The Commissioner may waive the hearing and submit
a resignation as an alternative. See generally Article I, § 67-1A(7) of the
Township Code.
§ 67-49. Vacancies.
The Township Board shall fill vacancies on the Commission created by
events other than the regularly scheduled expiration of the Commissioner's
term by appointing a new Commissioner who shall serve the remainder of
the term held by the Commissioner who has vacated the Commissioner seat.
§ 67-50. Actions by Commission require quorum; selection of
officers.
Board unless the number of appointment Commissioners falls
below the nine, which is the official number of Commission seats as
stated in Subsection A(1).
A. Unless appointed to fill a vacancy, each Commissioner shall be
appointed to serve a term that begins on the date of appointment and
expires in the third year of appointment on the last day of the
Township's calendar year, i.e., April 1.
B. The Commissioners will serve staggered terms.
C. There are no limits on the number terms that a Commissioner may
serve.
D. The terms of the Commissioners of the First Commission are set by the
Township Board's resolution of January 24, 2005.
A. Unless provided otherwise, actions by the Commission must be
approved by a majority of the membership at a scheduled meeting in
which a quorum of members is present. See § 67-1B(1) (majority of the
membership constitutes a quorum).
B. At the beginning of the Township's calendar year, i.e., April 1, the
Commission shall nominate a Chairperson, to be approved by the
Township Board. See § 67-1A(2).
§ 67-45 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-50
1:114
§ 67-51. Compensation.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation but shall be
entitled to actual and necessary expenses, approved by the Township Board,
incurred in the performance of official duties.
§ 67-52. General duties.
§ 67-53. Authority over certain properties and facilities.
§ 67-54. Master Plan; existing plan.
C. At the beginning of the Township's calendar year, i.e., April 1, the
Commission shall select a Vice Chairperson to assist the Chair and act
in the Chair's absence and a Secretary to be responsible for
Commission minutes. See duties of Vice Chair and Secretary,
§ 67-1A(3).
A. The Commission shall act as an advisory commission to the Township
Board.
B. The Commission shall consider, study and make recommendations
relative to the development of new programs and shall also consider,
study and make recommendations for improvements of existing
programs.
C. The Commission shall include in its recommendations proposals for the
use and/or improvement of the properties within its charge.
D. The Commission shall also perform such other acts and duties in
connection with the operation of its programs as authorized or directed
by the Township Board.
A. The Community Recreation Commission shall have general supervision
over the maintenance and operation of the Recreation Department,
Water's Edge Restaurant, Water's Edge Marina, Water's Edge Golf
Course, Water's Edge Driving Range, Water's Edge Swimming Pool,
Centennial Farm, Playscape, Airport Recreation Area, and any property
owned or leased by the Township that the Township Board delegates to
the Commission's charge.
B. The Commission shall have the authority to impose all necessary rules
and regulations governing the Recreation Department, Water's Edge
Restaurant, Water's Edge Marina, Water's Edge Golf Course, Water's
Edge Driving Range, Water's Edge Swimming Pool, Centennial Farm,
Playscape, Airport Recreation Area, and any property owned or leased
by the Township that the Township Board delegates to the
Commission's charge.
C. The Commission shall have specific oversight authority of the
restaurant operations to ensure compliance by the contractor with
Township policy and specific contractual obligations.
§ 67-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-54
1:115
§ 67-55. Authority over budgets and expenditures; existing budgets
and expenditures.
§ 67-56. Authority to collaborate with other governmental bodies.
A. Master Plan.
(1) The Community Recreation Commission shall consider, study, and
recommend an overall Master Plan for the development of
programs and use of Commission properties, which will provide
benefits for all community members.
(2) The Master Plan must be developed in accordance with the basic
land use plan and program adopted by the Township Planning
Commission.
(3) The Master Plan must be reviewed and approved by the Township
Board before its effective date.
(4) The Master Plan shall cover a span of five calendar years to expire
on December 31 of the fifth year.
B. The Recreation Master Plan, adopted in January 2001 by Township
Board, shall remain in full force and effect until December 31, 2005, as
originally enacted.
A. Neither the Commission nor its individual members shall incur any
expense or create any obligation or liability upon the Township without
prior approval from the Township Board.
B. The Commission shall review and recommend expenditures for the
approval by the Township Board. All Commission purchases must
comply with the procedures and regulations stated in Article I, § 67-2,
of the Township Code.
C. The Commission shall review and recommend an annual budget or
annual budgets for the approval by the Township Board. All Commission
budgets must comply with the procedures and regulations stated in
Article I, § 67-3, of the Township Code.
D. The budgets and expenditures, which have received prior approval
from the Township Board, for the former Recreation Commission and
the former Water's Edge Commission remain in full force and effect as
originally enacted.
A. The Commission shall request such assistance of other departments of
the Township government as may be necessary in the performance of
its duties.
B. The Commission shall receive assistance of the employees of the
Township as may be necessary in the performance of its duties.
§ 67-54 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-56
1:116
§ 67-57. Authority to negotiate and recommend contracts or leases.
§ 67-58. Reports.
C. The Commission is authorized to collaborate with other Township
governmental departments, the Grosse Ile Township School Board,
neighboring municipalities, Wayne County, and the State of Michigan.
The Commission may collaborate with these entities to develop new
programs, improve existing programs, obtain grant monies, agree on
use and/or develop facilities, and consolidate services with the goal of
improving the efficiency of Commission operations.
D. Nothing in this section authorizes the Commission to act in
contravention of the Township Code or public policy or to act without
prior Township Board approval as required by law.
A. The Commission shall review and recommend contracts or leases for
adoption and approval by the Township Board.
B. To obtain approval for contracts, the Commission must comply with the
bidding procedures of Article I, § 67-2B.
C. The Commission may lease to third parties use of the buildings or land
under its control in conformity with the master lease of the Township as
approved by the Township Board; provided, however, that no occupancy
shall be permitted unless or until the Township has issued an
appropriate certificate of occupancy for the property in question.
D. To obtain approval for leases, the Commission must comply with the
procedures of Article I, § 67-3G.
E. All contracts and leases which have received prior approval from the
Township Board for the former Recreation Commission and former
Water's Edge Commission remain in full force and effect as originally
enacted.
A. At the annual meeting of the Township Board, the Director and
Commission Chair shall present an annual report to the Township
Board, which advises the Board of the following:
(1) Financial reports related to budget performance, liabilities
(existing or potential), and millage related expenditures.
(2) Annual performance and/or proposed amendments relative to
Master Plan.
(3) Report on programming, services and projects.
(4) Proposed objectives for the upcoming year.
(5) Proposed budget(s) for the upcoming year.
§ 67-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-58
1:117
§ 67-59. Recreation Director.
B. The Director shall prepare for the Township Board an inventory of all
equipment under control of the Community Recreation Commission as
of the last day of each six months of the fiscal year to be submitted for
Township Board review within 30 days of the six-month period.
A. The Recreation Director shall serve as a nonvoting, permanent member
of the Community Recreation Commission.
B. The Commission may evaluate candidates and recommend an
individual(s) to the Township Board for the position of Director, whom a
majority of the Commission has determined has the education, training,
and experience to qualify for the position.
§ 67-58 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-59
1:118
ARTICLE XII
Public Services Commission
[Added 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 05-02.5]
§ 67-60. Establishment; membership; terms.
§ 67-61. Compensation and vacancies.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall
be entitled to actual and necessary expenses, approved by the Township
Board, incurred in the performance of official duties. Vacancies on the
Commission shall be filled by the Township Board for the unexpired term of
the Commissioner creating the vacancy.
§ 67-62. Department of Public Services Director to serve as
nonvoting member.
The Department of Public Services Director shall serve as a nonvoting,
permanent member of the Public Services Commission.
§ 67-63. Duties.
A. A Public Services Commission is hereby established as a result of
consolidating the former Public Works Commission, Road Committee,
and the Drainage Task Force.
B. The Commission shall initially consist of members who served on the
former Public Works Commission, Road Committee, and Drainage Task
Force. The Commission shall consist of 10 residents, including the
Township Board liaison, who are voting members and a Wayne County
Department of Public Services liaison who is a nonvoting member.
C. Terms of membership are for three years, ending on April 3 in the year
of expiration, except for the Township Board member whose term shall
be limited to the term he or she is a member of the Township Board;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the Township
Board from removing and/or replacing the Township Board member
from time to time during his/her tenure of office on the Township Board.
A. The Public Services Commission is responsible for the operation and
maintenance of the water supply and sewer systems of the Township of
Grosse Ile, and for the pickup of garbage and other forms of solid waste
within the Township and for the disposal thereof.
B. The Commission shall administer and have general supervision over the
operation of the Grosse Ile Department of Public Services.
C. The Commission shall have the authority to manage, improve, extend,
maintain, equip, operate, and regulate the water supply and sewer
systems of the Township.
§ 67-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-63
1:119
D. The Commission shall have the power to make all necessary rules and
regulations governing the Department of Public Services and
pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the water supply and
sewer systems of the Township including lateral sewer systems;
provided, however, that all such rules and regulations shall be subject
to approval by the Township Board before they shall become effective.
E. The Commission shall recommend to the Township Board from time to
time any changes in sewer, water and/or refuse rates and any
extensions or improvements needed to such systems; provided,
however, that no rate shall be effective unless approved by the
Township Board.
F. Whereas the Department of Community Development and Department
of Public Services have been consolidated, Public Services Commission
responsibilities shall include oversight of planning, zoning, ordinance
enforcement, and building services.
G. Whereas the former Road Committee has been consolidated with the
Public Services Commission, responsibilities shall include oversight of
roads and bike paths.
H. Whereas the former Drainage Task Force has been consolidated with
the Public Services Commission, responsibilities shall include oversight
of drainage issues and stormwater management.
§ 67-63 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-63
1:120
ARTICLE XIII
Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Commission
[Added 9-26-2011 by Ord. No. 11-04]
§ 67-64. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Commission,
the members of which shall serve without compensation.
§ 67-65. Composition; appointment; quorum.
The Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Commission shall consist of seven
members to be appointed by the Township Board. All candidates shall be
interviewed by the Commission, and a list of recommended candidates shall
be given to the Township Board from among bicyclists, runners, walkers,
people who use wheelchairs, and people with visual impairments, as well
as the public at large. All members shall be residents of the Township.
One member of the Commission shall be a Township Board Liaison. A
Chairman, not to be the Board Liaison, shall be recommended by the
appointed Commissioners and appointed by the Township Board. The
majority of members or any four members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum.
§ 67-66. Duties.
A. The purpose of the Bicycle and Pedestrian Advisory Commission shall
be to:
(1) Advise the Township on bicyclist and pedestrian issues;
(2) Analyze routing, operation, and safety of all bicycle and pedestrian
facilities;
(3) Review and make recommendations regarding the Township's
Capital Improvement Plan, Township ordinances, and other
planning documents and policies, based on bicycle and pedestrian
issues;
(4) Evaluate and make recommendations for an action plan for biking
and walking facilities (on-street and off-street bikeways, shared-use
paths, sidewalks, bicycle racks, crossings, signage and
signalization);
(5) Coordinate with internal and external agencies on maps and
regional connections;
(6) Develop education and public outreach programs on bicycle and
pedestrian issues; and
(7) Assist the Township in the development and maintenance of bicycle
and pedestrian systems within the community.
§ 67-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-66
1:121
§ 67-67. Meetings; absence of member.
§ 67-68. Performance of duties delegated by Township Board.
The Commission shall perform such further duties as may be delegated to it
by the Township Board.
B. The Commission shall advise and consult with the Township Board (or
appropriate commission) on the issues set forth in Subsection A, and
recommend such actions to them as it deems appropriate to effectuate
the intent of this article.
C. The services of all Township departments and agencies shall be made
reasonably available by their respective heads to the Commission at its
request, and information in the hands of any department or agency
shall be furnished to the Commission upon written request to the
department manager.
D. The Commission shall render an annual report to the Township Board.
A. The Commission shall meet from time to time, at least once each
quarter, on call of the Chairperson or any four members.
B. Meetings are advertized, agendas are posted per Township guidelines,
and meetings are televised when available.
C. Meetings are to be held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act.20
D. Any member who is absent from three consecutive meetings may be
replaced as in the case of a vacancy.
20.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
§ 67-66 GROSSE ILE CODE § 67-68
1:122
Chapter 68
COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Commissions — See Ch. 67.
§ 67-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-68
1:123

ARTICLE I
Airport Advisory Committee
[Adopted 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 05-12]
§ 68-1. Establishment; membership and terms; organization;
meetings.
A. An Airport Advisory Committee is established. The Airport Advisory
Committee shall consist of five members appointed by resolution of the
Township Board. In addition, the Airport Manager will be appointed to
serve as Township liaison. Terms of office for Committee members shall
be for three years. Appointments shall be staggered.
B. The Township Supervisor shall select a Chairperson prior to the first
quarterly meeting of each fiscal year. The Chairperson shall assume the
duties of the presiding officer immediately following his or her election.
C. Each member appointed to the Committee shall reside in Grosse Ile
Township, Michigan.
D. Any member of a Township Committee who is absent from more than
two consecutive meetings of the Committee in any one fiscal year may
be dismissed from membership on the Committee at the discretion of
the Township Board or may be removed by the Township Board under
Chapter 67, Commissions, Article I, § 67-1A(7).
E. The Airport Advisory Committee shall hold regular monthly meetings at
a date, place and time to be set by the Airport Manager. A schedule of
meetings adopted by the Committee shall be provided to the Township
Board, posted at the Township Hall and be available to the general
public through the office of the Clerk.
F. The Airport Manager may call a special meeting of the Committee
whenever, in his/her opinion, the business of the Committee may
require it. Notice of special meetings shall be made in conformance
with the Michigan Open Meetings Act.
G. A majority of the members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum
and be necessary for the transaction of business. If a quorum is not
present, those in attendance shall be named and shall adjourn to a later
time.
H. All meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public and freely
subject to recording, provided that such arrangements do not interfere
with the orderly conduct of the meetings under such rules as the
Committee may prescribe.
I. Minutes of all regular and special meetings shall be maintained in the
office of the Clerk. The minutes shall reflect the date, time and place of
the meetings; members recorded as either present or absent; a general
description of all matters proposed, discussed or decided; and a record
of any votes taken. Minutes of all meetings shall be taken. Approval of
§ 68-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-1
1:125
§ 68-2. Compensation; vacancies.
§ 68-3. Authority.
The Airport Advisory Committee, established under the authority of the
Aeronautics Code of the State of Michigan (Act 327 of the Public Acts
of 1945, as amended), shall provide advice and recommendations to the
Township Manager and the Airport Manager on the maintenance and
concerning the operation of the Grosse Ile Municipal Airport.
§ 68-4. Duties.
minutes shall be considered at the next regular meeting of the
Committee. Copies of approved minutes shall be provided to the
Township Manager and the Airport Manager.
A. Members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
B. If any member, for any reason, resigns or relinquishes his or her
membership on the Committee, a replacement shall be appointed by the
Township Board to fill the vacancy for the remainder of that unexpired
term.
A. The Committee shall adopt written rules and procedures for the
conduct of its business. These written rules shall include, but are not
limited to, defining the duties and responsibilities of the Chairperson.
B. The Committee shall submit comments and recommendations on the
proposed Grosse Ile Municipal Airport budget to the Airport Manager
and Township Manager prior to consideration of the budget by the
Township Board.
C. The Committee shall function in an advisory capacity only and shall
have no authority to adopt, amend, modify, alter or rescind any rule,
regulation or ordinance for the management, governance or use of the
Grosse Ile Municipal Airport. The Committee shall make
recommendations regarding aeronautical operations involving
technical aviation and safety matters to the Airport Manager. Financial
and budgetary items are limited in scope as defined above.
§ 68-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 68-4
1:126
Chapter 70
COMMUNITY AND TRAFFIC TRANSPORTATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental assessment — See Ch. 98.
Condominium projects — See Ch. 71.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 209.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 233.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Telecommunications facilities — See Ch. 247.
Utilities — See Ch. 258.
Water District — See Ch. 271.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 70-1. Intent.
The Township Board finds that, as a predominantly residential island
community, Grosse Ile Township has unique challenges to ensure that the
island remains a sustainable community. The island is vulnerable to largescale
development having a significantly adverse impact on transportation
and the ability of the community to provide the necessary infrastructure
and services. This chapter is intended to provide for the comprehensive and
systematic analysis of the impact and assessment of proposed mitigation for
any major development through:
A. Providing for Township review and approval of developments that may
have a significant impact on transportation, utilities and community
services.
B. Assisting applicants, the Township and the general public in
understanding the impacts of development and identify possible
changes to the development proposal or improvements to roadways,
utilities and infrastructure to mitigate the impact.
C. Ensuring land use decisions are made with consideration to the findings
and recommendations in the Township's Master Plan.
D. Ensuring adequate utility capacity, including sewer, water, and
electricity to ensure that adequate public facilities and services are
available concurrent with new development so that orderly
development, and growth can occur and protect the public health,
safety, and welfare, which can be damaged by exceeding utility
capacity.
E. Ensuring that the build out of the Township does not exceed capacity of
the Township wastewater treatment system.
F. Ensuring safe and reasonable transportation conditions on roads and
intersections and protect the public health, safety, and welfare, which
can be damaged by unmanaged increases in traffic congestion.
§ 68-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-1
1:127
§ 70-2. Definitions.
The following terms used in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
APPLICANT — An individual, partnership, corporation (or agent thereof), or
other entity that undertakes the responsibility for any or all of the activities
covered by this chapter or Chapter 71, Condominium Projects, Chapter 98,
Environmental Assessment, Chapter 238, Subdivision Control, or Chapter
285, Zoning.
AVERAGE DAY — A Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday for most uses. The
average day may be a Saturday for uses that have higher peak-hour traffic
volumes on a Saturday rather than mid-week.
BACKGROUND TRAFFIC — Traffic anticipated to occur regardless of the
decision on the subject application based on overall trends as demonstrated
by annual traffic increases and associated with specific approved projects
for the opening year of a project. Data such as historic counts and longrange
traffic projections from the SEMCOG model shall be considered as
part of the background traffic calculation.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN (CIP) — An annual document adopted by
the Township indicating capital projects having funding approval for the
current fiscal year and those capital projects which are currently planned
for the following five-year period, including the proposed means of financing
the same.
DEVELOPMENT — A site plan, subdivision tentative preliminary plat,
condominium project, mobile home park, redevelopment, reuse or
expansion of a use or building.
GAP (CRITICAL) — The median time headway (in seconds) between vehicles
in a major traffic stream which will permit side-street vehicles at a stop- or
G. Ensuring safe and reasonable transportation operating conditions on
streets and intersections after development of the proposed use.
H. Ensuring that the build out of the Township does not exceed the
capacity of the bridges leading to the island.
I. Protecting the substantial public investment in the existing street and
utility system.
J. Ensuring that any changes to land use or zoning will not adversely
impact the fiscal health of the Township and will maintain a fiscally
balanced land use balance.
K. Coordinating the environmental protection measures required under
various ordinances, including, but not limited to: Chapter 71,
Condominium Projects, Chapter 98, Environmental Assessment,
Chapter 238, Subdivision Control, Chapter 275, Wetlands and
Drainageways, Chapter 282, Woodland and Tree Preservation, and
Chapter 285, Zoning.
§ 70-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 70-2
1:128
yield-controlled approach to cross through or merge with the major traffic
stream under prevailing traffic and roadway conditions.
LEVEL OF SERVICE — A qualitative measure describing operational
conditions within a traffic stream; generally described in terms of such
factors as speed and travel time, delay, freedom to maneuver, traffic
interruptions, comfort and convenience and safety.
MASTER PLAN — A document which is adopted under the guidance of the
Planning Commission in accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling
Act (Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended) and consists of graphic and written
materials which indicate the general location for streets, parks, schools,
public buildings and all physical development of the Township.
OUT ISLAND — See "undeveloped area."
PEAK HOUR — A one-hour period representing the highest hourly volume
of traffic flow in the adjacent street system during the morning (a.m. peak
hour), during the afternoon or evening (p.m. peak hour); or representing
the hour of highest volume of traffic entering or exiting a site (peak hour of
generator).
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Township of
Grosse Ile, Wayne County, Michigan.
LEVEL OF SERVICE A — Operations with very low control delay
occurring with favorable progression and/or short cycle lengths.
A.
LEVEL OF SERVICE B — Operations with low control delay occurring
with good progression and/or short cycle lengths.
B.
LEVEL OF SERVICE C — Operations with average control delays
resulting from fair progression and/or longer cycle lengths. Individual
cycle failures begin to appear. It is typically determined to be
acceptable for signalized intersections and the bridges leading to the
island.
C.
LEVEL OF SERVICE D — Operations with longer control delays due
to a combination of unfavorable progression, long cycle lengths, or
high V/C ratios. Many vehicles stop and individual cycle failures are
noticeable. It is typically determined to be acceptable for unsignalized
intersections.
D.
LEVEL OF SERVICE E — Operations with high control delays due to
a combination of poor progression, long cycle lengths, and high V/
C ratios. Individual cycle failures are a frequent occurrence. This is
considered to be the limit of acceptable delay.
E.
LEVEL OF SERVICE F — Operation with control delays unacceptable
to most drivers occurring due to over saturation where arrival rates
exceed the capacity of the intersection, poor progression, or very long
cycle lengths.
F.
§ 70-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2
1:129
PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY — A unit dedicated to providing immediate
and direct emergency response to fire, medical service, crime, and other
community safety needs.
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION — The Grosse Ile Township Public Service
Commission.
ROADS — A public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way, other than a
public or private alley, dedicated to or designed for travel and access to
any land, lot or parcel, whether designated as a road, avenue, highway,
boulevard, drive, lane, place, court, or any similar designation. Various
types of roads are defined in Article 1 of Chapter 285, Zoning.
SEMCOG — The Southeast Michigan Council of Governments; the region's
designated Metropolitan Planning Organization for Southeast Michigan.
STRUCTURAL ADEQUACY — Determination by the Township Engineer or
the Wayne County Department of Public Services, that the pavement cross
section (or bridge design) is of sufficient depth and design to carry the
increased traffic volume generated by the proposed development, including
the heavy construction vehicles which will be present, without causing
undue failure of the infrastructure.
STUDY AREA — The geographic area containing those critical arterial
intersections (and connecting roadway segments) which are expected to be
affected by the site-traffic generated by a development.
TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (TIP) — A list of all
transportation projects receiving state or federal funding by SEMCOG.
TRIP (i.e., DIRECTIONAL TRIP) — A single- or one-direction vehicle
movement with either the origin or the destination (exiting or entering)
inside a study site.
UNDEVELOPED AREA — A land area that is removed by more than 200
feet from existing utilities and improved roads and has not been previously
improved with roads and utilities. Any previously platted lots that are
unimproved and currently do not have road and utility access shall be
considered an undeveloped area. Any out island that is separated from the
main island of the Township and currently does not have road and utility
access shall be considered an undeveloped area.
§ 70-3. Applicability.
A. Impact statement. A community impact statement, fiscal impact study
and a transportation impact assessment/statement shall be provided to
the Planning Commission for any site plan, special land use,
condominium project, subdivision plat or rezoning that meets or
exceeds the thresholds for each type of study as follows:
(1) Transportation analysis. A transportation impact assessment,
transportation impact statement, or transportation comparison
shall be required for any of the following, based upon the amount of
traffic generated:
§ 70-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 70-3
1:130
Type of Study
Developments Generating
the Following Traffic
Transportation impact assessment
(study of site and adjacent
roadways)
50 to 100 trips during a peak
hour; or
500 to 750 trips during a
typical day
Transportation impact statement
(study of larger area of Township)
Over 100 trips during the
peak hour; or
Over 750 trips in an average
day.
Any new bridge shall require
a transportation impact
statement.
Transportation comparison
(comparison of the trip generation
between existing and proposed
zoning and potential traffic
impacts resulting from a rezoning)
Any rezoning
(2) Community impact statement. A community impact statement shall
be required for any of the following, based upon relative demand
for utility capacity of various land uses:
Type of Development Proposal
Size of Development
Requiring Study
Single-family residential
development
50 dwelling units or more
Manufactured home park
development
50 dwelling units or more
Multiple-family residential
development
70 dwelling units or more
Senior housing development 100 dwelling units or more
Retail or commercial service use
(a)
45,000 square feet of gross
floor area or more
Restaurant, tavern or banquet hall 12,000 square feet of gross
floor area or more
Golf, county or boat club 33,000 square feet of gross
floor area or more
Office building (b) 45,000 square feet of gross
floor area or more
Institutional building (c) 67,000 square feet of gross
floor area or more
§ 70-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-3
1:131
Type of Development Proposal
Size of Development
Requiring Study
Industrial use (d) 100,000 square feet of gross
floor area or more
Extension of sewer or water to
undeveloped area or out island
Extension that will serve or
have the potential to serve 10
acres or more, including
adjacent undeveloped land
NOTES:
(a) Includes all retail uses, banks, commercial day-care centers,
lodging, personal service and vehicle service.
(b) Includes all general, professional and medical offices.
(c) Includes all community buildings, schools, places of worship
and other places of public assembly.
(d) Includes all manufacturing, transportation, warehousing and
storage uses.
(e) Other uses not identified above shall be as determined by
the Planning Commission based upon comparable demand for
utility services to those uses listed in the table.
(3) Fiscal impact statement. A fiscal impact statement shall be
required for any rezoning of 10 acres or more that would allow an
increase in residential density. This shall be required to determine
if the additional residential population can be served while
maintaining a fiscally balanced tax base.
B. Reuse of existing buildings. The reuse of existing buildings shall be
exempt from this chapter, except where an expansion or increase in
intensity to the use will result in a net increase, relative to the previous
use, equal to or greater than Subsection A above.
C. Phased developments. In determining whether a proposed development
exceeds the thresholds described above, all land at one location within
the Township under common ownership or control by an applicant shall
be included. An applicant shall not purposefully avoid the intent of this
section by submitting piecemeal applications for phased developments.
However, an applicant may seek approval of only a portion of a
subdivision or development, even if the site would generate fewer trips
than the thresholds in this section, provided that upon seeking approval
of the remaining subdivision or development which generates trips
greater than the thresholds, including that approved previously under
this subsection, the development shall comply with the requirements of
this chapter. Extension of roads or utilities to serve lots in previously
platted, but unimproved subdivisions shall consider the full impact of
developing all lots in the subdivision that could potentially be served by
the infrastructure extension, not just the lots proposed to be developed
at the time of application.
§ 70-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 70-3
1:132
§ 70-4. Transportation impact analysis.
The following information is required for transportation impact studies:
D. Review process. The impact statement shall be submitted and reviewed
concurrently with the site plan, condominium, subdivision, or rezoning
application and the environmental assessment required under Chapter
98, Environmental Assessment. The procedures for development
reviews are set forth in Chapter 285, Zoning, Chapter 71, Condominium
Projects, and Chapter 238, Subdivision Control. The review and
approval procedures for impact studies shall be in accordance with
§ 70-8. The impact statement shall be submitted prior to Planning
Commission approval of any site plan. For special land uses and
rezoning, the impact statement shall be submitted prior to Planning
Commission public hearing. For subdivisions and condominiums, the
impact statement shall be submitted prior to Planning Commission
review of the preliminary plat or condominium site plan.
E. Updates. An impact statement shall also be required for new phases,
expansions or changes to a development that requires site plan review,
based on the thresholds established above, except where such report
was approved within two years of the new site plan submittal date, and
a demonstration by the applicant that traffic volumes have not
increased by over 2% annually since the original approval.
F. Infrastructure improvements. Where an impact statement identifies
that there is not adequate infrastructure to support the proposed
development, the applicant shall have the option to provide the
infrastructure improvements necessary to support the proposed
development or wait for the infrastructure to become adequate by
improvements made pursuant to county, state or Township capital
improvement programs. Approval of development conditioned upon
completion of infrastructure shall be with performance guarantees as
required by Section 285-20.5 of the Zoning Chapter and § 238-11 of the
Subdivision Control Chapter.
A. Study area. The analysis should define and justify the study area
selected for analysis, subject to approval by the Township.
(1) A transportation impact assessment shall study the site access and
adjacent roadways.
(2) A transportation impact statement shall study the larger area of the
Township that is influenced by traffic from the development. At a
minimum this shall include any signalized intersection between the
site and the closest bridge leading to the island. The study shall
also include impacts to both bridges leading to the island.
(3) For a rezoning, a transportation comparison shall provide a
comparison of the trip generation between existing and proposed
zoning and potential traffic impacts resulting from a rezoning. This
§ 70-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-4
1:133
study shall document the transportation impacts of the net increase
in traffic.
B. Existing site conditions. Illustrations and a narrative shall be provided
that describes the characteristics of the site and adjacent roadway
system (planned and existing right-of-way, functional classification, lane
configuration, speed limits, any sight distance limitations, locations and
potential conflicts with operations at existing access points or
intersections within 250 feet of the site's frontage, or greater based
upon MDOT access management guidelines, current traffic conflicts,
etc.). This description should include surrounding land uses, expected
development in the vicinity which could influence future transportation
conditions, special site features and a description of any committed
roadway improvements.
C. Existing traffic conditions. Illustrations, narratives, tables and capacity
analysis that reflects existing traffic conditions for the study area
defined in § 70-4A above shall be provided, including the following.
(1) Roadway alignment, including any problems with sight distance,
number of lanes, lane width and lane configurations.
(2) Roadway pavement conditions.
(3) Posted speed limits for various segments.
(4) Existing traffic control.
(5) Existing signal timing, as applicable.
(6) Existing peak-hour weekday traffic volumes and daily volumes or
peak period counts (7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m.) to support the selection of the evaluated peak hour (if
applicable) on street(s) adjacent to the site. For uses with weekend
peak characteristics, the Township may require new counts be
taken on typical weekend days during the anticipated peak hours of
the proposed use. All counts shall be collected using accepted
practices and shall not be over two years old.
(7) Existing counts and levels of service for intersections in the study
area shall be performed. Existing counts and levels of service for
the closest bridge leading to the island shall also be performed.
(8) Crash data shall be provided and analyzed for the most recent
three-year period upon which information is available for sites in
close proximity to intersections identified as either a "critical crash
location" or a "fatality" location. SEMCOG data or UD-10 reports
should be used in the analysis. Critical crash locations should be
identified using SEMCOG's critical crash thresholds. The Planning
Commission may waive this requirement upon a finding that the
crash potential would not be significantly impacted by the proposed
project.
§ 70-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 70-4
1:134
D. Nonmotorized conditions. Illustrations, narratives and analysis that
reflect existing nonmotorized transportation conditions shall be
provided, including:
(1) Pedestrian level of service shall consider presence of sidewalks,
adequate sidewalk width based upon number of pedestrians and
bicycles, good lateral separation with buffers from traffic, traffic
volume and speed on adjoining street, crossing opportunities on
major streets, presence of traffic signal controls, number of
driveways crossing sidewalk, block size and connectivity to
adjacent development.
(2) Bicycle level of service shall consider presence of multi-modal
pathway or bike lane, pavement condition, adequate width of
bicycle travel lanes, average bicycle travel speeds, average control
delay for bicycles at signalized intersections, network connectivity,
traffic volume and speed on adjoining street, and amount of trucks
encountered.
E. Background traffic conditions. Projects that are not expected to be
completed and occupied within one year of site plan approval shall
provide a separate evaluation of background traffic for the expected
completion date of the proposed development. This background traffic
shall be based on historic counts to acknowledge general growth trends
in the area, plus traffic associated with approved developments, either
currently under construction or approved (and would be operational
before the build-out year of this proposed project), in the project area.
The background traffic shall be evaluated based on the existing road
system plus programmed improvements where funding has been
committed. A level of service analysis shall be performed for each
intersection in the study area. Unfunded mitigation that is not
programmed by Wayne County, the Township or included in the
SEMCOG five-year TIP shall not be provided under the background
conditions. Background traffic turning movements shall be illustrated
in the report.
F. Proposed use.
(1) For a site plan review, mobile home park, condominium project, a
subdivision plat or special land use: a description of factors that
relate to project trip generation, such as the number and types of
dwelling units, the gross and usable floor area, the number of
employees and shift change factors shall be provided. Intended
phasing or future expansion shall be noted.
(2) For a rezoning, a description of the potential representative uses
which would be allowed, compared to representative uses allowed
under current zoning. Representative uses shall include the most
intense traffic generation use allowed under current zoning in
compliance with all Township site development regulations.
§ 70-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-4
1:135
G. Trip generation forecast. Forecasted trip generation of the proposed
use for the a.m. peak hour, the p.m. peak hour and average day shall be
provided for the overall project and each phase. The forecasts shall be
based on the data and procedures outlined in the most recent edition of
Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
The applicant may use other commonly accepted and published sources
of data or supplement the standard data with data from at least three
similar projects in Michigan.
H. Trip reduction. Any trip reduction for pass-by trips, ride-sharing, other
modes and internal capture rates shall be based both on ITE findings
and documented survey results acceptable to the Township and Wayne
County. Trip reduction factors shall be subject to Township approval.
I. Trip distribution. The projected traffic generated shall be distributed
(inbound v. outbound, left turn v. right turn) onto the existing street
network to project turning movements at site access points and nearby
intersections where required. Projected turning movements shall be
illustrated in the report. A description of the application of standard
engineering procedures for determining the distribution should be
provided, such as trip distribution model, market studies or counts at
existing driveways.
J. Access point level of service. A level of service or capacity analysis is
required at the proposed access points using the procedures outlined in
the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual published by
the Transportation Research Board. The capacity analysis should be
provided in the appendix of the report.
K. Intersection level of service. Capacity analyses shall be provided for all
street intersections and bridges for the study area defined in § 70-4A
under the following conditions:
(1) Existing traffic under existing road conditions.
(2) Future project traffic under existing road conditions with
programmed road improvements that will be completed before the
build-out year of this proposed project.
(3) Future traffic, including project and background, under
background road conditions. Background road conditions shall
include the existing road system plus programmed improvements
where funding has been committed.
L. Warrant analysis. A traffic signal warrant analysis based on the
procedures outlined in the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices shall be performed for unsignalized intersections identified
with an existing Level of Service D or worse for existing conditions. The
signal warrant analysis should contain, at a minimum, Warrants 1, 2, 6,
9, and 11. For unsignalized intersections projected to operate at Level
of Service D or worse under background or future conditions, an
§ 70-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 70-4
1:136
assessment using the peak hour (Warrant 11) shall be provided. At least
two traffic signal warrants should be met to warrant a signal.
M. Bridge. For a transportation impact statement, capacity analyses shall
also be provided for the bridges leading to the island, including
intersections on both sides of the bridges. The analysis shall take into
consideration delays caused by bridge openings for boat traffic and the
capacity of toll booths. An assessment shall also be made of the impact
of additional population on the capacity of the bridges to evacuate the
island in the event of emergency.
N. Access design. The report shall include a map and description of the
location and design of proposed access (driveways or new street
intersections), including:
(1) Sight distance limitations and sketches from field notes.
(2) Dimensions from adjacent driveways and intersections within 250
feet on either side of the main roadway.
(3) Potential for shared access facilities.
(4) Data to demonstrate that the number of driveways proposed is the
fewest necessary.
(5) Support that the access points will provide safe and efficient traffic
operation and be in accordance with Wayne County standards.
(6) Comments shall also be provided on internal circulation design
such as the adequacy of queuing (stacking) at site access points
and other features that may affect traffic operations and safety.
O. Mitigation. The traffic analysis shall outline mitigation measures and
demonstrate any changes to the level of service achieved by these
measures for the proposed future conditions. The mitigated capacity
analysis should be provided in the appendix of the report.
(1) Mitigation shall be provided in order to meet the Township's goal
that all signalized intersections and the bridges leading to the
island operate at a Level of Service C or better during the peak
hours of the day. Unsignalized intersections should operate at Level
of Service D or better.
(2) The mitigation measures may include items such as, but not limited
to:
(a) Roadway paving or repaving.
(b) Roadway widening to increase lane width or add additional
lanes.
(c) Change to road intersection alignment or lane configuration.
(d) Bypass lanes, left turn lanes or deceleration tapers/lanes.
§ 70-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-4
1:137
§ 70-5. Community impact statement.
The following information is required for community impact statements:
(e) Changes to traffic control/signalization.
(f) Relocation change in design, or reduction in number of access
points.
(g) Reduction in the proposed density or intensity of use.
(3) Sketches should be provided of suggested mitigation. Any
alternatives or suggested phasing of improvements should be
described and illustrated. The responsibility and timing of roadway
improvements shall be described.
(4) Proposed mitigation measures shall be provided to the Wayne
County Department of Public Services for review and comment
prior to approval of the traffic analysis. Any mitigation that involves
changes to optimize signal timing must demonstrate that such
changes will benefit the overall operations and will be acceptable
to the Wayne County Department of Public Services.
P. Joint transportation impact studies. A single transportation impact
study may be submitted by two or more applicants where both
applicants submit plans (rezoning, site or subdivision) for sites adjacent
or in close proximity to one another. The transportation impact study
shall conform to all of the requirements of this section, including an
analysis of both sites and all impacted bridges, and intersections. The
transportation impact study shall document the cumulative impact of
both developments.
A. Existing site conditions. Illustrations and a narrative shall be provided
that describe the characteristics of the site and adjacent right-of-way.
This description should include surrounding land uses, expected
development in the vicinity which could influence future utility capacity,
special site features and a description of any committed infrastructure
improvements.
B. Proposed development. The applicant shall prepare a description of the
proposed development with an enumeration of the square footage for
nonresidential and number of each unit-type for residential
development. Residential equivalent unit figures shall be provided for
water for the new development. The proposed utility system to be
constructed as part of the development shall be detailed on the site plan
or subdivision plat.
C. Wastewater systems. The study shall demonstrate that the proposed
development will be served by adequate public sanitary sewerage. The
public sewerage system shall be considered adequate if there is
sufficient unreserved or uncommitted available capacity to
accommodate expected and ultimate peak flows from the proposed
§ 70-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 70-5
1:138
development, and any necessary improvements shall be constructed
and on-line prior to completion of the development. The analysis of the
capacity of the public sewerage system shall consider the following:
(1) The sewer system's design capacity.
(2) The sewer system's available capacity.
(3) The projected wastewater flow to be generated by proposed new
development.
(4) The impact of other proposed projects on the sewer system's
available capacity.
(5) Projects appearing in the Township's Capital Improvements
Program that will affect the ability of the sewer system to serve
new development.
(6) Other variables found to have an effect on the ability of the sewer
system to accept the projected wastewater flow from new
development.
(7) The sewer system shall be adequate to serve the development. All
lots shall tie into an appropriately sized collector main and shall not
tie directly into an interceptor.
D. Water systems. The study shall demonstrate that the proposed
development will be served by adequate public water. The public water
system shall be considered adequate if the source facilities, storage
tanks, pumping stations and distribution systems have sufficient
unreserved or uncommitted capacity available to provide the pressure
and flow required in addition to minimum fire suppression flow for the
proposed development, and any necessary improvements shall be
constructed and on-line prior to completion of the development. The
analysis of the capacity of the public sewage system shall consider the
following:
(1) The water system's design capacity.
(2) The water system's supply source.
(3) The water system's available capacity.
(4) The projected water needs of proposed new development to include
needs for domestic consumption and fire protection.
(5) Adequacy of the proposed system design to provide pressure, flow
and fire suppression, including required looping of water mains.
(6) Existing storage, treatment, and pumping facilities affected by the
proposed development.
(7) The impact of other proposed projects on the water system's
available capacity.
§ 70-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-5
1:139
(8) Projects appearing in the Township's Capital Improvements
Program that will affect the ability of the water system to serve new
development.
(9) Other variables found to have an effect on the ability of the water
system to satisfy the projected water needs of the new
development.
E. Stormwater Management. The study shall demonstrate that the
proposed development will provide adequate stormwater management
in accordance with Chapter 233, Stormwater Management. The
stormwater management plan shall be considered adequate if the
development is designed, constructed, and maintained to control
runoff, prevent flooding and protect water quality. The analysis of the
stormwater management shall consider the following:
(1) Prevention of increased runoff, flood hazards, water pollution
related to stormwater runoff, soil erosion, channel erosion and
impact to downstream properties.
(2) Prevention of impact to wetlands, watercourses or fish and wildlife
habitat.
(3) Stormwater best management practices to decrease runoff velocity,
allow for natural infiltration and passive storage, allow suspended
sediment particles to settle, and to remove pollutants.
(4) Controlled release of stormwater in accordance with the Wayne
County design standards and Chapter 233, Stormwater
Management.
(5) Stormwater facilities near the Grosse Ile Airport shall not create an
increased bird-aircraft strike hazard.
F. Other utilities. Information shall be provided regarding other utilities
that will be provided to the site, including electricity, gas and
telecommunications. Documentation shall be provided that there is
sufficient electrical capacity to serve the development without
impacting existing uses during peak demand periods.
G. Schools. The study shall demonstrate that there is adequate school
capacity to support the number of dwelling units and that the capacity
of public schools will not be adversely affected by residential
development. School capacity will consider current and projected
enrollments, capacities of individual schools and capacity at each grade
level.
H. Recreation. For any residential development, the study shall
demonstrate that there is adequate open space and recreation facilities
to serve the number of dwelling units proposed. All residential
developments shall include neighborhood open space as required by
Chapter 238, Subdivision Control.
§ 70-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 70-5
1:140
§ 70-6. Fiscal impact analysis.
The following information is required for fiscal impact studies:
I. Community character. The study shall demonstrate compatibility with
surrounding land uses and adherence to development standards,
including landscaping requirements, in accordance with Chapter 285,
Zoning. The study shall also demonstrate consistency with the
sustainable island character of the Township, as articulated in the
Township Master Plan.
J. Environment. The study shall demonstrate that the proposed
development will minimize impact to the environmental conditions of
the Township, through incorporation of an environmental assessment
prepared in accordance with Chapter 98, Environmental Assessment.
K. Township standards. All utilities shall be designed to meet the
requirements of Chapter 210, Sewer Use, Chapter 238, Subdivision
Control, Chapter 258, Utilities, and other applicable Township
engineering standards. Utilities shall be designed and installed with
proper access for maintenance by the Township.
L. Phased developments. Where a development is to be constructed in
phases, a phasing plan shall be provided that indicates the
improvements to be completed with each phase. Each phase of a
development shall have all necessary infrastructure installed to fully
operate independently in accordance with the Township engineering
requirements, regardless of whether future phases are constructed.
A. Existing capita estimate of service costs. The applicant shall determine
existing capita estimate of service costs based upon the most recent
budget provided by the Township. Budgets shall be disaggregated into
categories of service expenditure for general government
administration; public services; police; fire; and recreation. Costs shall
be allocated to residential and nonresidential land uses based upon
existing Township population and employment. Residentially associated
costs will be divided by total population to derive a per capita estimate
of service costs. Nonresidential costs will be divided by local employees
for a per employee estimate of nonresidential service costs.
B. Existing revenues. Existing revenues will be outlined based upon the
most recent budget provided by the Township. Budgets will be
disaggregated into categories of revenue including permit fees,
property taxes, and intergovernmental revenue. Revenues will be
allocated to residential and nonresidential uses, and estimated
revenues associated with residential and nonresidential land uses.
C. Fiscal impact. The applicant shall determine fiscal impact associated
with the development.
(1) The applicant shall outline population and employment changes
associated with the development.
§ 70-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-6
1:141
§ 70-7. Qualifications of preparer.
The person(s) responsible for the preparation of the impact studies shall
have a degree or specific professional training in the preparation of
infrastructure and transportation impact studies.
(2) The applicant shall determine infrastructure needs and costs
associated with the development. This shall identify infrastructure
facilities needed to accommodate the development and project the
costs of needed infrastructure improvements.
(3) Total costs to serve the development shall be calculated.
Residentially induced costs associated with development shall be
calculated by multiplying the per capita estimate of current service
costs from Subsection A above by the population increase of the
proposed development. Nonresidential costs associated with
development shall be calculated by multiplying the per employee
estimate of service costs by the employment increase associated
with the development. Annual debt service costs shall also be
calculated.
(4) Property taxes, state revenue sharing, utility fees, permit fees and
other revenues associated with the development shall be
estimated.
(5) Estimated revenues and costs shall be compared to determine net
fiscal impact on the Township.
D. Marginal costs. The analysis shall also identify any marginal costs
associated with the development. This shall consider surplus capacity
in existing facilities and the point at which new development will
require major expansion to infrastructure and facilities, thereby making
the marginal cost of serving the development higher than the average
per capita cost.
A. The transportation impact assessment/statement preparer shall have
experience in the preparation of transportation impact studies,
experience and familiarity with the Highway Capacity Manual and
other traffic operation evaluation techniques and be one or more of the
following: registered engineer (PE), professional traffic operations
engineer (PTOE) or professional transportation planner (PTP). Any
study involving roadway or traffic signal design work shall be prepared
by or under the supervision of a registered engineer (PE) with specific
training in transportation engineering.
B. The community impact statement shall be prepared by a registered
engineer (PE) with experience in design and construction of utility
systems.
C. The fiscal impact statement preparer shall have demonstrated
experience with accounting, financial analysis, municipal
administration or fiscal analysis.
§ 70-6 GROSSE ILE CODE § 70-8
1:142
§ 70-8. Review and approval procedures.
A. Preapplication. The applicant shall meet with the Planning Commission
at a regularly scheduled meeting prior to completing the impact
statement. The purpose of this meeting is to allow the applicant to
present the scope of the proposed development and receive comments
or direction from the Planning Commission on the scope of the impact
study to fully evaluate the impacts of the development. No formal action
shall be taken.
B. Review requirement. The impact statement shall be reviewed
concurrently with a development application. The procedures for
development reviews are set forth in the Chapter 285, Zoning, Chapter
71, Condominium Projects, and Chapter 238, Subdivision Control.
(1) The impact statement shall be submitted prior to Planning
Commission approval of any site plan.
(2) For special land uses and rezoning, the impact statement shall be
submitted prior to Planning Commission public hearing.
(3) For subdivisions and condominiums, the impact statement shall be
submitted prior to Planning Commission review of the preliminary
plat or condominium site plan.
C. Submittal. The impact statement shall be submitted along with the
environmental assessment required under Chapter 98, Environmental
Assessment.
(1) Six copies of the impact statement shall be provided to the
Community Development Department, which shall forward the
impact statement to following Township departments for review:
(a) Department of Public Services.
(b) Fire Department.
(c) Police Department.
(d) Township Engineer.
(e) Township Planner.
(2) A copy of the impact statement shall also be submitted by the
applicant to the Wayne County Department of Public Services, with
the Township copied on the transmittal.
D. Revisions. If the Departments listed in Subsection C above determine
there are deficiencies in the impact statement, a report of the
deficiencies shall be provided to the applicant and the applicant shall be
required to revise and resubmit the impact statement. Any impact
statement with noted deficiencies will not be rereviewed until all
elements have been addressed. All partial resubmittals will be rejected.
§ 70-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-8
1:143
Any deficiencies identified by the Wayne County Department of Public
Services must also be addressed.
E. Department recommendations. Upon determining that the impact
statement is complete, all of the review departments shall provide
comments on the impact statement prior to any consideration of the
proposed development.
F. Public Service Commission. The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the
impact statement, reflecting any revisions required by Township
departments, for review by the Public Service Commission along with
associated site plans or subdivision plats. The Public Service
Commission shall make a recommendation to the Planning Commission
on the impact statement along with any comments on the site plan or
subdivision application. A recommendation by the Public Service
Commission shall not constitute approval of construction plans.
Subsequent approvals shall be required later in the development
process for detailed engineering plans, inspections, as-builts and
acceptance of utilities.
G. Planning Commission. The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the
impact statement, reflecting any revisions required by the Public
Service Commission, for review by the Planning Commission along with
associated site plans or subdivision plats. For site plans requiring
approval by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall
approve or deny the impact statement based upon the recommendation
of the Public Service Commission and Township departments and
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. For rezonings,
condominiums and preliminary subdivision plats requiring approval by
the Township Board, the Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the Township Board.
H. Township Board. For rezonings, condominiums and preliminary
subdivision plats requiring approval by the Township Board, the
applicant shall submit 10 copies of the impact statement, reflecting any
revisions required by the Public Service Commission and the Planning
Commission. The Township Board shall approve or deny the impact
statement based upon the recommendation of the Public Service
Commission, Planning Commission, Township departments and
compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.
I. Approval consideration. In approving a development, the Planning
Commission and Township Board shall evaluate the project in terms of
the impacts it may have on the community's environment, socioeconomic
conditions, infrastructure, transportation network and fiscal
conditions of the Township. Depending on the significance of the impact
in each of these areas, the Planning Commission and Township Board
can decide to approve the project, reject the project, or modify plans for
development in such a way that impacts can be mitigated. Alternatives
and project modifications shall consider measures that will mitigate the
various impacts, including infrastructure improvements, scaling down
§ 70-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 70-8
1:144
Chapter 71
CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 71-1. Approval required.
Pursuant to authority conferred by law, including the Condominium Act
(Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended), all condominium projects within
the Township of Grosse Ile shall be approved by the Township Planning
Commission and the Township Board. In determining whether to approve
a condominium project, the Planning Commission shall consult with the
Zoning Officer, Township Attorney, Township Engineer and Township
Planner regarding the adequacy of the master deed, deed restrictions,
utility systems and streets and layout and designs in compliance with
all requirements of the Condominium Act, applicable state laws and the
ordinances of the Township of Grosse Ile.
the size of the project or finding a more appropriate location for the
project. Performance guarantees for infrastructure improvements shall
be as required by Section 285-20.5 of the Zoning Chapter and § 238-11
of the Subdivision Control Chapter.
§ 70-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-2
1:145
§ 71-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CODE or CODES — The Code or Codes of Ordinances of the Township of
Grosse Ile.
CONDOMINIUM ACT — Public Act Number 59 of 1978, as amended.
CONDOMINIUM PROJECT or PROJECT — A plan or project consisting of
not less than two condominium units established in conformance with the
Condominium Act.
CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN — The drawings and information
prepared and required by the Condominium Act.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT — That portion of the condominium project designed
and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master
deed.
DEVELOPER — A person engaged in the business of developing a
condominium project as provided in the Condominium Act.
EXPANDABLE CONDOMINIUM — A condominium project to which
additional land may be added pursuant to express provision in the
condominium documents in accordance with this chapter and the
Condominium Act.
MASTER DEED — The approved and recorded condominium document
recording the condominium project, to which is attached as exhibits and
incorporated by reference the approved bylaws for the project and the
approved condominium subdivision plan for the project.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission for the Township of
Grosse Ile.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Grosse Ile, Wayne County, Michigan.
TOWNSHIP BOARD or BOARD — The legislative body of the Township of
Grosse Ile.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Official designated in Chapter 285,
Zoning, Article 24, of the Grosse Ile Township Code.
§ 71-3. Initial information.
Concurrently with the necessary notice required to be given to the
Township of Grosse Ile pursuant to the Condominium Act, a person, firm or
corporation intending to develop a condominium project shall provide the
following information with respect to the project:
A. The name, address and telephone number of:
(1) All persons, firms or corporations with an ownership interest in the
land on which the condominium project will be located together
§ 71-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 71-3
1:146
§ 71-4. Requirements for condominium approval.
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, no condominium
project shall be approved by the Planning Commission until the following
requirements have been satisfied:
with a description of the nature of each entity's interest (for
example, fee owner, optionee, or land contract vendee).
(2) All engineers, attorneys, architects or registered land surveyors
associated with the project.
(3) The developer or proprietor of the condominium project.
B. The legal description of the land on which the condominium project will
be developed together with appropriate tax identification numbers and
proof of ownership of the land acceptable to the Township.
C. The acreage content of the land on which the condominium project will
be developed.
D. The purpose of the project (for example: residential, commercial,
industrial, etc.).
E. Approximate number of condominium units to be developed on the
subject parcel.
F. Whether or not a community water system is contemplated.
G. Whether or not a community sewer system is contemplated.
H. In addition to the foregoing, said person, firm or corporation shall also
supply any additional data and/or information required by Chapter 238,
Subdivision Control, of the Code of Ordinances of the Township of
Grosse Ile and Article 8 of Chapter 285, Zoning, of the Township of
Grosse Ile.
A. The Planning Commission determines that the proposed condominium
project complies with the Condominium Act, the applicable provisions
of Chapter 285, Zoning, and the site plan review and approval process
set forth in Chapter 238, Subdivision Control, of the Code of Ordinances
of the Township of Grosse Ile.
B. The proposed condominium project, if abutting a portion of a public
road, must have said public road improved to the boundary of the
project site.
C. All site condominiums shall comply with the design standards of § 238-7
and required improvements of § 238-8 of Chapter 238, Subdivision
Control. All site condominiums shall be reviewed following the
procedures of §§ 238-4 through 238-6 of Chapter 238, Subdivision
Control.
§ 71-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 71-4
1:147
§ 71-5. Site plans for expandable or convertible projects.
Prior to expansion or conversion of a condominium project to additional
land, the new phase of the project shall undergo site plan review and
approval pursuant to the provisions of the Condominium Act and this
chapter.
§ 71-6. Master deed and restrictive covenants to be furnished.
The condominium project developer shall furnish the Township with the
following: one copy of the approved and recorded master deed, and one
copy of all restrictive covenants. The Master Deed shall be approved and
recorded before any condominium units shall be sold, conveyed or leased in
the condominium project.
§ 71-7. Monuments required.
All condominium projects shall be marked with monuments as provided in
the Condominium Act and the applicable ordinances of the Township.
§ 71-8. Final approval.
The Township Board shall not give its final approval to any condominium
project until all of the provisions of the Condominium Act and the provisions
of this chapter are satisfied and until it has received the recommendations
of the Planning Commission after the public hearing concerning same.
§ 71-9. Compliance with federal, state and local laws.
Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, all condominium
projects shall comply with all federal and state statutes and all local
ordinances.
§ 71-10. Fees.
All developers of condominium projects within the Township shall pay the
required site plan review fees in accordance with the schedule of fees
posted in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 71-11. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
D. All condominium units shall be served by the Township public water and
sanitary sewer system.
§ 71-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 71-11
1:148
Chapter 80
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Minors — See Ch. 155.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 185.
Trespassing — See Ch. 255.
§ 80-1. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall:
A. Refuse or fail to support his or her spouse and children, provided such
person shall have sufficient ability to do so;
B. Engage in prostituting;
C. Peep into the window of an inhabited residence;
D. Engage in an illegal occupation or business;
E. Interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of others upon the
public roadways or in public places or places open to the public without
lawful authority to do so;
F. In a naked state bathe, swim or wade in any public waters or waters
open to the view of the public;
G. Make an immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his or her person in
any public place or in any place open to the view of the public;
H. Obstruct, resist, hinder or interfere with any public employee or peace
officer in the discharge of his or her duties without lawful authority to
do so;
I. Utilize as his or her residence any motor vehicle, recreational vehicle,
tent, boat, shed or barn; or inhabit or occupy any unoccupied building
or shelter without the permission of the owner thereof; [Amended
1-10-1983 by Ord. No. 142]
J. Summon as a joke or prank or otherwise without good reason, by
telephone or otherwise, the Police Department or Fire Department or
other public departments or officials;
K. Throw or propel or cause to be thrown or propelled any missile or
object likely to cause bodily or property injury or damage;
L. Engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place or in any
place open to public view;
M. Be a vagrant;
§ 71-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-1
1:149
§ 80-2. Loitering. [Amended 1-10-1983 by Ord. No. 142]
It shall be unlawful for any person to linger or loiter in any public place
or place open to the public or in any business establishment without the
permission of the owner, lessee, managing agent or person in control or
charge thereof.
§ 80-3. Assault.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or an assault and
battery upon the person of another.
§ 80-4. Permitting noisy conduct; illegal business.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any noisy conduct in any house
owned, occupied or controlled by him to the annoyance or disturbance of
the surrounding neighborhood or neighbors; or to attend, frequent, operate
or be an occupant of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale
of intoxicating liquor, or where any other illegal business or occupation is
conducted.
§ 80-5. Disturbing assemblies.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any school,
meeting, congregation, assembly, athletic event, or any group lawfully
assembled for religious, political, educational or entertainment purposes or
for other lawful purposes by making any disturbing noise or engaging in
any profane discourse or engaging in any behavior in or near the place of
assembly so as to disturb the meeting or assembly.
§ 80-6. Disturbing the peace.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in a fight or act in a violent,
boisterous, turbulent, quarrelsome, indecent or disorderly manner, or to
use profane, obscene or vulgar language, or to commit any act, or to do
anything to disturb the good order, peace and dignity of the Township, its
inhabitants or other persons in the Township.
§ 80-7. Malicious destruction of property. [Amended 5-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 264]
N. Beg in a public place;
O. Jostle or roughly crowd people unnecessarily in a public place or place
open to the public.
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to destroy, injure, remove,
damage or deface any public property or the private property of
another; or in any manner to interfere with or hinder the use of any
public or any private property of another, including any property or
equipment of any public utility serving the people of the Township, or to
§ 80-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 80-7
1:150
§ 80-8. Abandoned refrigerators.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or
dwelling, or in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended,
or discarded icebox, refrigerator, deep freeze, trunk, chest, cooler, cabinet
or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which
may not be released for opening from the inside of said icebox, refrigerator,
deep freeze, trunk, chest, cabinet or other container without first removing
the locks or doors therefrom.
§ 80-9. Larceny. [Amended 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 265]
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of larceny, by
stealing, of the property of another, any money, goods or chattels, or any
bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange
or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or
concerning money or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or
any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable
contract in force, or any receipt, release or defeasance, or any writ, process
or public record, if the property stolen shall be of the value of less than
$200. A person who commits the offense of larceny shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a
fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of the property stolen,
whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
§ 80-10. Possession of stolen property.
Any person who shall have possession of stolen property in the amount of
$100 or less, or who shall aid and abet another to do so, shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
§ 80-11. Tampering with motor vehicles and/or boats. [Amended
1-10-1983 by Ord. No. 143]
Any person who shall tamper with a motor vehicle and/or boat without the
permission of the owner of the vehicle, or who shall aid and abet another to
do so, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
paste any handbills on any public property, or to disturb, tamper with,
disconnect or damage any water meter without authority to do so.
B. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person who willfully and maliciously
destroys, injures, removes, defaces or damages any public property or
the personal property of another where the damage done is less than
$200, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or three times the
amount of the destruction or injury, whichever is greater, or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both imprisonment and
fine.21
21.Editor's Note: Original Sections 6-8, Desecration of the flag, and 6-9, Checks without
sufficient funds, which immediately followed this subsection, were deleted 7-22-2002.
§ 80-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-12
1:151
§ 80-12. Fireworks.
No person shall possess, sell, dispense, or discharge any smoke-bombs nor
possess, sell, dispense, or discharge any fireworks except of the type and
under the conditions permitted by Michigan statute.
§ 80-13. Fire hydrants.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully damage or to tamper in any
way or manner with publicly owned fire hydrants within the Township.
§ 80-14. False fire alarms.
No person shall knowingly communicate, publish, or participate in the
communication or publication of any false fire alarm.
§ 80-15. Water tanks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to vandalize, disfigure, climb upon,
hurl objects at, shoot at, paint, or in any manner to trespass upon any
publicly owned water tank or reservoir, including the foundations thereof.
This section shall not apply to any person duly authorized to repair, renovate
or service any water tank.
§ 80-16. Spitting in public places.
No person shall spit, urinate, or defecate upon any public roadway or upon
any public building or building open to the public or upon the floor or walls
thereof or upon the floor or walls of any hall, assembly room, church or
school building.
§ 80-17. Larceny from a motor vehicle. [Added 5-10-1999 by Ord.
No. 266]
A person who commits larceny by stealing or unlawfully removing or taking
any wheel, tire, air bag, radio, stereo, clock, telephone, computer or other
electronic device in or on any motor vehicle, house trailer, trailer, or
semitrailer where the value of the property is less than $200 is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or
a fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of the property,
whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
§ 80-18. Buying, receiving or possessing stolen money, goods or
property. [Added 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 268]
A person who buys, receives, possesses, conceals or aids in the concealment
of stolen, embezzled, or converted money, goods or property knowing the
money, goods or property to be stolen, embezzled or converted, if the
property purchased, received, possessed or concealed is of a value less than
$200, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the value
§ 80-12 GROSSE ILE CODE § 80-18
1:152
of the property purchased, received, possessed or concealed, whichever is
greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.
§ 80-19. Malicious use of service provided by communications
common carrier. [Added 3-25-1991 by Ord. No. 184]
§ 80-20. Resisting or obstructing officer in discharge of duty.
Any person who shall knowingly and willfully obstruct, resist or oppose
any Township Treasurer, police officer, or other officer or person duly
authorized, in serving or attempting to serve or execute any process, rule
A. Any person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service
provided by a communications common carrier with intent to terrorize,
frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest, or annoy any other
person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by any of
the following:
(1) Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in
the course of a telephone conversation.
(2) Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph
message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill,
has suffered death, or has been the victim of a crime or of an
accident.
(3) Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between
a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and
other equipment provided for the transmission of messages by
telephone, thereby interfering with any communication service.
(4) Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene, or offensive language or
suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone
conversation.
(5) Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking,
deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or
after the telephone call is answered.
(6) Making an unsolicited commercial telephone call which is received
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of
this subsection, "an unsolicited commercial telephone call" means
a call made by a person or recording device, on behalf of a person,
corporation, or other entity, soliciting business or contributions.
(7) Deliberately calling a telephone of another person in a repetitive
manner which causes interruption in telephone service or prevents
the person from utilizing his or her telephone service.
B. Any person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days.
§ 80-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-20
1:153
or order made or issued by lawful authority, or who shall resist any officer
in the execution of any ordinance, bylaw, or any rule, order or resolution
made, issued, or passed by the Township Board of Trustees of Grosse Ile,
or Township Board, or Commission of the Township, or who shall assault,
beat or wound any Township Treasurer, police officer, or other officer
duly authorized, while serving or attempting to serve or execute any such
process, rule or order, or for having served or attempted to serve or execute
the same, or who shall so obstruct, resist, oppose, assault, beat or wound
any of the above-named officers, or any other person or persons authorized
by law to maintain and preserve the peace, in their lawful acts, attempts
and efforts to maintain, preserve and keep the peace, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment of not more than 90 days, and/
or by a fine of not more than $500.
§ 80-21. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Except where otherwise provided in this chapter, penalties for violation
of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, § 1-3.
Chapter 84
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 80-20 GROSSE ILE CODE § 80-21
1:154
ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 189]
§ 84-1. Development Authority established.
In recognition of the fact that it is in the best interests of the public to
halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where
possible in its business district, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration,
and to encourage historic preservation and promote economic growth, a
Downtown Development Authority is hereby established pursuant to Act No.
197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, to be known as the "Grosse Ile
Downtown Development Authority within the Township of Grosse Ile."
§ 84-2. Organization and membership; conduct of business.
A. The Authority shall be under the supervision and control of a Board
consisting of the Supervisor of the Township of Grosse Ile and eight
members appointed by the Supervisor, subject to approval by the
Township Board of Trustees. At least five of the members shall be
persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district.
At least one of the members shall be a resident of the downtown district
if the downtown district has 100 or more persons residing within it. Of
the members first appointed, two shall be appointed for one year, two
for two years, two for three years, and two for four years. Thereafter, a
member shall serve for a term of four years. An appointment to fill a
vacancy shall be made by the Supervisor for the unexpired term only.
Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The Chairperson of the
Board shall be elected by the Board.
B. Before assuming the duties of office, a member shall qualify by taking
and subscribing to the constitutional oath of office.
C. The business which the Board may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting of the Board held in compliance with the Open Meetings
Act, Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, being §§ 15.261 to 15.275 of
the Michigan Compiled Laws. Public notice of the time, date, and place
of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of
the Public Acts of 1976. The Board shall adopt rules consistent with Act
No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976 governing its procedure and the
holding of regular meetings, subject to the approval of the Township
Board of Trustees. Special meetings may be held if called in the manner
provided in the rules of the Board.
D. Pursuant to notice and after having been given an opportunity to be
heard, a member of the Board may be removed for cause by the
Township Board of Trustees. Removal of a member is subject to review
by the Circuit Court.
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-2
1:155
§ 84-3. Powers of Board.
The Board of the Downtown Development Authority as herein created shall
have the following powers and may:
E. All expense items of the Authority shall be publicized monthly and the
financial records shall always be open to the public.
A. Prepare an analysis of economic changes taking place in the downtown
district.
B. Study and analyze the impact of metropolitan growth upon the
downtown district.
C. Plan and propose the construction, renovation, repair, remodeling,
rehabilitation, restoration, preservation, or reconstruction of a public
facility, an existing building, or a multiple-family dwelling unit which
may be necessary or appropriate to the execution of a plan which, in the
opinion of the Board, aids in the economic growth of the downtown
district.
D. Plan, propose, and implement an improvement to a public facility within
the development area to comply with the barrier-free design
requirements of the State Construction Code promulgated under the
State Construction Code Act of 1972, Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of
1972, being §§ 125.1501 to 125.1531 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
E. Develop long-range plans, in cooperation with the Township Planning
Commission, designed to halt the deterioration of property values in the
downtown district and to promote the economic growth of the
downtown district, and take such steps as may be necessary to
persuade property owners to implement the plans to the fullest extent
possible.
F. Implement any plan of development in the downtown district necessary
to achieve the purposes of this act, in accordance with the powers of the
Authority as granted by this act.
G. Make and enter into contracts necessary or incidental to the exercise of
its powers and the performance of its duties.
H. Acquire by purchase or otherwise, on terms and conditions and in a
manner the Authority deems proper, or own, convey, or otherwise
dispose of, or lease as lessor or lessee, land and other property, real or
personal, or rights or interests therein, which the Authority determines
is reasonably necessary to achieve the purposes of this act, and to grant
or acquire licenses, easements, and options with respect thereto.
I. Improve land and construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, restore and
preserve, equip, improve, maintain, repair, and operate any building,
including multifamily dwellings and any necessary or desirable
appurtenances thereto, within the downtown district for the use, in
§ 84-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 84-3
1:156
§ 84-4. Financing.
whole or in part, of any public or private person or corporation, or a
combination thereof.
J. Fix, charge, and collect fees, rents and charges for the use of any
building or property under its control or any part thereof, or facility
therein, and pledge the fees, rents, and charges for the payment of
revenue bonds issued by the Authority.
K. Lease any building or property under its control, or any part thereof.
L. Accept grants and donations of property, labor, or other things of value
from a public or private source.
M. Acquire and construct public facilities.
N. Any other act permitted by law.
A. The activities of the Authority shall be financed from one or more of the
following sources:
(1) Donations to the Authority for the performance of its functions.
(2) Proceeds of a tax imposed pursuant to Section 12 of Act No. 197 of
the Public Acts of 1975, as amended.
(3) Monies borrowed and to be repaid as authorized by Section 13 of
Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended.
(4) Revenues from any property, building, or facility owned, leased,
licensed or operated by the Authority or under its control, subject
to the limitations imposed upon the Authority by trusts or other
agreements.
(5) Proceeds of a tax increment financing plan, established under
Sections 14 to 16 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as
amended.
(6) Money obtained from other sources approved by the Township
Board of Trustees.
(7) Any other source permitted by law.
B. Money received by the Authority and not covered under the above
provisions shall immediately be deposited to the credit of the Authority,
subject to disbursement pursuant to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of
1975, as amended. Except as provided in Act No. 197 of the Public Acts
of 1975, as amended, the Township shall not obligate itself, nor shall it
ever be obligated to pay any sums from public funds, other than money
received by the Township pursuant to this section, for or on account of
the activities of the Authority.
§ 84-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-5
1:157
§ 84-5. Development plans.
When the Board decides to finance a project in the downtown district by the
use of revenue bonds as authorized in Section 13 or tax increment financing
as authorized in Sections 14, 15 and 16 of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts
of 1975, as amended, it shall prepare a development plan. The development
plan shall contain:
A. The designation of boundaries of the development area in relation to
highways, streets, streams or otherwise.
B. The location and extent of existing streets and other public facilities
within the development area and shall designate the location,
character, and extent of the categories of public and private land uses
then existing and proposed for the development area, including
residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, educational, and other
uses and shall include a legal description of the development area.
C. A description of existing improvements in the development area to be
demolished, repaired, or altered, a description of any repairs and
alterations, and an estimate of the time required for completion.
D. The location, extent, character, and estimated cost of the improvements
including rehabilitation contemplated for the development area and an
estimate of the time required for completion.
E. A statement of the construction or stages of construction planned, and
the estimated time of completion of each stage.
F. A description of any parts of the development area to be left as open
space and the use contemplated for the space.
G. A description of any portions of the development area which the
Authority desires to sell, donate, exchange, or lease to or from the
Township and the proposed terms.
H. A description of desired zoning changes and changes in streets, street
levels, intersections, and utilities.
I. An estimate of the cost of the development, a statement of the proposed
method of financing the development and the ability of the Authority to
arrange the financing.
J. Designation of the person or persons, natural or corporate, to whom all
or a portion of the development is to be leased, sold, or conveyed in any
manner and for whose benefit the project is being undertaken if that
information is available to the Authority.
K. The procedures for bidding for the leasing, purchasing, or conveying in
any manner of all or a portion of the development upon its completion, if
there is no express or implied agreement between the Authority and
persons, natural or corporate, that all or a portion of the development
will be leased, sold, or conveyed in any manner to those persons.
§ 84-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 84-5
1:158
§ 84-6. Development Area Citizens Council.
L. Estimates of the number of persons residing in the development area
and the number of families and individuals to be displaced. If occupied
residents are designated for acquisition and clearance by the Authority,
a development plan shall include a survey of the families and
individuals to be displaced, including their income and racial
composition, a statistical description of the housing supply in the
community, including the number of private and public units in
existence or under construction, the condition of those in existence, the
number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units, the annual rate
of turnover of the various types of housing and the range of rents and
sale prices, an estimate of the total demand for housing in the
community, and the estimated capacity of private and public housing
available to displaced families and individuals.
M. A plan for establishing priority for the relocation of persons displaced
by the development in any new housing in the development area.
N. Provision for the costs of relocating persons displaced by the
development and financial assistance and reimbursement of expenses,
including litigation expenses and expenses incident to the transfer of
title, in accordance with the standards and provisions of the Federal
Uniform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Acquisition Policies
Act of 1970, being Public Law 91-646, 42 USC § 4601 et seq.
O. A plan for compliance with Act No. 227 of the Public Acts of 1972, being
§§ 213.321 to 213.332 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
P. Other material which the Authority or the Township Board of Trustees
deems pertinent.
A. If a proposed development area has residing within it 100 or more
residents, a Development Area Citizens Council shall be established at
least 90 days before the public hearing on the development or tax
increment financing plan. The Development Area Citizens Council shall
be established by the Township Board of Trustees and shall consist of
not less than nine members. The members of the Development Area
Citizens Council shall be residents of the development area and shall be
appointed by the Township Board of Trustees. A member of a
Development Area Citizens Council shall be at least 18 years of age.
The Development Area Citizens Council shall be representative of the
development area.
B. The Development Area Citizens Council shall act as an advisory body to
the Authority and the Township Board of Trustees in the adoption of the
development or tax increment financing plans.
§ 84-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-7
1:159
§ 84-7. Governing procedures.
The Downtown Development Authority shall have all the powers and duties
prescribed by Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, which is
incorporated herein by this reference. Any questions of interpretation of the
powers and duties and responsibilities of the Authority shall be resolved by
reference to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended.
§ 84-8. Boundaries.
A. The Authority shall exercise its powers within the following described
area: Commencing at the intersection of the center line of Macomb
Street (120 feet wide) and the center line of Meridian Road and
continuing southerly along the center line of Meridian approximately
605 feet more or less; thence easterly along the southerly line of Lot
108 of Supervisor's Grosse Ile Subdivision (and said lot line extended)
approximately 5,500 feet to the U.S. Harbor Line lying east of East
River Road; thence northeasterly along said U.S. Harbor Line 1,230 feet
more or less to the northerly line of Gray's Drive (66 feet wide) as
extended to intersect with the U.S. Harbor Line; thence westerly along
the said northerly line extended and along the north line of Gray's Drive
as platted approximately 6,840 feet to the center line of Meridian Road;
thence southerly along the center line of Meridian Road approximately
500 feet to the point of beginning, except the following described
parcels:
(1) Lots 1 through 13 inclusive of Gray Garden's Subdivision as
recorded in Liber 37, Page 20.
(2) Royal Orleans Condominiums (Wayne County Condominiums Plan
No. 286).
(3) East Shore Condominiums (Wayne County Condominiums Plan No.
11).
(4) Colony Condominiums (Wayne County Condominium Plan No. 53).
(5) Parkelane Villas (Wayne County Condominiums Plan No. 155).
(6) Parkelane Condominiums (Wayne County Condominiums Plan No.
160).
(7) Grays Village (Wayne County Condominiums Plan No. 273).
(8) Golf Club Manor Condominiums (Wayne County Condominium Plan
No. 141).
(9) South Shore Properties, also known as "Isle Royal Apartments,"
being the West 200 feet of the East 600 feet of Lot 101 of
Supervisor's Grosse Ile Subdivision No. 7 as recorded in Liber 63,
Page 58.
§ 84-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 84-8
1:160
B. In addition to the above, the Downtown Development Authority District
shall also contain all of Private Claim No. 53, known as "Stoney Island."
§ 84-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-8
1:161

ARTICLE II
Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan
[Adopted 4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 196]
§ 84-9. Definitions.
A. The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings unless
the context clearly requires otherwise:
ACT 197 — The Downtown Development Authority Act, Act No. 197 of
Public Acts of Michigan of 1975, as may be amended.
CAPTURED ASSESSED VALUE — The amount in any one year by which
the current assessed value as finally equalized of all taxable property in
the development area exceeds the initial assessed value, as more fully
described in the development plan and tax increment financing plan.
DEVELOPMENT AREA — The area within the boundaries of the Grosse
Ile Township Downtown Development Authority District, as described
in Article I of this chapter, adopted on July 27, 1992, and as illustrated
in the Downtown Development Authority development plan and tax
increment financing plan.
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY — The Grosse Ile Township Downtown
Development Authority as established by Article I of this chapter,
adopted on July 27, 1992.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The development plan for the Downtown
Development Authority District, illustrated in the Downtown
Development Authority development plan and tax increment financing
plan.
INITIAL ASSESSED VALUE — The most recently assessed value, as
finally equalized by the State Board of Equalization, of all taxable
property within the boundaries of the Downtown Development
Authority District at the time of adoption of this article, as more fully
described in the Downtown Authority development plan and tax
increment financing plan.
TAX INCREMENT — That portion of the tax levy of all taxing
jurisdictions paid each year on real and personal property in the
Downtown Development Authority District on the captured assessed
value, as more fully described in the Downtown Development Authority
development plan and tax increment financing plan.
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN — The "Tax Increment Financing
Plan for the Grosse Ile Township Downtown Development Authority
District," including the development plan, as transmitted to the
Township Board by the Downtown Development Authority for public
hearing, and as confirmed by this article, copies of which are on file in
the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 84-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-9
1:163
§ 84-10. Approval and adoption of plans.
TAXING JURISDICTION — Each unit of government levying an ad
valorem property tax on property in the Downtown Development
Authority District.
B. All other undefined terms, unless the context of this article specifically
required otherwise, shall have the meanings attributed to them by
current usage.
A. Pursuant to § 19(1) of Act 197, the Township Board of Grosse Ile
Township, Wayne County, hereby finds and determines in accordance
with § 19(1) of Act 197 as follows:
(1) That the development plan and tax increment financing plan
constitute and embody a public purpose of Grosse Ile Township;
(2) That the development plan and tax increment financing plan meet
the requirements set forth in §§ 14(2) and 17(2) of Act 197;
(3) That the proposed method of financing the development activities
described in the development plan and tax increment financing
plan is feasible, and that the Downtown Development Authority has
the ability to arrange the financing;
(4) That the development activities described in the development plan
and tax increment financing plan are reasonable and necessary to
carry out the purposes of Act 197;
(5) That the land to be acquired within the Downtown Development
Authority District is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes
of the development plan and tax increment financing plan and the
purposes of Act 197;
(6) That the development plan and tax increment financing plan is in
reasonable accord with the approved Master Plan of Grosse Ile
Township;
(7) That public services, such as fire and police protection and utilities,
are, or will be, adequate to service the Downtown Development
Authority District; and
(8) That such changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections,
and utilities as are contemplated by the development plan and tax
increment financing plan are reasonably necessary for the project.
B. In accordance with the foregoing considerations, the Downtown
Development Authority development plan and tax increment financing
plan are hereby approved and adopted for all purposes of Act 197
consistent with said plans. [Amended 7-22-2002]
§ 84-9 GROSSE ILE CODE § 84-10
1:164
§ 84-11. Boundaries of development area.
The boundaries of the development area are hereby adopted and confirmed.
§ 84-12. Preparation of base year assessment roll.
§ 84-13. Preparation of annual assessment roll.
Each year within 15 days following the final equalization of property in
the development district, the Township Assessor shall prepare an updated
annual assessment roll. The annual assessment roll shall show the
information required in the base year assessment roll and, in addition, the
captured assessed value for that year. Copies of the annual assessment
roll shall be transmitted by the Assessor to the same persons as the base
year assessment roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in
accordance with this article and the development plan and tax increment
financing plan.
§ 84-14. Account status report.
Annually, the Authority shall submit to the governing body of the
municipality and the State Tax Commission a report on the status of the
tax increment financing account. The report shall include: the amount and
source of revenue in the account; the amount and purpose of expenditures
from the account; the amount of principal and interest on any outstanding
bonded indebtedness; the initial assessed value of the project area; the
captured assessed value retained by the Authority; the tax increments
received; and any additional information the governing body or the State
Tax Commission considers necessary. The report shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality.
C. A copy of the development plan and tax increment financing plan, and
all respective amendments thereto, shall be maintained on file in the
Township Clerk's office and cross-indexed to this article.
A. Within 90 days of the effective date of this article, the Township
Assessor shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll. The base
year assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in which the
Downtown Development Authority District is located, the initial
assessed value of the development district on the effective date of this
article, and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing
jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in the development
district.
B. The Township Assessor shall transmit copies of the base year
assessment roll to the Township Treasurer, the County Treasurer, the
Downtown Development Authority, and each taxing jurisdiction,
together with a notice that the assessment roll has been prepared in
accordance with this article and the development plan and tax
increment financing plan approved by this article.
§ 84-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-15
1:165
§ 84-15. Implementation.
All tax increments shall be transmitted by the Township Treasurer into an
account of the Downtown Development Authority at the earliest practicable
date. All tax increments so received by the Downtown Development
Authority shall be disbursed in accordance with the provisions of the
development plan and tax increment financing plan and the requisitions
of the Downtown Development Authority. Surplus funds shall revert
proportionately to the respective taxing bodies. For the purpose of
segregation and transfer of such funds, the Township Treasurer shall
maintain a separate fund which shall be kept in a depository bank account
or accounts in a bank or banks approved by Grosse Ile Township, to be
designated "Downtown Development Authority project fund." All amounts
payable to the Downtown Development Authority shall, subject to the
foregoing, be deposited directly in the Downtown Development Authority
project fund.
§ 84-16. Duration of tax increment financing plan.
The tax increment financing plan will continue in effect until all purposes of
the development plan and tax increment financing plan have been fulfilled.
§ 84-15 GROSSE ILE CODE § 84-16
1:166
ARTICLE III
Adoption of Amended Plan
[Adopted 6-14-1999 by Ord. No. 270]
§ 84-17. Determination of public purpose.
Following a duly noticed public hearing to amend the downtown
development and tax increment financing plan adopted by the Township of
Grosse Ile Downtown Development Authority on the the 14th day of June
1999, and having given due consideration to the following standards and
criteria as set forth in § 19(1) of P.A. 197 of 1975, as amended:
§ 84-18. Approval of plan.
In accordance with the foregoing considerations, the downtown
development and tax increment financing plans, as amended, dated June
14, 1999, are hereby approved and adopted for all purposes of P.A. 197
of 1975, as amended, consistent with said plan. Copies of the downtown
development and tax increment financing plans and all respective
amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the Township Clerk's
office and cross-indexed to this article.
A. The tax increment financing plan meets the requirements set forth in
§§ 14 and 15 of said P.A. 197 of 1975, as amended.
B. The development plan meets the requirements set forth in § 17(2) of
said P.A. 197 of 1975, as amended.
C. The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the
Authority has the ability to arrange the financing.
D. The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes
of said P.A. 197 of 1975, as amended.
E. The land included within the development area to be acquired, if any, is
reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and of P.A.
197 of 1975, as amended, in an efficient and economically satisfactory
manner.
F. The development plan is in reasonable accord with the Master Plan of
the Township.
G. Public services such as fire and police protection and utilities are or will
be adequate to service the project area.
H. No changes in zoning are necessary for the project and for the
Township. It is hereby found and determined that the plan constitutes
and seeks to accomplish a public purpose.
§ 84-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-19
1:167
§ 84-19. Public purpose.
The Township Board hereby determines that the plan constitutes a public
purpose.
§ 84-20. Best interests of public.
The Township Board hereby determines that it is in the best interests
of the public to proceed with the plan in order to halt property value
deterioration, to increase property tax valuation, to eliminate the causes
of the deterioration in property values, and to promote growth in the
Downtown District.
§ 84-21. Effect on existing provisions and proceedings.
Any proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired,
or incurred at the time this article takes effect are saved and may be
consummated according to the law in force when they were commenced.
§ 84-19 GROSSE ILE CODE § 84-21
1:168
Chapter 88
DRUGS
§ 88-1. Controlled substances. [Amended 2-11-1991 by Ord. No.
183; 7-22-2002]
A person shall not knowingly or intentionally possess marijuana (cannabis
sativa L.), lysergic acid diethylamide, peyote, mescaline,
dimethyltryptamine, psilocyn, psilocybin, or any controlled substances
classified in Schedule 5 of Act Number 368 of 1978, as amended, unless
the controlled substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid
prescription order of a practitioner (as defined in the Public Health Code)
while acting in the course of the practitioner's professional practice, or
except as otherwise authorized by the Public Health Code.
§ 88-2. Chemical agents.
No person shall intentionally smell or inhale the fumes of any chemical
agent or intentionally drink or consume or otherwise introduce any
chemical agent into his or her respiratory or circulatory system, except
upon or under a physician's or dentist's direction or prescription, for the
purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, euphoria, excitement,
exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of the senses or the nervous system.
The term "chemical agent" includes any substance containing a toxic
chemical or organic solvent having the property of releasing toxic vapors,
including but not limited to glue, acetone, toluene, carbon tetrachloride,
hydrocarbons and hydrocarbon derivatives.
§ 88-3. Possession of drug paraphernalia. [Added 3-10-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-04]
A. It is unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, display,
supply or furnish drug paraphernalia.
B. "Drug paraphernalia" defined.
(1) The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and
materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed
for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, measuring, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled
substance, as defined by state law, in violation of state or local law.
(2) By way of example and not by law of limitation, "drug
paraphernalia" includes a hypodermic syringe or needle, marijuana
pipe, roach clip or any other implement or device which is primarily
adapted or designed for the administration or use of any controlled
substance.
§ 84-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 88-3
1:169
§ 88-4. Loitering.22 [Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01]
C. Exemptions. This chapter shall not apply to licensed medical
technicians, nurses, doctors, pharmacists or other medical
practitioners in the normal lawful course of their respective profession,
nor to public officers or employers in the performance of their official
duties, nor to persons suffering from a medical condition requiring selfinjection.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter about, frequent or be
present in or about any such building, apartment, automobile, boat or
public place of any description wherein illegal controlled substances
and/or narcotic paraphernalia is knowingly being sold, dispensed,
furnished, given away, kept or used.
(1) "Loiter" means to delay, linger, or stand around.
(2) "Public place" means an area open to the public or exposed to
public view and includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, parks,
driveways, and parking lots.
B. Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining
whether any person has the requisite knowledge that the illegal drug
activity is present are as follows:
(1) The alleged perpetrator is under the influence of a controlled
substance or in possession of a controlled substance and/or
narcotic paraphernalia.
(2) The building, apartment, automobile, boat or other place described
has the odor of burning marijuana or other controlled substance, or
there is sufficient cause to believe that a reasonable person would
know that marijuana or another controlled substance is being used.
(3) Any other information or circumstance that would provide
information or knowledge to a reasonable person that illegal drug
activity is present.
C. Any person who violates Subsection A above is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by fine of $500 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
D. A person who has the opportunity to immediately depart the described
location upon learning of the illegal drug activity or presence of illegal
controlled substance on the premises but fails to do so shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
22.Editor's Note: Former § 88-4, Penalty, was renumbered as § 88-6, Penalty, to accommodate
the addition of this new § 88-4.
§ 88-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 88-5
1:170
§ 88-5. Probation without judgment of guilt. [Added 9-26-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-0923]
When an individual who has not previously been convicted of an offense
under this chapter or under any statute of the United States or of any state
relating to narcotic drugs, coca leaves, marijuana, stimulant, depressant,
or hallucinogenic drugs, pleads guilty to or is found guilty under § 88-1
or 88-2, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt with the consent
of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on
probation upon terms and conditions that shall include, but are not limited
to, payment of a probation supervision fee as prescribed in Section 3c of
Chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Act No. 175 of the Public
Acts of 1927, being MCLA § 771.3c. Upon violation of a term or condition,
the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise
provided. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the
court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge
and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt
and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or for purposes of
disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime,
including the additional penalties imposed for second or subsequent
convictions under MCLA § 333.7413. There may be only one discharge
and dismissal under this section as to an individual. The records and
identifications division of the Department of State Police shall retain a
nonpublic record of an arrest and discharge or dismissal under this section.
This record shall be furnished to a court or police agency upon request
for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action involving
the possession or use of a controlled substance, or an imitation controlled
substance as defined in MCLA § 333.7341, covered in this section has
already once utilized this section. For purposes of this section, a person
subjected to a civil fine for a first violation of MCLA § 333.7341(4) shall not
be considered to have previously been convicted of an offense under this
chapter.
§ 88-6. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002; amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No.
03-04]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3.
Chapter 94
EMERGENCY TECHNICAL RESCUE
§ 94-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Emergency Technical
Rescue."
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as § 88-4, but was renumbered as
§ 88-5 because the Code already contained a § 88-4.
§ 88-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-2
1:171
§ 94-2. Definitions and word usage.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words
used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The providing, sending or utilizing of police,
fire fighting, emergency medical or rescue, or public works services by the
Township of Grosse Ile, or by a private person or governmental agency
operating at the request or direction of the Township, to an emergency
technical rescue.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
TECHNICAL RESCUE — Any rescue which may become injurious to the
public health, safety, or welfare, or to persons, and shall include, but not
be limited to, confined space, trench rescue, dive rescue or water and ice
rescue, and any HAZMAT operations.
§ 94-3. Duty to remove, clean up and pay response costs.
Any person who accidentally, negligently or intentionally causes or is
responsible for an emergency technical rescue affecting persons or
property within the Township of Grosse Ile shall be responsible for the
immediate and complete costs of returning affected property to its condition
before the technical rescue, if necessary, and for any and all costs of the
emergency response to such technical rescue.
§ 94-4. Costs of response, removal and cleanup.
The costs of the emergency response and the removal and cleanup of a
technical rescue or threatened rescue shall include, but not be limited
to, the actual costs incurred by the Township, or a private person or
governmental agency operating at the request or direction of the Township,
when responding to the technical rescue or threatened rescue, including
the costs of providing police, fire fighting, emergency medical and rescue,
and public works services unrelated to the normal provision of such
services. These costs shall include actual labor costs of Township personnel,
including workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative
overhead, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials obtained directly
by the Township and costs of any contract labor and materials.
§ 94-5. Charge against person responsible.
The costs of the emergency technical rescue or threatened rescue shall be
a charge against the person liable for the costs under this chapter. The
Township shall have the right to initiate proceedings in any court as a
matured debt of the Township.
§ 94-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 94-6
1:172
§ 94-6. Cost recovery schedule. [Amended 7-22-2002]
The Township of Grosse Ile Board shall from time to time, by resolution,
adopt a schedule of the costs included within the expense of a response to
an emergency technical rescue or threatened rescue. This schedule shall be
available to the public at the Township office.
§ 94-7. Township personnel enumerated. [Added 7-22-2002]
Employees of the Township are to include but not be limited to police
officers, Fire Department personnel, Department of Public Works
employees, airport employees, and reserve police personnel.
§ 94-8. Replacement of emergency equipment. [Added 7-22-2002]
Any emergency equipment destroyed or declared unsafe for use as a direct
result of the technical rescue or threatened rescue will be replaced with the
same or better equipment by person(s) responsible for the rescue within 30
days of the incident.
§ 94-9. Billing.
The Township may, within 10 days of receiving itemized costs, or any part
thereof, incurred for an emergency technical rescue or threatened rescue,
submit a bill for the costs by first class mail or personal service to the
person liable for the costs under this chapter, at the person's last known
address, demanding payment of the amount due. The bill shall require full
payment within 30 days from the date of service.
§ 94-10. Enforcement.
If the person fails to pay the bill within 30 days of service and the person
is the owner of the affected property, the Township may add such costs to
the tax roll as to such property, and may levy and collect such costs in the
same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real property taxes
against the property. The Township may also bring action in the appropriate
court to collect such costs if it deems such action to be necessary.
§ 94-11. Construal of provisions; severability.
It is the legislative intent of the Township Board in adopting this chapter
that all provisions hereby shall be liberally construed to protect the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Township and
other persons affected by this chapter, and consequently, should any
provision of this chapter be held to be unconstitutional, invalid, or of no
effect, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of
the remaining provisions of this chapter, it being the intent of the Township
Board that this chapter shall stand and remain in effect, notwithstanding
the invalidity of any provision hereof.
Chapter 98
§ 94-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-11
1:173
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Condominium projects — See Ch. 71.
Grading — See Ch. 124.
Public works — See Ch. 197.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Wetlands and drainageways — See Ch. 275.
Woodland and tree protection — See Ch. 282.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 98-1. Findings; intent.
A. The Township Board finds that, as an island community, Grosse Ile
Township possesses sensitive natural features that are important to the
community and the ecosystem of the Detroit River and that
development can have significant impacts to many of these unique, and
important natural resources.
B. This chapter is intended to provide for the comprehensive and
systematic protection of natural resources and the environment of
Grosse Ile Township. It is also the intent of this chapter to provide for
the preservation and management of significant natural features
through:
(1) Providing for Township review and approval of developments that
may have a significant impact on natural features, adjacent land
uses and the character of the community.
(2) Assisting petitioners, reviewers, decisionmakers and the general
public in understanding how natural features may be identified,
evaluated, protected, managed and mitigated.
(3) Providing a mechanism for identification and protection of natural
resources that contain elements of natural beauty, animal habitat
and geological, hydrological, ecological and historical
characteristics significant to the citizens of the Township.
(4) Coordinating the environmental protection measures required
under various ordinances, including the Protection of Wetlands and
Drainageways,24 the Woodland Ordinance,25 Grading Ordinance26
and Stormwater Management Ordinance.
(5) Coordinating and supporting the enforcement of applicable federal,
state, and county ordinances and statutes, including, but not
limited to:
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Wetlands and Drainageways.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 282, Woodland and Tree Protection.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Grading.
§ 94-11 GROSSE ILE CODE § 98-1
1:174
§ 98-2. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions in this section shall
apply to and govern the construction of this chapter:
ACTIVITY — Any use, operation, development or action involving a change
in, on or to uplands or bottomlands caused by any person, including, but not
limited to, constructing, operating or maintaining any use or development;
erecting buildings or other structures; depositing or removing material;
dredging; ditching; land balancing; draining or diverting water; pumping
or discharge of surface water; grading; paving; vegetative clearing or
excavation, mining or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, bridges, alteration to waterways, excavation or
drilling operations.
(a) Michigan Environmental Protection Act (Act 347, Public Acts
of Michigan of 1972, as amended), which imposes a duty on
government agencies and private individuals and
organizations to prevent or minimize degradation of the
environment which is likely to be caused by their activities;
(b) Goemaere Anderson Wetland Protection Act (Act 203, Public
Acts of Michigan of 1979, as amended);
(c) The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251);
(d) Inland Lakes and Streams Act (Act 346, Public Acts of
Michigan of 1972, as amended);
(e) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (Act 347, Public
Acts of Michigan of 1972, as amended);
(f) Flood Plain Control Act (Act 167 of the Public Acts of Michigan
of 1968);
(g) Water Resource Commission Act (Act 245 of the Public Acts of
Michigan of 1929), as amended); and
(h) Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Act 451
of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994).
C. This chapter includes requirements for an environmental assessment,
which is intended to accompany a site plan to specifically address the
anticipated impact of a proposed use on the natural features, economic
climate, social environment, public infrastructure and public services in
the Township. The assessment is intended to allow reasonable use of
property while ensuring the long-term community benefits associated
with preserving environmentally sensitive lands and aesthetic
resources.
§ 98-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-2
1:175
ENVIRONMENT — The physical and social conditions which exist within
the area and within the Township of Grosse Ile which will be affected
by a proposed project, including natural features, as defined (natural
environment), land uses, buildings, improvements and infrastructure,
including utilities, roads and public facilities (built environment), social and
economic conditions (socio-economic environment) and cultural/historic
resources.
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT — A detailed statement or study setting
forth the environmental analysis and the results thereof required by this
chapter. It shall also include any comments on an environmental assessment
which are obtained or received or required to be obtained pursuant to
this chapter. An environmental assessment is an informational document
or study which, when its preparation is required by this chapter, shall
be finished and considered by the public agency prior to its approval or
disapproval of a project. The purpose of an environmental assessment is to
provide the public agency with detailed information about the significant
effects which a proposed project may or is likely to have on the
environment; to list ways or recommendations by which any adverse effects
of such a project might be minimized; to suggest or recommend alternatives
to such projects; and to insure that if the project is approved, it will be
constructed, completed or developed in a manner consistent with the report
and with the environmental recommendations, if any, contained therein.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT — Any alteration of the existing conditions of
the environment, or the creation of a new set of environmental conditions,
adverse or beneficial, caused or induced in whole or in part, directly or
indirectly, by a proposed project.
FLORISTIC QUALITY ASSESSMENT — An assessment that includes a
comprehensive list of plant species that occur on a site, based upon
sampling, an identification of the estimated probability that each plant
species is likely to occur in a pre-settlement landscape (coefficient of
conservatism) and an establishment of a floristic quality index based upon
the aggregate of all plant species on the site. Such assessment shall be
prepared based upon standards and guidelines adopted by the Township or
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
NATURAL FEATURES — Any one or more of the following: soils,
topography, geology, vegetation, woodlands, landmark tree, fish and wildlife
habitat, floodplain, watercourse, rivers, streams, creeks, ponds, wetland,
groundwater, watersheds, aesthetic resources, and microclimate.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, association, organization,
partnership, business, trust, corporation or company.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Gross Ile Township Planning Commission.
PROJECT — Any use, operation, development or action involving a change
in, on or to uplands or bottomlands caused by any person, including, but not
limited to, constructing, operating or maintaining any use or development;
erecting buildings or other structures; depositing or removing material;
dredging; ditching; land balancing; draining or diverting water; pumping
§ 98-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 98-2
1:176
or discharge of surface water; grading; paving; vegetative clearing or
excavation, mining or drilling operations.
PUBLIC AGENCY — The Township of Grosse Ile and its respective boards
and commissions, Wayne County, State of Michigan, United States Federal
Government.
SIGNIFICANT IMPACT — An adverse impact on the environment that is
greater than the impact of other similar uses within the Township due
to the increased intensity of the proposed development or the presence
of sensitive or valuable environmental features on the site that will be
adversely impacted by development.
STREAMS — As defined in the Protection of Wetlands and Drainageways
Ordinance.27
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Grosse Ile Township Board.
WATERCOURSE — As defined in the Protection of Wetlands and
Drainageways Ordinance.
WETLAND — As defined in the Protection of Wetlands and Drainageways
Ordinance.
WOODLAND — As defined in the Woodland Protection Ordinance.28
§ 98-3. Applicability.
A. Approval of environmental assessment required. All applications to
Grosse Ile Township for the following approvals shall be accompanied
by an environmental assessment and an environmental assessment
checklist. Such study and checklist shall be prepared, reviewed and
approved meeting the requirements of this chapter.
(1) Site plan approval from the Planning Commission under the Zoning
Ordinance29 for any new use, or building or major expansion to an
existing non-single-family residential use (e.g., multiple-family
residential, commercial or industrial) where the expansion has the
potential to impact natural areas or natural features;
(2) Special land use approval from the Township Board under the
Zoning Ordinance for the establishment of any new special land use
or major expansion to an existing special land use where the
expansion has the potential to impact natural areas or natural
features;
(3) Rezoning approval from the Township Board under the Zoning
Ordinance;
(4) Tentative preliminary plat approval from the Township Board under
the Subdivision Control Ordinance;30
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Wetlands and Drainageways.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 282, Woodland and Tree Protection.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Zoning.
§ 98-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-3
1:177
(5) Preliminary condominium approval from the Township Board under
the Condominium Projects Ordinance;31
(6) Wetland permit approval from the Planning Commission under the
Wetlands and Drainageways Protection Ordinance;32 and
(7) Any crossing, construction or fill within a navigable waterway that
will impact navigation or aquatic habitat.
B. Exemptions: The following categories of actions, which do not
individually or cumulatively have a significant effect on the
environment and, therefore, do not require the submission of an
environmental assessment or checklist for approval under this chapter:
(1) Building permits for construction of a new single-family and
customary accessory structures or expansion to a single-family
residential dwelling;
(2) Site plan approval by the Planning Commission under the Zoning
Ordinance for minor expansions to existing non-single-family
residential uses (e.g., multiple-family residential, commercial or
industrial), including accessory structures, where the use is
permitted under the Zoning Ordinance and the expansion is within
an area of the site that has been previously disturbed and does not
contain natural features;
(3) Amended special land use approval from the Township Board under
the Zoning Ordinance for expansions or changes to existing special
land uses where the expansion is within an area of the site that has
been previously disturbed and does not contain natural features;
(4) Building permits for interior construction or exterior renovation of
any building that is exempt from the site plan requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance;
(5) Reuse of an existing building for a use permitted in the zoning
district;
(6) Waterfront accessory structures that are in compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance and will not impact navigation or aquatic
habitat;
(7) Ministerial projects proposed to be carried out by the Township or
other governmental agency;
(8) Projects that the Planning Commission determines at the time of a
preapplication hearing will not to have a significant effect on the
environment due to the low-impact nature of the proposal and the
lack of natural features on the site; and
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 238, Subdivision Control.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 71, Condominium Projects.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Wetlands and Drainageways.
§ 98-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 98-3
1:178
§ 98-4. Evaluation procedure.
The following process shall be followed for the review and approval of an
environmental assessment. The process shall run concurrently with the site
plan, subdivision plat, rezoning or other applicable review process.
(9) Emergency repairs to public service facilities necessary to maintain
service.
A. Natural features determination. The petitioner contemplating a project
requiring Township review is responsible for determining whether
natural features exist on the site. This determination can be made by
outside consultants retained by the petitioner. Township staff will
confirm these determinations during the review process.
B. Plan and environmental assessment submission. The Zoning Ordinance,
Condominium Projects Ordinance and Subdivision Control Ordinance
specify what information must be shown on plans submitted for
Township review. The applicant shall submit the environmental
assessment and checklist along with any site plan, subdivision tentative
preliminary plat, or rezoning application and required fees to the
Community Development Department.
C. Township staff review/analysis of alternative designs. Community
Development Department staff will coordinate the proposal's review by
various Township departments and consultants to provide written
review and recommendation to the Planning Commission.
D. Planning Commission review and findings. Once information and plans
submitted to the Township are complete, the formal public review
process begins with the Planning Commission. Exact procedures for
reviews before the Township Planning Commission and the Township
Board are outlined in the Zoning Ordinance, Condominium Projects
Ordinance and Subdivision Control Ordinance. The Planning
Commission shall review the environmental assessment to determine
that the data and analysis of the environmental assessment are
complete. Once complete, the Planning Commission shall make one of
the two following findings based upon the criteria of § 98-5:
(1) A finding that the proposed project is not a project which may or is
likely to have a significant impact on the environment.
(2) A finding that the proposed project may or is likely to have a
significant impact on the environment.
E. Planning Commission approval for projects with no significant impact.
Upon a finding by the Planning Commission that a proposed project is
not a project which may or is likely to have a significant impact on the
environment or any impacts can be fully mitigated, such finding shall be
included in an environmental assessment statement and the
environmental assessment shall be approved or denied by the Planning
Commission based upon the review criteria of § 98-6. The Planning
§ 98-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-4
1:179
§ 98-5. Significant impact criteria.
The criteria established under § 98-4 shall require a finding of "significant
impact on the environment" if any of the following conditions exist:
Commission may thereafter proceed to either approve or disapprove
the project; provided, however, that any approval of the proposed
project shall take into consideration the information, recommendations
and mitigation measures contained within the environmental
assessment.
F. Township Board review and approval required for a significant impact.
Upon a finding by the Planning Commission that the proposed project
may or is likely to have a significant impact on the environment, the
Planning Commission shall, prior to approval or disapproval of the
project, forward the environmental assessment to the Township Board
for approval along with recommended mitigation measures to minimize
the environmental impact of the project. Where significant
environmental impacts will result from the proposed project, then the
environmental assessment shall be approved or denied by the Township
Board based upon the review criteria of § 98-6 and a finding that the
mitigation measures proposed will minimize the level of impact to the
maximum extent practical.
G. Final approvals, permits and inspections. Following approval of the
environmental assessment and other approvals required under
applicable ordinances, permits shall be obtained from the Community
Development Department. All natural feature protection measures
specified in the approved plans must be installed and maintained on the
site throughout construction. Inspections shall be conducted to ensure
sedimentation and erosion controls and protective barrier fencing are
in place and maintained, limits of construction and barrier fencing are
being observed, pavements and streets are clean of soils, debris is
properly contained on the site, and site work is proceeding according to
plan.33
A. A proposed project will have an adverse impact on the environment that
is greater than the impact of other similar uses within the Township due
to the increased intensity of the proposed development or the presence
of sensitive or valuable environmental features on the site that will be
adversely impacted by development.
B. A proposed project has the potential to degrade the quality of the
environment, curtail the range of the environment, or the potential to
achieve short-term, to the disadvantage of long-term, environmental
goals.
33.Editor's Note: A chart depicting the environmental assessment review process is included
at the end of this chapter.
§ 98-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 98-5
1:180
§ 98-6. Environmental assessment approval criteria.
In determining whether the proposed disturbance or removal of natural
features is limited to the minimum necessary to allow a reasonable use of
the land, the approving body shall apply the following criteria:
C. The possible effects of a project are individually limited but
cumulatively considerable, including consideration of any secondary
land use changes that may result from the proposed action.
D. The environmental effects of a project will cause substantial adverse
effects on human beings, either directly or indirectly.
A. The environmental assessment is complete and contains all of the
information and analysis required by § 98-7.
B. The environmental impact of other practical alternative development
plans under § 98-8.
C. The importance and overall value of a natural feature, both on the site
and on a Township-wide basis. In general, the importance of a natural
feature increases with its rarity, size, age and condition.
D. The existence of overlapping natural features in one area. Overlapping
natural features increase the importance and overall value for
preservation of the area.
E. The existence of edges between two habitats or natural features. The
edges between two natural feature types, such as the area between an
upland and a wetland or the edge between a woodland and a prairie
play an important role, particularly for animal life.
F. The existence of natural greenway linkages. Natural linkages across a
site that connect habitat areas, follow a riparian corridor or connect
with natural features on adjacent sites should be preserved.
G. The impact of the proposed disturbance on the integrity of ecological
systems or the continuity between natural features. Wherever possible,
ecological systems and continuity between natural features should be
preserved.
H. The impact on public services, facilities, roads, utilities, and
surrounding land and degree to which such impact shall be mitigated.
I. Compliance with the protection standards of § 98-10.
J. The adequacy of the mitigation plan meeting the requirements of
§ 98-9.
K. Applicant obtaining all federal, state and county permits.
§ 98-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-7
1:181
§ 98-7. Contents of environmental assessment.
The environmental assessment required under this chapter shall
accompany a development application and specifically address the
anticipated impact of a proposed project on the natural features, cultural
resources, public infrastructure and public services in the Township. The
environmental impact study checklist shall also be completed and submitted
with the assessment. The following information shall be provided in the
environmental assessment. The level of detail will vary based upon the
scope and nature of the proposed project and the presence of environmental
features on the site. It is the intent of this section that the environmental
assessment focuses analysis on natural features and environmental impacts
that are pertinent to the site and the proposed activity, and not generate
large volumes of extraneous analysis of environmental features that are not
present or are not to be impacted.
A. Name(s) and address(es) of person(s) responsible for preparation of the
impact assessment and a brief statement of their qualifications shall be
provided. The report shall be prepared by a professional qualified in the
areas of ecology, botany, wildlife biology, geology, or other relevant
discipline acceptable to the Planning Commission.
B. A description of the proposed project, activity or development shall be
provided.
C. Map(s) and a written description/analysis of the project site shall be
provided, including all existing structures, man-made facilities, and
natural features. An aerial photograph or drawing may be used to
delineate these areas.
D. A site inventory shall be prepared that identifies the location of existing
environmental conditions and contains a written description of their
quality, character, and health, including the following:
(1) Environmental characteristics of the site prior to development and
following development, i.e., topography, soil series and
classification, geology, wildlife, woodlands, mature indigenous
trees with a six-inch caliper or greater, groundwater, wetlands,
drainageways, rivers, streams, creeks, ponds, and surface water
quality. Documentation by a qualified wetland specialist shall be
required wherever the Township determines that there is a
potential regulated wetland. Written material may be accompanied
by reduced copies of the Existing Conditions Map(s) or aerial
photograph.
(2) A floristic quality assessment shall be prepared to evaluate the
vegetation found on the site and identify the natural significance of
the habitat;
(3) Map and description of site location in relationship to the local
drainage, including an identification of the drain, stream, river or
other tributary to which the site drains;
§ 98-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 98-7
1:182
(4) Surrounding zoning, land uses, buildings, and aesthetic character;
(5) Public facilities and services, including schools, recreation
facilities, police protection, fire protection and emergency services
that serve the site; and
(6) Public utilities that serve the site, including water, sanitary sewer,
storm drainage, gas and electricity.
E. The environmental assessment shall describe the impact of the
proposed project on the existing site conditions described in Subsection
D above, including the following. Detailed assessments are not required
for impacts that are not applicable to a specific development proposal.
(1) Disturbance to natural topography, soils and geology.
(2) Removal of vegetation and woodlands and an outline of woodland
areas to be preserved.
(3) Impact to fish and wildlife habitat.
(4) Alteration to surface drainage and groundwater recharge.
(5) Impact to rivers, channels and streams, including flow, flood stages,
water temperature, stream bank erosion, crossings and quality for
fish.
(6) Impact to wetlands, both in terms of direct impact of crossings/fill
and impacts from developing surrounding uplands that contribute
surface flows to the wetlands.
(7) Description of how the proposed use conforms or conflicts with
existing and potential development patterns or potential negative
impact to adjacent properties. Such assessment shall include
compatibility with current and planned adjacent development,
conformance with the Township Master Plan; lighting impact to
adjacent properties; any increase or reduction in air pollutants;
noise levels generated by the use with a level exceeding 55 decibels
at the property line and the suitability of the site's ambient noise
levels for the proposed use; modification to the aesthetic character
of the area, and obstruction of views or sunlight.
(8) Description of the number of expected residents, employees,
visitors or patrons, and the anticipated impact on public schools,
recreation facilities, police protection, fire protection and
emergency services.
(9) The method to be used to serve the development with water and
sanitary sewer facilities; the method to be used to control drainage,
both temporary and permanent on the site and from the site,
including runoff control during periods of construction. For
projects served by public sanitary sewer or public water systems,
§ 98-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-7
1:183
§ 98-8. Alternative analysis.
When environmental conditions are to be significantly impacted, or natural
features are proposed to be removed, or disturbed, an examination and
consideration of ways in which the proposed project can be modified to
eliminate or minimize any adverse environmental impacts and to enhance
environmental quality shall be provided. The analysis shall include
consideration of no project and consideration of positive and negative
effects of any such modification in relation to the design, use, location, cost
and timing of the proposed project and its implementation. The alternative
analysis report shall contain the following:
§ 98-9. Mitigation of environmental and natural features impacts.
calculations for pre- and post-development flows shall be provided
in comparison with sewer line capacity.
(10) A description of any hazardous substances expected to be used,
stored or disposed of on the site. The information shall describe the
type of materials, location within the site and method of
containment.
F. A natural features mitigation, protection, and management plan shall
identify any mitigation, meeting the requirements of § 98-9, natural
features proposed to be preserved and the management practices
required by § 98-10 to be implemented during and following completion
of construction.
A. Alternative development plans that were considered which would limit
the disturbance or removal of environmental conditions and natural
features on and adjacent to the site.
B. Justification for selecting the proposed plan, including a written
explanation as to why the proposed disturbance or removal is the
minimum necessary to reasonably accomplish the permitted use.
C. A mitigation plan, consisting of a written and graphic description of the
proposed measures to mitigate the removal or disturbance of
environmental conditions or natural features.
A. When a site plan or plat proposes that natural features be removed or
disturbed, the following mitigation measures shall be shown on the site
plan or plat:
(1) Wetlands. Wetland mitigation shall be provided meeting the
requirements of the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality.
(2) Endangered species habitat. Endangered species habitat shall be
mitigated in accordance with the Michigan Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended.
§ 98-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 98-9
1:184
(3) One-hundred-year floodplain. Floodplain areas shall be mitigated to
provide no net loss of flood storage capacity and shall comply with
any conditions of a valid permit from the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality in accordance with the Michigan Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as
amended. If mitigation is proposed off site, it shall be located in the
same watershed as the development site.
(4) Regulated trees and woodlands. Woodland mitigation shall be
provided as required by the Woodland and Tree Preservation
Ordinance.34
(5) Steep slopes. Disturbed areas of steep slopes shall approximate the
natural terrain and be planted with native vegetation at the
completion of construction. No new drainage may be directed over
areas of disturbed slope.
(6) Watercourses. Mitigation for disturbance of watercourses shall be
provided according to the requirements of a valid permit from the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality in accordance with
the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
1994 PA 451, as amended, or the Army Corps of Engineers, as
applicable.
(7) All natural features. Disturbed areas to be reestablished shall be
planted with species native to Michigan and characteristic of the
plant communities of the areas before disturbance. The density and
coverage of vegetation (except trees) shall be such that it will
approximate the density and coverage before disturbance within
three years after planting.
(8) Hazardous materials. Any use that involves hazardous materials
shall provide proper handling procedures and safety precautions
necessary to comply with Township, county, state and federal
regulations. This shall also include a pollution incident protection
plan.
(9) Traffic impact. Mitigation shall be provided for traffic impacts.
(10) Infrastructure. The development shall include the necessary utility
and public facility improvements to support the proposed use and
not adversely impact the development potential of other property
in the area (i.e., not overload capacity or consume more than a
proportionate share of the available public infrastructure capacity).
(11) Socioeconomic and built environment. The development shall
include such elements necessary to be compatible with and not
adversely impact the character of the area adjoining property.
B. The mitigation measures shown on the site plan or plat shall include:
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 282, Woodland and Tree Protection.
§ 98-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-9
1:185
§ 98-10. Natural features protection and management.
Natural features shown on a site plan or plat that are to be preserved shall
be protected during construction. The following protection measures shall
be shown on a drawing provided as part of the site plan or plat and followed
during construction:
(1) A written description of the mitigation program.
(2) Replacement calculations.
(3) Planting plan, showing the location of trees, shrubs and ground
cover.
(4) Plant list, including botanical and common names, caliper sizes,
root type, and height.
(5) Plans for necessary infrastructure improvements.
(6) Timing schedule for the implementation of the mitigation
measures.
(7) A monitoring plan shall be provided to document the establishment
of plants and hydrology, as applicable, ensure long-term
maintenance of the mitigation. Annual reports shall be provided to
the Community Development Department for three years following
installation of mitigation.
C. Mitigation of natural features shall be provided on site. However, where
mitigation cannot be accomplished on the site, all or part of the
mitigation may be provided on public land within the Township if
approved as part of the site plan or plat. Plans for off-site mitigation
shall be included as part of the site plan or plat approval.
A. Protection measures for wetlands shall be provided as required by the
Wetlands and Drainageways Ordinance.
B. Any woodland or historic/landmark/specimen trees shall be protected
as required by the Woodlands Ordinance.
C. Prior to any development, clearing or other activity for which a permit
is required, barrier fencing shall be installed to restrict access to
protected natural features.
(1) Barrier fencing, such as snow fencing or similarly sturdy fencing,
shall be provided at the limits of soil disturbance adjacent to
natural features and at the edge of any open space identified on the
site plan or plat to remain natural.
(2) Wood rail fencing shall be provided around the perimeter of the
critical root zone of historic/landmark/specimen trees which are
located within a disturbance area.
§ 98-9 GROSSE ILE CODE § 98-10
1:186
§ 98-11. Hazardous materials.
Any use which involves the use of large quantities of hazardous materials
shall be required to include a materials management plan as an appendix
of the environmental assessment for the safe use, recycling and disposal
of such substances. Any use that involves fuel services and use or storage
of large quantities of hazardous materials shall comply with the following
requirements:
(3) No filling, excavating or storage of materials, debris or equipment
shall take place within the fenced areas.
(4) Barrier fencing shall be a minimum of four feet in height and shall
remain in place in good condition until it is authorized to be
removed by the Community Development Department.
A. Materials management plan. A materials management plan shall be
submitted that provides documentation for the following, with
appropriate correspondence from the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality, Michigan State Police Fire Marshal, Grosse Ile
Township Fire Department and Wayne County:
(1) Description of storage of any potentially hazardous materials,
including common name, name of chemical components, material
safety data sheets, location, maximum quantity expected on hand
at any time, type of storage containers or base material, and
anticipated procedure for use and handling;
(2) Description of any transportation, on-site treatment, storage or
disposal of hazardous waste generated in quantities of 250 gallons
or 2,200 pounds per month;
(3) Description of any secondary containment measures proposed,
including design, construction materials and specifications, volume
and security measures;
(4) Description of any discharge of any type of wastewater to a storm
sewer, drain, river, stream, wetland, other surface water body or
into the groundwater; and
(5) Name and phone number(s) of person(s) responsible for materials
and available 24 hours, in case of detected spill or other incident.
B. Secondary containment. Establishments using, storing or handling
hazardous material have provided secondary containment facilities and
provide documentation of compliance with state and federal
regulations, as required. Underground storage tanks shall be provided
with noncorrosive double linings and leak detection systems.
C. Permits. Any necessary state permits for discharge of wastewater,
storage of flammable or combustible liquids in above- or below-ground
§ 98-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-11
1:187
§ 98-12. Required approvals, compliance, enforcement and appeals.
containers or storage of other hazardous materials shall be included as
an appendix to the environmental assessment.
A. Disturbance to natural feature. No person shall construct, install or
place any building or site improvement or remove or disturb any
natural features for which site plan or subdivision plat approval is
required, unless the approvals required by this chapter and any
necessary permits have first been obtained.
B. Nuisance. Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this chapter is
declared to be a nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any
court of competent jurisdiction. The Township Board, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, abate, or restrain the violation. All costs, fees, and expenses in
connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the
violator(s).
C. Enforcement. If activities are conducted contrary to a use permit issued
under this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances, the Township
Community Development Department shall give written notice to the
permit grantee, or if a permit has not been issued, then to the person
conducting the activity, notifying the person of the violation of the
permit, this chapter, or other applicable law or ordinance, and to
appear and, show cause why the activity should not be stopped. If the
permit grantee or the person conducting the activity fails to appear and
show cause within one workday after notice is delivered, the
Community Development Department shall cause a written order to
stop the activity to be posted on the premises. A person shall not
continue or cause or allow to be continued activity in violation of such
an order, except with permission of the enforcing agency to abate a
dangerous condition or remove the violation, or except by court order. If
an order to stop is not obeyed, the enforcing agency may apply to the
Circuit Court of Wayne County for an order enjoining the violation of
the order. This remedy is in addition to, and not in limitation of, any
other remedy provided by law or ordinance.
D. Compliance with other laws. State and federal government laws and
regulations governing development in wetlands, in floodplains, in
watercourses, on bottomlands, and in the vicinity of rare, threatened or
endangered species of plants or animals shall be complied with. Copies
of approved permits must be submitted to the Township prior to site
plan or tentative preliminary plat approval.
E. Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued
for a property unless all required site improvements, including those
associated with the protection and mitigation of natural features, have
been installed and these improvements approved by the Community
and Economic Development Director, or designee. The property owner
shall have a continuing obligation to maintain required site
§ 98-11 GROSSE ILE CODE § 98-12
1:188
§ 98-13. Fees.
The Planning Commission shall charge a reasonable fee to any person
proposing a project subject to the provisions of this chapter which shall
recover the estimated and actual costs to be incurred by the public agency
in preparing any environmental assessment statement and any
environmental assessment required for such project, and to recover the
costs to be incurred for consultation with any person who has special
expertise with respect to any environmental impact involved in the project.
Such fees shall be established and paid prior to the Commission
undertaking any environmental evaluation or any portion thereof with
respect to the project.
Chapter 99
ENVIRONMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading — See Ch. 124.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 233.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
improvements, natural features to be preserved, and natural features
mitigation in a good condition.
F. Appeal. An appeal may be made by any person from a decision of the
Planning Commission or Community Development Department in
administering this chapter. Such an appeal shall be made to the
Township Board which shall have the authority to approve, reverse or
modify any such decision or recommendation.
§ 98-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-13
1:189

ARTICLE I
Pavement Sealant
[Adopted 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 17-001]
§ 99-1. Purpose.
The Township of Grosse Ile understands that lakes, rivers, streams and
other bodies of water are natural assets which enhance the environmental,
recreational, cultural and economic resources and contribute to the general
health and welfare of the community. The use of sealers on asphalt
driveways is a common practice. However, scientific studies on the use of
driveway sealers have suggested a relationship between stormwater runoff
and certain health and environmental concerns. The purpose of this article
is to prohibit the use and sale of sealant products containing greater than
0.1% polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) by weight, including coal tar
containing sealer, in the Township, in order to protect, restore and preserve
the quality of its waters, preserve wildlife and protect the health of its
residents.
§ 99-2. Definitions.
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all
terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose
of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASPHALT-BASED SEALER — A petroleu-based sealer material that is
commonly used on driveways, parking lots, and other surfaces and may
contain PAHs but at a much lower concentration than found in coal tar
based sealers.
COAL TAR — A by-product of the process used to refine coal.
COAL TAR SEALANT PRODUCT — A surface-applied sealing product for
application on asphalt, concrete or other pavement, including a driveway,
path or parking area, containing coal tar, coal tar pitch, coal tar pitch
volatiles, heavy pyrolized oil, refined coal tar (RT-12), or any variation
assigned the Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) numbers 65996-93-2,
65996-89-6, 65996-92-1, 8007-45-2, 64742-90-1, or 69013-21-4.
HIGH PAH CONTENT SEALANT PRODUCT — Any pavement sealant
product that contains greater than 0.1% PAHs by weight.
PAHs — Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. A group of organic chemicals
formed during the incomplete burning of coal, oil, gas, or other organic
substances. Present in coal tar and believed harmful to humans, fish, and
other aquatic life.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship,
LLC or other entity.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-3
1:191
§ 99-3. Prohibitions on use of coal tar containing products.
§ 99-4. Asphalt-based sealcoat products.
The provisions of this article shall only apply to coal tar, coal tar sealant
products or other high PAH content sealant products in the Township
and shall not affect the use of asphalt-based sealer products within the
Township, as long as those products contain less than 0.1% PAHs by weight.
§ 99-5. Penalties and enforcement.
A. No person shall use or apply a coal tar, coal tar sealant product or other
high PAH content sealant product on asphalt paved surfaces within the
Township.
B. No person shall allow a coal tar, coal tar sealant product or other high
PAH content sealant product to be used or applied upon property that is
under that person's ownership or control.
C. No person shall contract with any commercial sealer product
applicator, residential or commercial developer, or any other person for
the application of any coal tar, coal tar sealant product or other high
PAH content sealant product to any driveway, parking lot, or other
surface within the Township.
D. No commercial sealer product applicator, residential or commercial
developer, or other similar individual or organization shall direct any
employee, independent contractor, volunteer, or other person to apply
any coal tar, coal tar sealant product or other high PAH content sealant
product to any driveway, parking lot, or other surface with the
Township.
A. Penalty. Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction,
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, of the Grosse Ile
Township Code.
B. Injunction. Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a
nuisance per se. In addition to, or in lieu of, seeking to enforce this
article by proceeding under § 99-5A above, the Township may institute
an action in a court of general jurisdiction seeking injunctive or
equitable relief and shall be entitled to recover all attorney fees, court
costs, litigation expenses, costs and expenses to abate the nuisance,
and all other costs allowed by law.
C. Enforcement and administration. This article shall be enforced and
administered by the Township Director of Planning and Economic
Development or such other Township official as may be designated from
time to time by resolution by the Township Board.
§ 99-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 99-6
1:192
§ 99-6. Severability.
In the event that any one or more sections, provisions, phrases or words of
this article shall be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such holding shall not affect the validity or the enforceability of the
remaining sections, provisions, phrases or words of this article.
§ 99-7. Conflicts.
If any provision of this article conflicts with any provision of any other
Township general ordinance or zoning ordinance, the most restrictive
provision shall apply.
§ 99-8. When effective.
The provisions of this article shall take effect upon publication in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Township.
§ 99-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-8
1:193
Chapter 103
FENCES AND WALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 103-1. Word usage and interpretation.
When used in this chapter the word "fence" shall also include the word
"wall."
§ 103-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or
cause to be constructed any fence upon any property within the Township
of Grosse Ile without first having obtained a permit therefor.
§ 103-3. Permit application; fee.
Any person desiring to construct or cause to be constructed a fence upon
property in the Township of Grosse Ile shall first apply to the Township's
Department of Community Development for a permit therefor for which
there shall be paid a fee as established by the Township Board and posted
or made available at the Township Department of Community Development
after approval of a written application, which shall contain such information
as may be required by the Department in order to determine that such fence
will not violate any ordinance of the Township, or county or state laws.
§ 103-4. Standards for fences in residential districts.
Fences in all residential districts are permitted subject to the following:
A. Fences on all lots of record in all residential districts which enclose
property and/or are within a required side or rear yard, and are within
six feet of the property line, shall not exceed four feet in height,
measured from the surface of the ground, and shall not extend toward
the front of the lot nearer than the front of the house. Fences to six feet
in height may be allowed when at least six feet from the property line.
B. Fences on property under single ownership having a lot area in excess
of two acres and a frontage of at least 200 feet in all residential districts
are excluded from these regulations, except as they relate to
Subsection C of this section. A fence not to exceed four feet will be
permitted in front yards provided it is located at least 40 feet from the
front property line.
C. Fences which enclose public or institutional parks, playgrounds, or
public landscaped areas situated within an area developed with
§ 99-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 103-4
1:194
§ 103-5. Construction requirements.
Fences shall be constructed of posts sunk into the soil at least three feet,
provided that all steel or metal posts shall be encased in concrete, and of
a height above the ground surface of not more than four feet, with boards,
recorded lots shall not exceed six feet in height, measured from the
surface of the ground, and shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater
than 25% of their total area.
D. Fences on all lots of record in all residential districts which serve as
architectural or decorative landscaping and are not used to enclose
property and/or are not placed within six feet of lot lines may be erected
within the confines of the minimum yard requirements for said yard,
provided that:
(1) The height of said fence shall not exceed four feet measured from
the surface of the ground.
(2) The safety triangle shall be observed.
(3) Said fence shall be constructed of wood, stone, brick, sculptured
block or architecturally treated concrete.
(4) No fence shall have a linear measurement exceeding 30% of the
length of the yard line which it parallels.
E. Fences on corner lots shall be allowed, provided that:
(1) The fence does not extend toward the front of the lot nearer than
the front of the house.
(2) No fence shall be allowed within 20 feet of the property line
abutting the side street right-of-way except in the instance of a
corner lot where the rear yard abuts the rear yard of the corner lot
of the next parallel street no fence shall be allowed within six feet
of the property line abutting the side street right-of-way.
(3) The height of said fence shall not exceed four feet unless the fence
is located a minimum of 40 feet from the property line abutting the
side street right-of-way.
(4) All fences within 40 feet of the property line abutting the side street
right-of-way must be of architecturally treated design.
F. Fences on double frontage lots:
(1) No fences over four feet in height shall be allowed in yards abutting
waterways.
(2) No fences shall be allowed within 40 feet of the property line
abutting the right-of-way of the street opposite and parallel to the
street on which the house fronts.
§ 103-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 103-5
1:195
woven non-barbed wire, or other suitable material equivalent thereto and
approved by the Township's Department of Community Development.
§ 103-6. Fence location. [Amended 9-9-2013 by Ord. No. 13-002]
§ 103-7. Electric fences prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or
maintain, or to allow to be constructed or maintained, upon property owned
or occupied by such person, firm or corporation, any fence charged or
connected with an electrical current in such manner as to transmit such
current to persons, animals or things which might come in contact with
such charged fence.
§ 103-8. Survey required.
The Township's Building Inspector may require the owner of property upon
which a fence is to be constructed to establish lot lines upon said property,
through the placing of permanent stakes located by a licensed surveyor.
Such lot lines shall be established before such fence shall be erected and
the Building Inspector may withhold the issuance of the required permit
until the lot lines are established and permanent stakes are placed.
§ 103-9. Board of Appeals.
Upon complaint, in writing, by any person directly or adversely affected, the
Zoning Board of Appeals of the Township of Grosse Ile, after a hearing in
accordance with the established procedure of said Board, may in its sound
discretion and in the interest of public health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Township, modify, reduce or remit the requirements of
this chapter in individual cases coming before the Board.
§ 103-10. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 107
A. All fences must be located entirely on the private property of the person
for whom the fence was constructed; provided, however, that if the
adjoining property owners jointly apply for a permit to erect a fence
upon their common property line, such fence may be so erected. In the
event of a shared fence line, the adjoining property owners shall
determine which side will be finished. Where the fence is placed on the
lot line the junction of posts and boards or wire shall always be
considered the lot line.
B. Posts of all fences shall be placed on the inside of the owner's property
such that the finished side faces all adjacent properties.
§ 103-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 103-10
1:196
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fishing and recreational activities — See Ch.
113.
Hunting and trapping — See Ch. 132.
§ 107-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
DANGEROUS WEAPON — Any device, object or article designed or utilized
for the purpose of bodily assault or defense.
FIREARM — Any device or weapon from which a dangerous projectile may
be propelled by using explosives, gas or air as a means of propulsion, except
any smooth bore rifle or handgun designed and manufactured exclusively
for propelling BB's not exceeding .177 caliber by means of spring, gas or
air, except for any slingshot or bow and arrow. The definition of "firearm"
shall include but not be limited to a rifle, shotgun or pistol.
§ 107-2. Possession of firearms and/or weapons. [Amended
7-22-2002]
§ 107-3. Discharge of firearms.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a police officer in the
performance of his or her duty, to discharge any firearm or dangerous
weapon within the Township except in the lawful defense of person or
property, or except at a duly established range for that purpose, the
operation of which has been approved by the Township, or except at such
A. No weapons of any kind including concealed weapons shall be
permitted in any Township-owned or -leased building. This prohibition
includes any individuals who are licensed to carry a concealed pistol by
the State of Michigan. This prohibition shall not apply to a police officer
or other law enforcement officer authorized by law to carry a firearm.
B. Except as otherwise permitted by law, a person shall not transport or
possess in or upon a motor vehicle, or any self-propelled vehicle, or any
watercraft or vessel, a firearm, other than a pistol, unless the firearm is
unloaded and is one or more of the following:
(1) Taken down;
(2) Enclosed in a case;
(3) Carried in the trunk of the vehicle;
(4) Inaccessible from the interior of the vehicle.
§ 103-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-3
1:197
other places and under such other circumstances otherwise approved by
the Township's Police Department. The exceptions herein contained shall
not include the discharge of firearms or dangerous weapons for the purpose
of hunting within the Township, such act being hereby prohibited by this
section.
§ 107-4. Transportation of firearms.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a police or peace officer, to
transport in any motor vehicle any loaded or unloaded firearm or dangerous
weapon within the Township except in accordance with and in the manner
provided by law. The exceptions herein contained or contained within the
general statutes of the State of Michigan shall not permit or include the
transporting of firearms or dangerous weapons for the purpose of hunting
within the Township, such act being hereby prohibited by this section.
§ 107-5. Use of air gun, BB gun, slingshot or bow and arrow.
§ 107-6. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air or BB gun, not
defined in this chapter as a firearm, or to discharge any slingshot or
bow and arrow within the Township except on a target range; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply whenever such air or BB gun,
or slingshot or bow and arrow is discharged on private property with
the consent of the owner or occupant thereof and the discharge of such
air or BB gun, slingshot or bow and arrow is confined to such private
property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of premises within the
Township to permit the use of any air or BB gun, slingshot or bow and
arrow upon his property by any other person, unless such use is
personally supervised by a person 17 years of age or older.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or carry any air or BB
gun, slingshot or bow and arrow on any public roadway or in any public
place or place open to the public within the Township unless such air or
BB gun, slingshot, or bow and arrow is enclosed in a case or in a box.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, discharge, or transport any
air or BB gun, slingshot, or bow and arrow in the Township for the
purpose of hunting on any public or private property within the
Township.
§ 107-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 107-6
1:198
Chapter 110
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 107-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-6
1:199

ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 236; amended in its entirety
7-22-2002]
§ 110-1. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Township
Clerk of the Township of Grosse Ile, being marked and designated as the
2000 International Fire Code, First Edition, December 1999, as published
by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Fire
Prevention Code of the Township of Grosse Ile, in the State of Michigan,
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
International Fire Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this article with additions, insertions, deletions
and changes, if any, prescribed in § 110-2 of this article.
§ 110-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The International Fire Code is amended and changed in the following
respects:
§ 110-3. Establishment of limits.
A. Section 101.1, Title (page 1, second line): Insert Grosse Ile Township.
B. Section 1106, Fuel Dispensing, is amended to read as follows:
Fuel dispensing: The dispensing, transfer or storage of flammable or
combustible liquid (other than 2 1/2 gallons combined of flammable or
combustible liquids which may be stored in UL approved safety type
I containers only and two cases of motor oil may be stored within
the existing T-hangars) shall not be permitted inside of or upon any
building or structure. Flammable or combustible liquid shall not be
dispensed into or removed from a container, tank, vehicle or aircraft
except in an approved location.
A. Establishment of limits for explosives and fireworks (3303.1); scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the possession,
manufacture, storage, handling, sale and use of explosive materials,
fireworks and small arms ammunition.
B. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 33 of the International Fire
Code, Edition 2000, NFPA 495 shall govern the manufacture,
transportation, storage, sale, handling and use of explosive materials.
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-4
1:201
§ 110-4. Purpose.
The purpose of the International Fire Code, as adopted by this article,
is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 110-5. Publication available for use and inspection.
The International Fire Code, Edition 2000, is available for inspection by
and distribution to the public at the Grosse Ile Fire Department, 24525
Meridian, Grosse Ile, Michigan, during regular business hours.
§ 110-6. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 110-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 110-6
1:202
ARTICLE II
Life Safety Code
[Adopted 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 237]
§ 110-7. Adoption of Life Safety Code.
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Township
Clerk of the Township of Grosse Ile, being marked and designated as "NFPA
101, Life Safety Code (1994 Edition)," is hereby adopted as the Life Safety
Code of the Township of Grosse Ile, in the State of Michigan, and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set
out in this article.
§ 110-8. Purpose.
The purpose of the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, as adopted by this article,
is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 110-9. Publication available for use and inspection. [Amended
7-22-2002]
The NFPA 101, Life Safety Code (1994 Edition) is available for inspection
by and distribution to the public at the Grosse Ile Fire Department, 24525
Meridian, Grosse Ile, Michigan, during regular business hours.
§ 110-10. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-10
1:203

ARTICLE III
National Fire Code
[Adopted 4-14-1997 by Ord. No. 238 amended in its entirety
7-22-2002]
§ 110-11. Adoption of National Fire Code.
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Township
Clerk of the Township of Grosse Ile, being marked and designated as
"International Fire Code, 2000, and Supplementary Standards," is hereby
adopted as the Fire Code of the Township of Grosse Ile, in the State
of Michigan; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made
part hereof, as if fully set out in this article.
§ 110-12. Purpose.
The purpose of the International Fire Code 2000 with Supplementary
Standards as adopted by this article is to protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 110-13. Publication available for use and inspection.
The the International Fire Code 2000 with Supplementary Standards is
available for inspection by and distribution to the public at the Grosse Ile
Fire Department, 24525 Meridian, Grosse Ile, Michigan, during regular
business hours.
§ 110-14. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 110-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-14
1:205
Chapter 113
FISHING AND RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 20.
Firearms — See Ch. 107.
Hunting and trapping — See Ch. 132.
Trespassing — See Ch. 255.
§ 113-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FARM PROPERTY — Property zoned as farm property or which has been
listed by the owner with the Township as being used primarily as farm
property and which in fact is used primarily for farming and not some other
purpose. "Farming" shall mean using the land in the production of a farm
product.
FISHING — Any action by a person for the purpose of catching, trapping,
spearing or netting fish.
HUNTING DOG — A dog allowed to range freely to engage in or aid in
hunting on the day the dog enters the property of another person and which
must comply with the dog ordinance.35
PERSON — Any individual, organization, corporation, partnership,
association, or other legal entity.
RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY — Any activity covered by the Recreational
Trespass Act (MCL § 317.171 et seq.), including but not limited to fishing,
trapping, swimming, jumping, or diving into water, snowmobiling, or any
other like activity.[Amended 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 301]
§ 113-2. Fishing and recreational activities prohibited.
A. Except as provided in Subsection D, a person shall not enter or remain
upon the property of another person (including property owned by a
public agency or entity) other than farm property or a wooded area
connected to farm property, to engage in any recreational activity or
fishing on that property without the consent of the owner or his or her
or its lessee or agent, if any of the following circumstances exist:
[Amended 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 301]
(1) The property is fenced or enclosed, and the property is maintained
in such a manner to exclude intruders.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 20, Animals.
§ 110-14 GROSSE ILE CODE § 113-2
1:206
§ 113-3. Posting of property by another.
A person shall not post a sign on property owned by another person or
enclose the property of another person to prohibit hunting, fishing,
trapping, or other recreational activities on that property without the
written permission of the owner of that property, or his or her lessee or
agent.
(2) The property is posted in a conspicuous manner against entry. The
minimum letter height on the posting signs shall be one inch. Each
posting sign shall be not less than 50 square inches and the signs
shall be spaced to enable a person to observe not less than one sign
at every point of entry upon the property.
(3) The property consists of a residential dwelling.
(4) The property consists of a public bridge or overpass. This
prohibition includes all recreational activity, including fishing,
swimming, jumping or diving from the bridge or overpass.
B. Except as provided in Subsection D, a person shall not enter or remain
upon farm property or a wooded area connected to farm property for
any recreational activity or trapping without the consent of the owner
or his or her lessee or agent, whether or not the farm property or
wooded area connected to farm property is fenced, enclosed, or posted.
C. On fenced or posted property or farm property, a fisherman wading or
floating a navigable public stream may, without written or oral consent,
enter upon property within the clearly defined banks of the stream or
walk a route as closely proximate to the clearly defined bank as possible
when necessary to avoid a natural or artificial hazard or obstruction
including, but not limited to, a dam, deep hole, fence, or other exercise
of ownership by the riparian owner.
D. A person other than a person possessing a firearm may, unless
previously prohibited in writing or orally by the property owner or his
or her lessee or agent, enter on foot upon the property of another
person for the sole purpose of retrieving a hunting dog. The person
shall not remain on the property beyond the reasonable time necessary
to retrieve the dog.
E. Consent to enter or remain upon the property of another person
pursuant to this section may be given orally or in writing. The consent
may establish conditions for entering or remaining upon that property.
Unless prohibited in the written consent, a written consent may be
amended or revoked orally. If the owner or his or her lessee or agent
requires all persons entering or remaining upon the property to have
written consent, the presence of the person on the property without
written consent is prima facie evidence of unlawful entry.
§ 113-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-4
1:207
§ 113-4. Failure to leave upon command.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully enter upon the lands or premises
of another without lawful authority or after having been forbidden to do so
by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or for
any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified
to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of
either, who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom.
The Grosse Ile Police Department may act as agent of the owner of the
premises (for the purposes of enforcing this chapter) if the Police
Department receives in writing signed by the owner that no one is permitted
to fish or engage in recreational activities and that the Grosse Ile Police
Department may enter on their premises to enforce this restriction. The
property owner may appoint or designate any other person to act as his or
her agent.
§ 113-5. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 116
FLOOD CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Environmental assessment — See Ch. 98.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Wetlands and drainageways — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 116-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and
property due to water or erosion or increase in flood heights or
velocities.
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
§ 113-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 116-1
1:208
§ 116-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS — The
Township of Grosse Ile Construction Board of Appeals.
FLOOD — An overflow of water onto lands not normally covered by water
where the inundation of land is temporary and the land is adjacent to
and inundated by overflow from a watercourse, or lake, or other body of
standing water.
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat low lands which are contiguous areas
paralleling major rivers or streams that constitute at their maximum edge
the highest flood levels experienced in a period of 100 years; shall include
wetland areas that are part of the river flow system; and shall include
contiguous areas paralleling major rivers or streams that exhibit unstable
soil conditions for development.
FLOODWAY — The channel of any watercourse and those portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwater.
LOCATE — To construct, place, insert or excavate.
MATERIAL — Any organic or inorganic material or substance.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood having an average of one in 100
probability of occurrence in any one year or a 1% chance of occurring in
any given year.
OWNER — Any person who has dominion over, control of, or title to a parcel
of land.
D. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage.
E. Identify and provide a method of identification of the floodplains,
floodways and watercourses located within the Township and to provide
for the proper use of Township land and property located in areas
within the Township subject to periodic flooding in order to attempt to
protect and secure the safety of construction located in such areas from
periodic flooding.
F. Reduce the financial burdens imposed upon the community by the
improper occupancy and use of areas subject to periodic flooding within
the Township.
G. Establish construction standards in areas within the Township subject
to periodic flooding in order to attempt to prevent loss of life, property
damage, and other losses and risk associated with flooding conditions.
H. Provide a procedure for obtaining building permits for construction
within areas of the Township subject to periodic flooding.
§ 116-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-2
1:209
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind.
STRUCTURE — Any assembly of materials above or below the surface of
land or water, including but not limited to houses, buildings, bulkheads,
piers, docks and waterway obstructions.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structures.
The term does not, however, include either any project for improvement
or a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or a State Inventory or Historic Places.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary
hardship.
WATERCOURSE — Any waterway or other body of water having welldefined
banks, including rivers, streams, creeks and brooks, whether
continually or intermittently flowing.
§ 116-3. Areas to which chapter applies.
§ 116-4. Adoption of maps.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all floodplains, floodway
and watercourse areas located within the Township of Grosse Ile as the
same are identified or determined by any of the following methods:
(1) As such areas are identified on the Official Shoreland Protection
and Management Ordinance Map of the Township of Grosse Ile.
(2) As such areas are identified or determined on the basis of
individual computation based on current standards and
engineering techniques approved and employed by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(3) As such areas are identified or determined by the Department of
the Army Corps of Engineers.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to such areas within the
Township as are identified or determined in accordance with the
elevation standards set forth hereinafter.
§ 116-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 116-4
1:210
§ 116-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Township or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 116-6. Application for building permits.
A. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in its Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) #26-0227,
as amended, and any revisions thereto are adopted by reference and
declared to be part of this chapter.
B. The Township Board of the Township of Grosse Ile hereby designates
the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) of Grosse Ile Township, Wayne
County, Michigan, panel numbers of 26163C0410E, 26163C0416E,
26163C0420E and 26163C0535E, dated February 2, 2012. [Amended
1-9-2012 by Ord. No. 12-01]
A. All applications for the construction of principal buildings and/or all
accessory buildings in areas within the Township to which this chapter
applies must include the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant and of applicant's agent, if any, and
whether applicant is owner, lessee, licensee, etc. If applicant is not
owner, the written consent of the owner, duly acknowledged, must
be attached.
(2) Survey and topographical map of the property upon which the
proposed construction is to take place, prepared in the manner
provided for in this chapter.
(3) A nonrefundable filing fee in an amount established by the
Township Board.
B. The permit application shall be accompanied by a survey and
topographical map drawn to a scale of no smaller than 1:40 prepared
and certified substantially correct by a registered land surveyor or
engineer, and shall include the following information:
(1) Name and address of record of the affected property and of
applicant, if other than owner; location and dimension of all
boundary lines; scale; North arrow and date.
§ 116-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-6
1:211
§ 116-7. Elevation standards.
§ 116-8. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required:
(2) Existing contour data for the entire property with a vertical interval
of no more than two feet and contour data at an interval of no more
than one foot for all areas to be disturbed by the proposed
construction, extending for a distance of at least 50 feet beyond the
limits of such areas. Indicated elevations shall be based on USC
and GS datum or NGV datum.
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in
§ 116-9.
A. Areas within the Township of Grosse Ile subject to the provisions of this
chapter shall depend upon the location of a particular parcel of land
with respect to natural rivers, canals, streams and other watercourses
within the Township.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to those areas within the
Township of Grosse Ile which are at and below the elevation determined
by federal requirements and which are adjacent to sheltered streams,
canals and watercourses and which are not affected by direct exposure
to wind, wave action and wakes from the Detroit River or Lake Erie.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to those areas within the
Township of Grosse Ile which are at an elevation of 580.0 USC and GS
datum or NGV datum and below, and which are immediately adjacent to
the Detroit River or have direct exposure to wind, wave action and
wakes from passing ships.
D. As used in this chapter, the hereinbefore established elevation
standards shall be defined as the "contour of the floodplain" or the
"floodplain contour" within the Township of Grosse Ile.
E. In the event of a conflict between other ordinances of the Township of
Grosse Ile and the elevation standards defining the floodplain contour
or the contour of the floodplain within the Township of Grosse Ile, as set
forth in this section, the provisions of this section shall supersede and
control.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
§ 116-6 GROSSE ILE CODE § 116-8
1:212
§ 116-9. Construction standards.
C. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
D. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
E. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
F. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
A. No structure which is located or is proposed to be located within the
areas of the Township subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be
constructed, extended, located, converted, or structurally altered
except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter in accordance
with the appropriate portions of State of Michigan Building Code. Such
structures or proposed structures shall be required to also satisfy the
following requirements:
(1) Be located on a lot having a minimum building site of 6,000 square
feet of its area at natural grade, or at a grade attained by
depositing approved fill, above the elevation of the contour of the
floodplain as defined in this chapter. All fill deposited to meet the
foregoing grade requirement must be compacted to 95% Proctor,
tested and verified by a certified testing laboratory. The required
grade must extend a minimum of 15 feet beyond the limits of any
building or structure; except side setback must meet minimum
requirements;
(2) Have lower floors, including basements, no lower than the
elevation of the floodplain contour;
(3) Be equipped with a positive means of preventing storm or sanitary
sewer backup from drains serving the structure by installation of
valves capable of being closed manually or automatically when
sewers leave the building below elevation of 580.0, USC and GS
datum;
(4) Must be equipped with a sump pump to discharge floor drains and
laundry tubs into the sanitary sewer;
(5) Must have footing drains around basements or depressed portions
of the structure (including crawl spaces) which are below the
contour of the floodplain pumped into a separate discharge line
which is taken directly to the adjacent watercourse;
(6) Have all electrical equipment, circuits and electrical appliances
located so as not to be subject to flooding, or shall be waterproofed
§ 116-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-9
1:213
§ 116-10. Variances.
against damage resulting from inundation by a one-hundred-year
flood;
(7) The location or storage of chemicals, explosives, buoyant and/or
flammable liquids is prohibited below the contour of the onehundred-
year floodplain;
(8) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(9) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(10) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications
shall be provided to the Township.
B. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the applicant
must provide to the Township a certification from a registered
professional engineer or architect.
C. In the event a structure is adjacent to a floodplain and the basement is
two feet below the flood elevation the basement must be floodproofed,
all setback requirements must be met, and all utility restrictions of this
chapter apply.
D. It shall be brought to the attention of both the owner of the property
and the contractor performing the construction that, prior to issuance
of a construction permit, both the owner and contractor must submit an
affidavit as evidence that they have been advised of a potential danger
of damage due to flooding conditions and/or sewer backup, that they
will abide by the requirements of this chapter, and absolve the
Township of any and all responsibility for liability for loss suffered by
such an occurrence.
E. The Zoning Officer shall ensure that all necessary permits have been
issued, including a floodplain permit, approval, or letter of no authority
from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources under authority of
Act 245, Public Acts of 1929, as amended by Act 167, Public Acts of
1968.
F. The Department of Community Development Manager and/or Zoning
Officer shall maintain a record of new structures or substantial
improvements erected in the flood hazard area indicating the actual
elevation of the lowest structural member required to be elevated or as
an alternative, in nonresidential structures, the elevation to which the
structure has been floodproofed.
§ 116-9 GROSSE ILE CODE § 116-10
1:214
A. The Construction Board of Appeals of Grosse Ile Township shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of
this chapter.
B. The Construction Board of Appeals of Grosse Ile Township shall hear
and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any decision or
determination made in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon all the following conditions being
met. Personal hardship shall not be an acceptable condition for the
granting of a variance.
(1) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
an exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(2) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
any threat to the public safety and would not result in any
extraordinary public expense.
(3) The variance within any designated regulatory floodway would not
result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge.
(4) A showing of good and sufficient cause is made by the applicant.
(5) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to the public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with any other existing local
laws or ordinances.
(6) A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary
considering the flood hazard to afford relief.
(7) The structure or other development that is proposed will be
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
D. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of
a Township official that the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base of flood level will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for each $100 of
insurance coverage and that such construction below the base flood
level increases risk to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance action. The Township shall
maintain a record of all variance actions under this chapter, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
annual or biennial reports submitted to the Administrator for the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or his designee.
E. The appeal or request for a variance shall be filed not later than 30
calendar days after the decision or action has been taken on an
§ 116-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-10
1:215
§ 116-11. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 124
GRADING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 59.
Fences and walls — See Ch. 103.
Flood control — See Ch. 116.
Roads and driveways — See Ch. 205.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Wetlands and drainageways — See Ch. 275.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 124-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXCAVATION — The removal or movement of soil, sand, stone, gravel, or fill
dirt except for common household gardening, farming, and general ground
care.
FILL — A deposit of soil or rock placed or replaced by people or machine
which raises an existing elevation.
FILL MATERIAL — Soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, debris and refuse, waste
of any kind, or any other material which displaces soil or water or reduces
water retention potential.
GRADING — Any stripping, excavating, filling, stockpiling or any
combination thereof, and shall include the land in its excavated or filled
condition.
GRADING PERMIT — A permit issued to authorize work to be performed
under this chapter.
RETAINING WALL — A vertical or near vertical wall structure constructed
of masonry, wood, concrete or other similar materials that forms a
structural barrier that is above ground on one side and is used to retain
application form provided by the Township. The application shall
specify the requirements from which a variance is sought and the
nature and extent of such variance. The application shall be
accompanied by a plan drawing. The application and plan drawing
shall also be submitted to the Township Engineer for their review and
recommendation to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
§ 116-10 GROSSE ILE CODE § 124-1
1:216
and stabilize earth located on the other side of the wall. For the purpose of
this chapter, the definition of "retaining walls" shall not include seawalls or
riprap constructed in accordance with the waterfront provisions of Article
17 of the Zoning Ordinance36 or foundation walls that are part of a building.
§ 124-2. Permit requirements; exception.
§ 124-3. Permit fee.
The permit fee shall be as established by the Township Board and shall
be posted or made available at the Township's Department of Community
Development.
§ 124-4. Grade plan.
A. Grading permit. Any person desirous of improving, grading, excavating,
filling, or otherwise making any surface alterations on any property
within the Township of Grosse Ile shall first obtain a grade permit from
the Township Department of Community Development. Any
improvement, grading, excavation, fill or other surface alteration shall
be in accordance with the grade permit and the approved application
filed for such permit. No permit shall be required for minor changes in
the grade of improved property where the storm drainage pattern on
the property is not altered by such minor grade changes.
B. Retaining walls. The construction of any retaining wall over one foot in
height located within the minimum required front, side or rear yard, as
specified in the Zoning Ordinance, shall require a permit under this
chapter. The construction of any retaining wall over two feet in height
located within the lot's building envelope, as specified by setbacks
required in the Zoning Ordinance, shall require a permit under this
chapter.
A. A grade plan shall be submitted with an application for a grade permit
where topographical information has not been previously submitted on
a site plan or plat or is inadequate on the subject property. Prior to
issuance of a grade permit, the grade plan shall be approved by the
Township Engineer, provided that the construction, enlargement or
alteration of any sea walls, boat wells, or fill in relation thereto, on the
spillways or floodplains of any natural streams or watercourses shall be
permitted only in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 285,
Zoning. Grade plans may be included with a plot plan or may be
submitted as a separate plan. Grade plans prepared by a registered
engineer or surveyor shall be required when requested by the
Department of Community Development.
B. Grade plans shall show the elevation of the grade at existing and
proposed structures on the property and existing grade at the nearest
side of structures on adjacent property. They shall also show sufficient
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Zoning.
§ 124-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-4
1:217
§ 124-5. Final building grade.
§ 124-6. Subdivision grades.
A grade plan drawn by a registered engineer or surveyor of any proposed
subdivision showing the topography of the area to be platted and indicating
the existing drainage pattern and the proposed surface drainage from
each parcel or lot shall be submitted with the preliminary subdivision
plat. Drainage easements shall be provided across private property where
necessary for handling surface drainage from adjacent properties.
§ 124-7. Grade approval.
Grades for residential properties may be approved by the Township's
Building Inspector after visual on-site inspection. Grades around large
buildings, such as churches, schools, offices, businesses, parking lots, etc.,
shall be approved by the Township Engineer. Before final inspection is
made and a certificate of occupancy is issued, the rough grading must be
completed, allowing for bringing the premises up to grade by the addition of
topsoil, sod, and other landscaping. Final grading shall be completed within
one year after the certificate of occupancy is issued.
§ 124-8. Retaining walls.
existing and proposed elevations on both the property to be improved,
including the four corners, and on as much of the adjacent property
as is necessary in order to establish the proposed surface drainage
pattern. All elevations shall be based on U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey
datum. Elevation and location of the bench mark which was used for
determining the elevations shall be shown on the plan. Retaining walls
shall be illustrated with construction details provided.
A. The final building grade permitted by the Township's grade permit shall
be established and maintained at an elevation that will provide a
minimum five-percent slope away from splash blocks at the building or
house for a minimum distance of 10 feet, and the balance of the
building or house site shall be graded to provide positive surface
drainage from that point to the street, ditch or other drainagecourse.
Where the distance between the house and the lot line is less than 10
feet, the slope and grading will be as approved by the Township
Engineer.
B. Finished grades shall maintain relationship to existing topography to
the maximum extent practical. Grades shall be maintained in
relationship to adjacent properties such that there are not significant
changes in grade from one lot to another that require the use of
retaining walls between adjacent lots beyond what is permitted under
this chapter. The existing watercourse on adjoining properties shall not
be altered without prior approval of the owners thereof.
§ 124-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 124-8
1:218
A. Areas where retaining walls are allowed. Retaining walls shall be
permitted to be constructed on a lot as follows:37
Area of Lot (a) Height Limit (b)
Within 25 feet of principal
building footprint and within
building envelope defined by
setbacks
No limit (c)
Within building envelope defined
by setbacks but not within 25 feet
of principal building footprint
4 feet
Within minimum required setback
distances from lot lines
Height equal to setback from lot
line up to a maximum of 2 feet (d)
Within waterfront yards between
shoreline and principal building
4 feet (e)
NOTES:
(a) As defined under the Township Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Walls taller than four feet shall be required to be stepped in
multiple tiers.
(c) Height limited by Building Code and review of engineering plans.
(d) Total length of retaining walls along a lot line may not exceed 30%
of lot line length, except in the waterfront yard as provided for in
Note (e) below.
(e) Retaining walls within the required waterfront yard shall
generally be parallel to the shoreline, provided that short
segments of the wall may be perpendicular to the shoreline to
allow for variations in the wall. Retaining walls shall not be
permitted parallel to side lot lines except for short segments along
the sides where the waterfront yard is stepped, as shown in the
graphic.
B. Retaining wall construction standards.
(1) Relationship to grade. Retaining walls shall be utilized only where
needed to stabilize steep slopes, establish grade for buildings and
accessory structures, preserve grade around trees, wetlands or
other natural features to be preserved or as part of a grading plan
37.Editor's Note: Drawings depicting the area of allowed retaining walls are included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 124-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-8
1:219
§ 124-9. Appeals.
An individual who desires a waiver or modification to the standards of this
chapter may petition the Township Zoning Board of Appeals for a hearing
on such request. Such request shall be processed and hearing noticed
following the procedures of Chapter 285, Zoning, Article 23. In reviewing
the request, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the following:
to establish positive drainage from a site. Retaining walls shall not
be constructed in a manner that alters natural drainage between
properties or creates the need for mechanical drainage systems.
(2) Building materials. Retaining walls shall be constructed of stone,
brick, interlocking decorative concrete block, wood or other similar
quality material approved by the Building Inspector. The use of
broken concrete for retaining walls shall not be permitted.
(3) Building Code compliance. All retaining walls shall be constructed
in accordance with the Building Code.
(4) Site restoration. Upon the completion of the retaining wall, all
areas above and below the retaining wall shall be planted with
grass or other suitable living plant material, except where
pavement or decks are provided.
(5) Retaining walls within floodplains. Retaining walls shall be
permitted to elevate building sites and accessory structures above
the one-hundred-year floodplain elevation, provided that retaining
walls shall not interfere with the flow of floodways and shall not
cause increased flooding of adjacent properties.
(6) Fence height in addition to retaining wall. Where a fence is located
on top of a retaining wall, the height of the retaining wall shall be
included in the height of the fence when determining compliance
with the fence height limitations in the Fence Ordinance.38
C. Existing retaining walls. This chapter shall not prohibit the
maintenance of existing retaining walls that do not meet the
requirements of this chapter, but were constructed prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
A. Practical difficulties. Compliance with the strict letter of the regulations
would create practical difficulties and unreasonably prevent the
establishment of a finished grade or drainage necessary to develop the
property for a permitted use.
B. Extraordinary circumstances. There are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or physical conditions applicable to the property
involved, such as natural features, unusual grades on the property, or
adjacent property or drainage problems that do not apply generally to
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Fences and Walls.
§ 124-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 124-9
1:220
§ 124-10. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 126
HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 146. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 185.
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any business, entity, company or individual who is
responsible for the distribution of handbills within the Township or who
directs or provides handbills to persons to distribute within the Township.
other properties in the Township. The conditions resulting in a request
cannot be self-created.
C. Public safety and welfare. The granting of a waiver or modification will
not create a hazardous condition, increase the risk of erosion or create
drainage or flooding problems on adjacent or other nearby properties.
D. Drainage. Granting a waiver shall not have an adverse impact on the
drainage of the site and adjacent lots and shall not disrupt natural
drainage patterns or flow of floodwaters. The granting of a waiver or
modification will not be contrary to the Township Floodplain
Ordinance.39
E. Natural features. The granting of a waiver or modification will minimize
impact on natural features. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
specifically grant modifications to this chapter for retaining walls
utilized to minimize disturbance to woodlands or wetlands.
F. Neighborhood character. The granting of a waiver or modification will
not impact views from adjacent properties or alter the essential
character of the neighborhood.
G. Building and engineering standards. The granting of a waiver or
modification will not be contrary to the Building Code or accepted
building and engineering standards.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 116, Flood Control.
§ 124-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-1
1:221
HANDBILLS — Includes any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, plastic bag containing
printed material or any other printed matter or literature which is not
delivered by United States mail, except that "handbill" shall not include a
newspaper.
PREMISES — Any residence, commercial building or other structure which
has a mailing address assigned to it and includes appurtenant structures
including but not limited to mailbox posts and structures.
SOLICITOR — Individual, entity, company or other person who is
responsible for the distribution of handbills within the Township of Grosse
Ile, and said definition includes "distributor."
§ 126-2. Delivery of handbills.
§ 126-3. Registration.
Any distributor and solicitor shall provide to the Township Clerk, prior to
the distribution of handbills within the Township, their name, address and
telephone number. A distributor may register on behalf of its solicitors.
A. No person shall place any handbill upon any premises if requested by
anyone thereon not to do so or there is placed on the premises in a
position near the doorway entrance thereof a notice indicating that the
occupants of said premises do not desire to have solicitors or do not
desire to have handbills left at their premises. Any posted notice on or
near the front door to the premises such as "No Solicitors Allowed" or
"No Handbills"or similar type language is sufficient notice that
handbills shall not be left at the premises.
B. No handbill may be attached or affixed to any mailbox or other
structure (other than the building or home) belonging or appurtenant to
the residence or commercial building. This prohibition shall not apply if
the material is deposited in a box designed to hold the handbills
provided the distributor or solicitor has obtained prior permission from
the property owner to place a box on the premises for that purpose.
C. No person may make any alteration or addition to a mailbox post or
structure for any purpose without receiving permission from the
property owners.
D. No person shall place any handbill in or upon any private premises
except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to any
person then present in or upon the private premises or by placing or
depositing any handbill upon the building or home in such a manner so
as to prevent it from being carried away by the elements, or by placing
the handbill in a box designed for that purpose.
§ 126-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 126-4
1:222
§ 126-4. Penalty.
Any solicitor, distributor or any other person who in any way violates any
provision of this chapter shall be responsible for municipal civil infraction
for each property address or location where said violation occurs. The
responsible party shall pay a fine not to exceed $500 plus court costs for
each location that said violation occurs.
Chapter 130
HORSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 20.
Fishing and recreational activities — See Ch.
113.
Trespassing — See Ch. 255.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 130-1. Design and maintenance of stables.
No person, firm or corporation owning or responsible for the custody of
any horses within the Township of Grosse Ile shall, for the purpose of
stabling any such horse or horses, use or occupy any building, shed or other
structure which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter:
A. No structure for the stabling of any such horse or horses shall be
smaller than will adequately house such animals, nor shall such stable
be less in interior dimensions than nine feet by 13 feet, with a minimum
ceiling height of eight feet six inches.
B. The individual stalls shall be separately partitioned in a substantial
manner to a height of at least four feet above the stall floor. Each stall
shall be provided with a substantial wood floor laid upon a concrete
floor sloping to adequate drainage outlets. Each stall shall also be
provided with a permanent manger and hay rack.
C. The stable shall be provided with windows for adequate light and
ventilation, equipped and maintained with adequate fly screens. The
walls and roof of the stable shall be so constructed as to be
weatherproof and the use of rotten, burned or inferior lumber is
prohibited. The interior of the stable shall be free from projecting nails
or splinters liable to injure persons or animals. The entire stable shall
be provided with a concrete floor so sloped to adequate drainage
outlets as to permit thorough flushing of the floor area.
D. The doors of every stable shall be not less than 3 1/2 feet by 6 1/2 feet,
properly hung so as to be weatherproof when closed, and in the summer
months the opening shall be provided with a suitable fly screen properly
maintained.
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-1
1:223
§ 130-2. Stable required.
No horse shall be kept in the Township of Grosse Ile unless a stable is
provided and maintained for it in compliance with this chapter.
§ 130-3. Location of stable or corral.
No stable or corral shall be located nearer than 150 feet to any dwelling nor
upon any lot or tract of land containing less than one acre for each horse
kept on the premises.
§ 130-4. Riding on private property.
No person shall lead or ride any horse or pony on any private property
without the permission of the owner of the property.
§ 130-5. Riding on roadways.
Horseback riders shall proceed in single file on the shoulder of any roadway
in the Township.
§ 130-6. Nighttime riding prohibited.
Horseback riding is prohibited during the period from 1/2 hour after sunset
to 1/2 hour before sunrise.
§ 130-7. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 132
HUNTING AND TRAPPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms — See Ch. 107. Fishing and recreational activities — See Ch.
113.
E. Proper receptacles shall be provided for the storage of grain, hay and
bedding. A supply of good water shall be maintained convenient to the
stable.
F. The stable shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition at all times and
the interior shall be cleaned as often as necessary to maintain sanitary
conditions. Suitable provision shall be made for the storage of manure
outside the building. Until disposed of, the manure shall be kept in a
manner that will not create an unhealthy condition or one which is
offensive or disturbing to the neighborhood.
§ 130-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 130-7
1:224
§ 132-1. Hunting prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt by any means any birds, animals
or fowl within the Township.
§ 132-2. Trapping restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to trap or to set out or make use of any
kind or type of trap for the purpose of trapping any animals, birds or fowl
within the Township. This section shall not prohibit the owner or occupant
of any property from trapping thereon any rodents or from trapping by use
of a live trap any animal thereon for the purpose of live release thereafter of
any such trapped animal as permitted and in accordance with Department
of Natural Resources rules and regulations.
§ 132-3. Confiscation of traps and weapons.
Any traps or other apparatus used in prohibited trapping and any firearms,
dangerous weapons, air or BB guns, slingshots, or bow and arrow used in
violation of this chapter shall be seized and disposed of in accordance with
the order of the court in which such violation is prosecuted. In the event
that there exists no court order for the disposition of such seized property,
such property shall be returned to the owner or to the person entitled to
possession thereof if such person is known or can be determined. In the
event that the owner or person entitled to such property is not known or
cannot be determined, then such seized property shall be disposed of in the
manner provided for in the disposition of abandoned property.
§ 132-4. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 133
ILLICIT DISCHARGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood control — See Ch. 116.
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 209.
Sewer use — See Ch. 210.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 233.
Wetlands and drainageways — See Ch. 275.
§ 133-1. Purpose; objectives.
§ 130-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-1
1:225
§ 133-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
GROSSE ILE TOWNSHIP and/or MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY (MDEQ) — Employees or designees of the
municipality or agency designated to enforce this chapter or the regulations
herein.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, including any substance, waste,
or combination thereof which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge
to the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 133-7 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS — Either of the following:
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of Grosse Ile Township through the
regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system
to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law.
This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in
order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.
B. The objectives of this chapter are to:
(1) Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater
discharges by any user.
(2) Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
(3) Establish legal authority to carry out inspection, surveillance,
monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary for this
chapter.
§ 133-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 133-2
1:226
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY — Activities subject to NPDES industrial
stormwater permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — The system of
conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) owned and operated by the Township of Grosse Ile and designed
or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for
collecting or conveying sewage.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the EPA [or
by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)] that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the storm drain
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater and that exceeds the
established state or federal limits.
PERSON — Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT — Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may
cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including
but not limited to any conveyances that allow any non-stormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain
or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by
an authorized enforcement agency; or
A.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
B.
§ 133-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-2
1:227
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped
storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER — Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A document which describes the
best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person
or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and
the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum
extent practicable.
WASTEWATER — Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.
§ 133-3. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by Grosse Ile Township and/or the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality (MDEQ).
§ 133-4. Responsibility for administration.
Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties
imposed upon Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ may be delegated in
writing by the Director of Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ to persons
or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
§ 133-5. Effect on other laws.
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are
in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation,
or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive
or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the
environment shall control.
§ 133-6. Minimum standards.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that
§ 133-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 133-6
1:228
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 133-7. Discharge prohibitions.
A. Prohibition of illegal discharges.
(1) No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or
allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise
discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than stormwater.
(2) The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal
discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(a) The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing,
landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising
groundwaters, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration,
uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from
potable water sources, foundation drains, air-conditioning
condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl
space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual
residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and street
wash water.
(b) Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges
specified in writing by Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ
as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
(c) Discharges associated with dye testing, however this activity
requires a verbal notification to Grosse Ile Township and/or the
MDEQ prior to the time of the test.
(d) The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered
under the authority of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or
order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided
that written approval has been granted for any discharge to
the storm drain system.
B. Prohibition of illegal connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain is prohibited.
§ 133-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-7
1:229
§ 133-8. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse
so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 133-9. Compliance monitoring.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at
the time of the connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows
such a connection to continue.
(4) Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site
wastewater management system or sanitary sewer system upon
approval of Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ.
(5) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans,
maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm
sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that
property upon receipt of written notice of violation from Grosse Ile
Township and/or the MDEQ requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within
which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined,
that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary
sewer, or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection
to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other
discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to
be documented and provided to Grosse Ile Township and/or the
MDEQ.
A. Right of entry; inspection and sampling. Grosse Ile Township and/or the
MDEQ shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to
regulation under this chapter as often as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.
(1) If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ.
§ 133-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 133-9
1:230
§ 133-10. Requirement to use best management practices.
Any person responsible for a property or premises that is, or may be,
the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent
(2) Facility operators shall allow Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must
be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by state and federal law.
(3) Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ shall have the right to set up
on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the
opinion of Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ has the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of Grosse Ile
Township and/or the MDEQ and shall not be replaced. The costs of
clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing Grosse Ile Township and/or the
MDEQ access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater
discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator
of a facility with an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater
associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person
denies Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ reasonable access to
the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this chapter.
B. Search warrants. If Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ has been
refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is
discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe
that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to
inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and
welfare of the community, then Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ
may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 133-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-10
1:231
the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms
and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
§ 133-11. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain
system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release.
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ
in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ within three
business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or
operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of
the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least seven years. Failure to provide notification of a
release as provided above is a violation of this chapter.
§ 133-12. Violations, enforcement and penalties.
A. Violations.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person
who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this
chapter may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this
section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a
manner provided by law.
(2) In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public
health or public safety, Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ is
authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without
giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate
the violation and/or restore the property. Grosse Ile Township and/
or the MDEQ is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as
outlined in § 133-15.
B. Warning notice. When Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ finds that
any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter or any order issued hereunder, Grosse Ile Township and/or the
MDEQ may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying
§ 133-10 GROSSE ILE CODE § 133-12
1:232
the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the
discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a
resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation
and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no
way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this subsection
shall limit the authority of Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ to
take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a warning notice.
C. Notice of violation. Whenever Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ
finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this chapter, Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible
person.
(1) The notice of violation shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the alleged violator;
(b) The address, when available, or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has
occurred;
(c) A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
(d) A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore
compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the
completion of such remedial action;
(e) A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;
(f) A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ by filing a
written notice of appeal within five days of service of notice of
violation; and
(g) A statement specifying that should the violator fail to restore
compliance within the established time schedule, the work will
be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor
and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(2) Such notice may require without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(b) The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
(c) That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease
and desist;
§ 133-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-12
1:233
(d) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(e) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation
costs; and
(f) The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
D. Compensatory action. In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties,
and remedies authorized by this chapter, Grosse Ile Township and/or
the MDEQ may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory
actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance
workshops, creek cleanup, etc.
E. Emergency cease and desist orders; suspensions.
(1) Emergency cease and desist orders.
(a) When Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ finds that any
person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the
person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the
person's violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an
actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the
United States which reasonably appears to present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare
of persons or to the environment, Grosse Ile Township and/or
the MDEQ may issue an order to the violator directing it
immediately to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the violator to:
[1] Immediately comply with all chapter requirements; and
[2] Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including immediately halting operations and/or
terminating the discharge.
(b) Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under
this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate
its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency
order, Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ may take such
steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the
MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to
persons or to the environment, including immediate
termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or
other municipal utility services. Grosse Ile Township and/or the
MDEQ may allow the person to recommence its discharge
when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of Grosse Ile
Township and/or the MDEQ that the period of endangerment
§ 133-12 GROSSE ILE CODE § 133-12
1:234
has passed, unless further termination proceedings are
initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person
that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ within
three days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an
emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
(2) Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.
Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ may, without prior notice,
suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension
is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4
or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, Grosse Ile Township and/
or the MDEQ may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent
or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or
to minimize danger to persons.
(3) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.
(a) Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter
may have his/her MS4 access terminated if such termination
would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. Grosse Ile Township
and/or the MDEQ will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition Grosse
Ile Township and/or the MDEQ for a reconsideration and
hearing.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant to this section,
without the prior approval of Grosse Ile Township and/or the
MDEQ.
F. Civil penalties. In the event a person violates any provision of this
chapter, such a violation constitutes a municipal civil infraction which
may be punishable by a fine of up to $500 per violation. In addition to
any fine and costs imposed under this chapter, the court may assess the
additional costs incurred in compelling enforcement of the chapter.
Each day that the violation takes place constitutes a separate offense
under this chapter. If any person commits a second offense or
subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter, such a violation, in
the discretion of the Township, may be charged as a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not exceeding $500 and/or imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, provided that the authorized Township official
issues an appearance ticket and marks it as a misdemeanor. However,
§ 133-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-12
1:235
§ 133-13. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ. The notice of appeal must be
received within five days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on
the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take
place within 10 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the municipal authority or its designee shall be final.
§ 133-14. Failure to comply.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within five
days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of
Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ, then representatives of Grosse Ile
Township and/or the MDEQ shall enter upon the subject private property
and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for
the purposes set forth above.
§ 133-15. Cost of abatement.
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment within five days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the
expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become
a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment.
§ 133-16. Violations deemed public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored
at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise
compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
§ 133-17. Remedies not exclusive.
nothing herein requires the Township official to charge a repeat offense
of the same ordinance by the same individual as a misdemeanor.
A. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and
it is within the discretion of Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ to
seek cumulative remedies.
§ 133-12 GROSSE ILE CODE § 133-17
1:236
Chapter 135
INMATE REIMBURSEMENT
§ 135-1. Reimbursement may be sought; financial status of inmate.
B. Grosse Ile Township and/or the MDEQ may recover all attorneys' fees,
court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this
chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
A. The Township of Grosse Ile ("Township") may seek reimbursement from
any person who is or was a convicted inmate in a Township jail, or in a
county jail, or any other jail facility for expenses incurred by the
Township in relation to the incarceration of that person, as follows:
(1) Not more than $60 per day for the expenses of maintaining that
inmate or the actual per diem cost of maintaining that inmate,
whichever is less, for the entire period of time the inmate was
confined to the Township jail, county jail, or any other jail facility,
including any period of pretrial detention.
(2) The per-day cost charged to the Township by a city, county, or any
other jail facility for housing the inmate in that Township jail, or
county jail, or any other jail facility, but not more than $60 per day,
for the entire period during which the inmate was housed in that
facility.
(3) The cost of providing medical treatment, prescription drugs, dental
care, and other medical examinations or procedures, including the
following fees to be assessed to and paid by any person utilizing the
services of the Township for providing or transporting for
emergency medical treatment: [Amended 2-8-2016 by Ord. No.
16-001]
(a) Basic, emergency ambulance service: $600.
(b) Basic, nonemergency ambulance service: $425.
(c) Reimbursement for mileage: $14.
(d) No transport: $150.
(e) Reimbursement to Township for oxygen and supplies: $50.
(f) Reimbursement to Township for C-Collar: $20.
(g) Reimbursement to Township for combitube: $25.
(h) Reimbursement to Township for defibrillator: $50.
(4) To investigate the financial status of the person.
§ 133-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-1
1:237
§ 135-2. Submission of information to Township Board.
At, and in accordance with, the request of the Township Board of Trustees,
the Chief of Police shall forward to the Township Board of Trustees a list
containing the name of each sentenced inmate and each pretrial detainee
whose prosecution resulted in conviction from whom reimbursement may
be sought under § 135-1, the term of sentence or the period of pretrial
detention, and the date of admission to the city jail, or county jail, or any
other jail facility, together with information regarding the financial status of
each inmate, as required by the Township Board of Trustees.
§ 135-3. Cooperation of inmate required.
§ 135-4. Investigation of reports.
The Board of Trustees may investigate or cause to be investigated all the
reports under § 135-2 furnished by the Chief of Police for the purpose of
securing reimbursement as provided for under this chapter.
(5) Any other expenses incurred by the Township to collect payments
under this chapter, including, but not limited to, administrative
costs for searching for collectible assets of the inmate, and
reasonable attorney fees and court costs.
B. Reimbursement under this chapter may be ordered as a probation
condition entered pursuant to Section 3 of Chapter XI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCLA § 771.3.
C. Before seeking any reimbursement under this chapter, the Township
shall develop a form to be used for determining the financial status of
inmates. The form shall provide for obtaining the age and marital status
of an inmate, number and ages of children of an inmate, number and
ages of other dependents, type and value of real estate, type and value
of personal property, cash and bank accounts, type and value of
investments, pensions and annuities, and any other personalty of
significant cash value. The Township shall use the form when
investigating the financial status of inmates.
A. An inmate in a Township jail, county jail, or other jail facility shall
cooperate with the Township in seeking reimbursements under this
chapter for expenses incurred by the Township for that inmate.
B. An inmate who willfully refuses to cooperate as provided in Subsection
A shall not receive a reduction in his or her term under Section 7 of
1962 PA 60, MCLA § 801.257. If an inmate is ordered to reimburse the
Township under this chapter probation condition entered pursuant to
Section 3 of Chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA
175, MCLA § 771.3, the inmate is subject to probation revocation as
provided in Section 4 of Chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1927 PA 175, MCLA § 771.4.
§ 135-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 135-5
1:238
§ 135-5. Filing of civil action; of considerations.
§ 135-6. Enforcement of judgment.
A. Within 12 months after the release from Township jail, county jail, or
other jail facility of a sentenced inmate or a pretrial detainee whose
prosecution resulted in conviction, an attorney for the Township may
file a civil action to seek reimbursement from that person for
maintenance and support of that person while he or she was confined to
the jail, for costs charged to the Township by a county for housing that
person in a county jail, or for costs charged to the Township by any
other entity for housing that person in any other jail facility, and for any
other expense for which the Township may be reimbursed under
§ 135-1 as provided in this section and §§ 135-6 to 135-8. The Township
may also commence an action for reimbursement in Small Claims
Court.
B. A civil action brought under this chapter shall be instituted in the name
of the Township and shall state the following, as applicable:
(1) In the case of an inmate sentenced to a Township jail, county jail, or
other jail facility, the date and place of sentence, the length of time
set forth in the sentence, the length of time actually served, and the
amount or amounts due to the Township pursuant to § 135-1.
(2) In the case of a person imprisoned as a pretrial detainee on a
charge or charges that resulted in conviction, the length of pretrial
detention and the amount or amounts due to the Township
pursuant to § 135-1.
C. Before entering any order on behalf of the Township against the
defendant, the court shall take into consideration any legal obligation of
the defendant to support a spouse, minor children, or other dependents
and any moral obligation to support dependents to whom the defendant
is providing or has in fact provided support.
D. The court may enter a money judgment against the defendant and may
order that the defendant's property is liable for reimbursement for
maintenance and support of the defendant as an inmate and other
expenses reimbursable under § 135-1.
A. Consistent with Section 5, the Township may file the civil action in the
District Court to recover a money judgment and to enforce that
judgment in the same manner as other money judgments entered by the
District Court. If the Defendant is still an inmate in the Township jail,
county jail, or other jail facility, or is a prisoner in a state correctional
facility, venue in a district of the first class is proper in the county where
the Township jail, county jail, or other jail facility, or where the state
correction facility is located and in a district of the second or third class
is proper in the judicial district where the Township jail, county jail, or
other jail facility, or where the state correction facility is located.
§ 135-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-6
1:239
§ 135-7. Enforcement by execution against homestead prohibited.
The Township shall not enforce any judgment obtained under this chapter
by means of execution against the homestead of the defendant.
§ 135-8. Information to be provided to Township Attorney.
The sentencing judge and the sheriff of any county in which an inmate's
property is located shall furnish to the attorney for the Township all
information and assistance possible to enable the attorney to secure
reimbursement for the Township under this chapter.
§ 135-9. Disposition of reimbursements; determination of amount
due.
The reimbursements secured under this chapter shall be credited to the
general fund of the Township to be available for general fund purposes. The
Township Treasurer may determine the amount due the Township under
this chapter and render sworn statements thereof. These sworn statements
shall be considered prima facie evidence of the amount due.
Chapter 139
LAND USE HEARING NOTICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238. Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 139-1. Posting of property prior to hearing.
A petitioner, developer or property owner shall be required to post notices
upon the land which is the subject matter of a required public hearing
before the Planning Commission under Chapter 71, Condominium Projects,
or Chapter 238, Subdivision Control, of the Township Code of Ordinances
B. If necessary to protect the Township's right to obtain reimbursement
under this chapter against the disposition of known property, the
Township, in accordance with rules of the Supreme Court of this state,
may seek issuance of an Ex Parte Restraining Order to restrain the
defendant from disposing of the property pending a Hearing on an
Order to Show Cause why the particular property should not be applied
to reimbursement of the Township for the maintenance and support of
the defendant as an inmate.
C. To protect and maintain the property pending resolution of the matter,
upon request, may appoint a receiver. The cost of the receiver shall be
paid for by the inmate.
§ 135-6 GROSSE ILE CODE § 139-1
1:240
or Article 22, Special Land Use Review, or Article 23, Variances and
Amendments, of Chapter 285, Zoning.
§ 139-2. Contents of notice.
The petitioner, developer or property owner shall obtain the required
language to be placed upon the notice from the Township Department of
Community Development at least one week prior to the date when the
notices must be posted.
§ 139-3. Method of posting.
The posting of notices upon the property shall comply with the following
standards:
§ 139-4. Failure to comply.
Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter may
not proceed with the public hearing.
A. The notice shall be posted once every 400 feet of road frontage along
the perimeter of the property which is the subject matter of the public
hearing, with a minimum of one notice facing each road along the
property's perimeter.
B. The notice shall be made in black lettering on an eighteen-inch-wide,
twenty-four-inch-high yellow weatherproofed board with a minimum of
a one-quarter-inch plywood backing.
C. The notice shall be firmly attached or secured to a two-inch-by-two-inch
or a two-inch-by-four-inch stake or post at locations that are easily
observable by the public from abutting roads or sidewalks, but shall not
be placed in a location that would obstruct the view of roadway traffic
or which would interfere with the effectiveness or obstruct the view of
any traffic control device or signal.
D. The notice shall stand at least three feet off the ground.
E. The person responsible for posting the notice shall maintain the notice
in compliance with all requirements of this chapter until the day
following the public hearing and the notice shall then be removed by
the person responsible for posting the notice.
F. The person responsible for posting the notice shall file a signed form at
least 10 days prior to the public hearing date which establishes that the
person has complied with the requirements of this chapter.
G. The posted notice is exempt from the Grosse Ile sign ordinance
requirements.
§ 139-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-5
1:241
§ 139-5. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 142
LAW ENFORCEMENT DATA
§ 142-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESS — To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in, retrieve
data from, or otherwise use the resources of a computer, computer system,
or computer network.
COMPUTER — An electronic device which performs logical, arithmetic, and
memory function by the manipulations of electronic or magnetic impulses,
and includes input, output, processing, storage, software, or communication
facilities which are connected or related to a device in a system or network.
COMPUTER NETWORK — The interconnection of communication lines with
a computer through remote terminals, or a complex consisting of two or
more interconnected computers.
COMPUTER PROGRAM — A series of instructions or statements, in a form
acceptable to a computer, which permits the functioning of a computer
system in a manner designed to provide appropriate products from the
computer system.
COMPUTER SOFTWARE — A set of computer programs, procedures, and
associated documentation concerned with the operation of a computer
system.
COMPUTER SYSTEM — A set of related, connected or unconnected,
computer equipment, devices, and software.
SHARED INFORMATION NETWORK CONSORTIUM (SINC) — The
management information system created by interlocal government
agreement entered into by the Township of Grosse Ile on January 25, 1999,
pursuant to MCLA § 124.501 to assist participating communities in the
assembly, retention, and retrieval of law enforcement data.
§ 142-2. Accessing law enforcement data.
A. No person other than an authorized law enforcement officer employed
by the Township shall access the Shared Information Network
Consortium Management Information System, unless specifically
authorized in writing by the Chief of Police.
§ 139-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 142-2
1:242
§ 142-3. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3.
Chapter 146
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 167. Solid waste — See Ch. 226.
§ 146-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby declared and found that litter carelessly deposited in the
Township of Grosse Ile is the cause of civic disgrace; that litter is a health,
fire and safety hazard and pollutant; that an all-out litter control campaign
can result in substantial savings to the taxpayers of the Township of Grosse
Ile; and that litter is a matter affecting the public interest and consequently
should be subject to supervision and administrative control for the purpose
of safeguarding the public health, safety and general welfare of the people
of the Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 146-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future; words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
COMMERCIAL PLACE — Any store or building or group thereof, including
shopping centers, shopping plazas and other similar places, where
mercantile activities and services are offered to the public, and shall include
all parking areas thereat.
B. No law enforcement officer employed by the Township shall access that
portion of the Shared Information Network Consortium Management
Information System outside his or her clearance level as established by
the access protocols published by SINC.
C. No person shall intentionally and without authorization gain access to,
alter, damage, or destroy, or tamper with for the purposes of damaging
or destroying, a computer, computer system or computer network, or
gain access to, alter, damage, or destroy a computer software program
or data contained in the Shared Information Network Consortium
Management Information System, its computers or computer network.
§ 142-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-2
1:243
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copy of any matter of literature which:
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends
to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or creates
unsightliness.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by law;
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States in accordance with federal statute or regulation; and any newspaper
filed and recorded with any recording officer, as provided by law. In addition
thereto, it shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published, with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the
public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter; any
sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or originals
or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions
of a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the Township owned or used by the Township and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any house, building or other structure designed
or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise, produce, commodity or thing.
Directs attention to any business, mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit.
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 146-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 146-2
1:244
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 146-3. Litter in public places.
No person shall deposit or throw litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the Township except in public receptacles or in
private receptacles for collection.
§ 146-4. Placing litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall do
so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property.
§ 146-5. Sweeping or depositing litter in gutters.
No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place
within the Township the accumulation of litter from any building or litter
from any public sidewalk or driveway.
§ 146-6. Littering from vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or public place within the Township or upon private
property.
§ 146-7. Trucks causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Township unless such vehicle is so constructed or located as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley
or other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the Township, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit
in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter
or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 146-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-8
1:245
§ 146-8. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Township
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as
provided herein.
§ 146-9. Litter in public waters.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Township.
§ 146-10. Handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbills in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Township.
§ 146-11. Handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 146-12. Placing handbills on vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 146-13. Distributing handbills on private premises.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises.
B. Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to
newspapers (as defined herein), except that newspapers shall be placed
on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or
upon private property.
§ 146-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 146-14
1:246
§ 146-14. Litter on private and commercial premises.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
or commercial place within the Township, whether owned by such person
or not, except that the owner or person in control of such private property
or commercial place may maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or upon
any private property.
§ 146-15. Maintenance of commercial premises free of litter.
Each owner or person in control of any commercial place, including
shopping centers and delivery and parking areas thereat, shall keep said
places, parking fields, parking areas, delivery areas and other open areas
which are a part of such commercial place free from litter.
§ 146-16. Maintenance of private premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 146-17. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Township, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 146-18. Notice to remove litter.
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the
owner of any open or vacant private property or commercial place within
the Township, or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of litter
located on such owner's property which is a nuisance or dangerous to
public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by certified mail and
addressed to said owner at his last known address.
§ 146-19. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
§ 146-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 146-19
1:247
Chapter 150
MACOMB STREET LANDSCAPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Downtown Development Authority — See Ch.
84.
Woodland and tree preservation — See Ch.
282.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 150-1. Intent.
The intent of this section is to create a visual cohesiveness and unity for
the commercial frontage through enhancement of building facades and
streetscape improvements; to eliminate the effect of blighting influences
which detract from the appearance and marketability of the district and
negatively affect the image of the Township; to enhance the economic
viability of the businesses in the district; to encourage additional private
investment in the business district; and to create a physical environment,
image, and "sense of place" which will encourage additional retail and
commercial activity in the district.
§ 150-2. Applicability; provisions to be minimum requirements.
A. This chapter applies to all lots, sites, parcels and uses which are
developed, expanded, or changed following the effective date of this
chapter that exist within the Macomb Street District Zoning District.
Any preexisting condition not in conformance with the standards and
regulations of this chapter shall be eliminated within 45 days. Failure to
do so shall result in a municipal civil infractions ticket being issued (see
§ 150-10, Penalty).
B. The landscaping requirements shall be met prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy and shall be continuously maintained in a
sound, healthy, and vigorous growing condition.
C. The requirements set forth herein are minimum requirements, and
nothing herein shall preclude the applicant and the Township from
agreeing to more extensive landscaping.
D. Creativity in landscape design is encouraged but must be consistent
with the Downtown Development Authority plan adopted by Township
Board, as a component element of the Downtown Development
Authority's tax increment financing and development plan, of June 14,
1999, which identifies a series of projects to achieve the above-stated
goals.
§ 146-19 GROSSE ILE CODE § 150-3
1:248
§ 150-3. Land clearing and modification; permit required.
It is the intent of this section to protect the natural resources of the
community by requiring a Township permit to be issued by the Department
of Community Development prior to the start of construction or modification
to land areas.
§ 150-4. Site and landscape design standards.
All developed portions of a site requiring site plan approval shall conform
to the general landscaping standards as outlined in the Downtown
Development Authority's approved landscape plan for the Macomb Street
District dated June 14, 1999, and as may be amended (see exhibit
attached40).
§ 150-5. Landscape maintenance.
Maintenance is an important concern to all living things, particularly plant
materials in their first year of establishment. To ensure that newly planted
vegetation survives and serves the purpose of the chapter and to be neat,
healthy and orderly, and that the individual shall comply with the
maintenance standards as found in Article 13, § 285-13.4D, entitled
"Installation and maintenance," of Chapter 285, Zoning.
§ 150-6. Landscape plan required.
A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the Department of Community
Development for Township review. All landscape material shall comply with
the standards outlined in Article 13, § 285-13.4A, entitled "Standards for
landscape materials," of Chapter 285, Zoning.
§ 150-7. Downtown Development Authority plan.
§ 150-8. Alternative compliance and landscape credit.
A. The Downtown Development Authority in its capacity of overseeing the
development of the Macomb Street corridor area has approved a
landscaping amenities plan adopted by the Township Board on June 14,
1999, and as may be amended (see exhibit attached). All landscaping
within the right-of-way must meet with the approval of this plan.
Variations to this plan must be approved by the Downtown
Development Authority.
B. Required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at
random, or in groupings, depending on the designer's desired visual
effect and the intent of the Township to coordinate landscaping on
adjacent properties.
40.Editor's Note: The diagrams which accompany this ordinance are included at the end of
the chapter.
§ 150-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-8
1:249
A. The Planning Commission may reduce or modify the location of the
landscape requirements for development plan reviews under its
jurisdiction based upon a determination that the landscaping required
will not be necessary or effective in meeting the intent of this chapter.
In making such a determination, the following shall be considered:
(1) Topographic features or other unique features of the site create
conditions such that strict application of the landscape regulations
would result in a less effective screen than an alternative landscape
design.
(2) Parking, vehicular circulation, or existing or planned land use are
such that required landscaping would not enhance the site or result
in the desired screening effect.
(3) The public benefit intended by the landscape regulations could be
better achieved with a plan that varies from the strict requirements
of the chapter.
(4) The intent to comply with the standards has been demonstrated by
the applicant with alternatives considered by the applicant prior to
the Planning Commission consideration of modification to
requirements.
B. The following regulations shall apply to existing plant material:
(1) Utilization of existing elements in the landscape design. In
instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its
development, the Planning Commission may permit substitution of
such plant material in place of the requirements set forth
previously in this section, provided such substitution is in keeping
with the spirit and intent of the chapter. Existing hedges, berms,
walls, or other landscape elements may be used to satisfy the
requirements set forth previously, provided that such existing
elements are in conformance with the requirements of this section.
(2) Preservation of existing plant material. Site plans shall show all
existing trees which are located in the portions of the site that will
be built upon or otherwise altered, and are six inches or greater in
diameter at breast height (dbh). Trees shall be labeled "To Be
Removed" or "To Be Saved" on the site plan. Removal of trees shall
be undertaken in compliance with Chapter 282, Woodland and Tree
Preservation. If existing plant material is labeled "To Be Saved" on
the site plan, the protective measures outlined in Chapter 282 shall
be complied with.
C. In the event that healthy plant materials which are intended to meet the
requirements of this chapter are cut down, damaged, or destroyed
during construction or modification, said plant material shall be
replaced in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 282. An
occupancy permit shall not be issued until the applicant has
documented compliance with this requirement.
§ 150-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 150-9
1:250
§ 150-9. Permit application procedures.
A permit is required for landscaping in the right-of-way and is to be issued
by the Department of Community Development. Two copies of the permit
application, site plan, and one copy of the license (when applicable) are to
be included when submitting an application for review.
§ 150-10. Penalty.
Chapter 153
MARINE SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fishing and recreational activities — See Ch.
113.
§ 153-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANCHORED RAFTS — All types of nonpowered rafts used for recreation
purposes that are anchored seasonally on waters of the State of Michigan
or Township of Grosse Ile.
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT — Any of the following that are not radio
equipment:
A. Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1,
Article II, Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this
chapter. [Amended 7-22-2002]
B. The defendant is responsible to remove from the right-of-way abutting
the defendant's property or from the defendant's property at the
defendant's cost any item in violation of the terms of the chapter and,
upon failure to do so, the Township shall request that the District Court
enter an order enforcing the terms of this chapter by requiring the
removal of the item under the terms of this chapter and to assess any
costs involved for the removal of said item against the defendant and/or
the property involved, and further ordering that, if the defendant fails
to comply, the Township or its agents may remove any item prohibited
by this chapter and have the costs charged against the defendant.
An original system, part, or component of a boat at the time that boat
was manufactured, or a similar part or component manufactured or
sold for replacement.
A.
§ 150-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1
1:251
BOAT — A vessel.
BOAT LIVERY — A business that holds a vessel for renting, leasing or
chartering.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — That term as defined in Section 7104 of the
Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, being MCL
§ 333.7104.
CONVICTION — A final conviction, the payment of a fine, a plea of guilty
or nolo contendere if accepted by the court, a finding of guilt, or a probate
court disposition on a violation of this chapter, regardless of whether the
penalty is rebated or suspended.
DEALER — A person and an authorized representative of that person who
annually purchases from a manufacturer, or who is engaged in selling
or manufacturing, six or more vessels that require certificates of number
under this chapter or as required by state law.
IDENTIFICATION DOCUMENT — Any of the following:
ISSUING AUTHORITY — The United States Coast Guard or a state that has
a numbering system approved by the United States Coast Guard.
LAW OF ANOTHER STATE — A law or ordinance enacted by another state
or by a local unit of government in another state.
LIFEBOAT — A small boat designated and used solely for lifesaving
purposes, and does not include a dinghy, tender, speedboat, or other type of
craft that is not carried aboard a vessel for lifesaving purposes.
LONG-TERM INCAPACITATING INJURY — An injury that causes serious
impairment of a body function.
MANUFACTURER — A person engaged in any of the following:
Repair or improvement of an original or replacement system, part or
component.
B.
C. An accessory or equipment for, or appurtenance to, a boat.
A marine safety article, accessory, or equipment intended for use by a
person on board a boat.
D.
A. A valid Michigan operator's or chauffeur's license.
A valid driver's or chauffeur's license issued by an agency, department,
or bureau of the United States or another state.
B.
An official identification card issued by an agency, department, or
bureau of the United States, the State of Michigan or another state.
C.
An official identification card issued by a political subdivision of the
State of Michigan or another state.
D.
The manufacture, construction, or assembly of boats or associated
equipment.
A.
§ 153-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-1
1:252
MARINE LAW — This chapter, Section 324.80101 et seq. (Part 801) of the
Michigan Administrative Code (MAC), or a rule adopted under the Michigan
Administrative Code which is incorporated herein by reference.
MARINE SAFETY ACT — Former Act No. 303 of the Public Acts of 1967.
MARINE SAFETY PROGRAM — Marine law enforcement, search and rescue
operations, water safety education, recovery of drowned bodies, and boat
livery inspections.
MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE — Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being
MCL §§ 257.1 to 257.923.
MOTORBOAT — A vessel propelled wholly or in part by machinery.
OPERATE — To be in control of a vessel while the vessel is under way and
is not secured in some manner such as being docked or at anchor.
OPERATOR — The person who is in control or in charge of a vessel while
the vessel is under way and is not secured in some manner such as being
docked or at anchor.
OWNER — A person who claims or is entitled to lawful possession of a
vessel by virtue of that person's legal title or equitable interest in a vessel.
PASSENGER — A person carried on board a vessel other than any of the
following:
PEACE OFFICER — Any of the following:
The manufacture or construction of components for boats and
associated equipment to be sold for subsequent assembly.
B.
The importation of a boat or associated equipment into the State of
Michigan for sale.
C.
A. The owner or his or her representative.
B. The operator.
A. A sheriff.
B. A sheriff's deputy.
A deputy who is authorized by a sheriff to enforce this chapter, the
Marine Law or Marine Safety Act and who has satisfactorily completed
at least 40 hours of law enforcement training, including training
specific to this chapter.
C.
D. A village or township marshal.
E. An officer of the Police Department of the Township of Grosse Ile.
F. An officer of the Michigan State Police.
The director and conservation officers employed by the Department of
Environmental Quality.
G.
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1
1:253
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A vessel that meets all of the following
requirements:
PORT — Left, and reference is to the port side of a vessel or to the left side
of the vessel.
PROBATE COURT DISPOSITION — The entry of the probate court order of
disposition for a child found to be within the provisions of Chapter XIIA of
Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, being MCL §§ 712A.1 to 712A.31.
PROSECUTING ATTORNEY — The prosecuting attorney of the Township of
Grosse Ile.
REGATTA, BOAT RACE, MARINE PARADE, TOURNAMENT OR
EXHIBITION — An organized water event of limited duration that is
conducted according to a prearranged schedule.
SLOW – NO WAKE SPEED — A very slow speed whereby the wake or wash
created by the vessel would be minimal.
STARBOARD — Right, and reference is to the starboard side of a vessel or
to the right side of the vessel.
STATE AID — Payment made by the state to a county for the conduct of a
marine safety program.
UNDOCUMENTED VESSEL — A vessel that does not have, and is not
required to have, a valid marine document issued by the United States
Coast Guard or federal agency successor to the United States Coast Guard.
UNIFORM INSPECTION DECAL — An adhesive-backed sticker created
by the State of Michigan pursuant to Section 324.80166 of the Michigan
Administrative Code that is color-coded to indicate the year that it expires
and is attached to a vessel in the manner prescribed for decals in Section
324.80122 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
USE — Operate, navigate, or employ.
VESSEL — Every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as
a means of transportation on water.
WATERS OF THE TOWNSHIP — Any waters within the territorial limits of
the Township of Grosse Ile, and includes the waters of the State of Michigan
under the jurisdiction of the Township of Grosse Ile.
WATERS OF THIS STATE — Any waters within the territorial limits of the
State of Michigan, and includes those waters of the Great Lakes that are
under the jurisdiction of the state.
Uses a motor-driven propeller or an internal combustion engine
powering a water jet pump as its primary source of propulsion.
A.
B. Is designed without an open load carrying area that would retain water.
Is designed to be operated by one or more persons positioned on, rather
than within, the confines of the hull.
C.
§ 153-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-2
1:254
§ 153-2. Applicability.
§ 153-3. Conditions for operation of vessels.
A. This chapter applies to vessels and associated equipment used, to be
used, or carried in vessels used on waters subject to the jurisdiction of
the Township of Grosse Ile.
B. This chapter, except where expressly indicated otherwise, does not
apply to any of the following:
(1) Foreign vessels temporarily using waters subject to the jurisdiction
of the Township of Grosse Ile.
(2) Military or public vessels of the United States, except recreationaltype
public vessels.
(3) A vessel whose owner is a state or political subdivision of a state,
other than the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions, that
is used principally for governmental purposes and that is clearly
identifiable as such.
(4) A ship's lifeboat.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a person shall not operate
or give permission for the operation of a vessel of any length on the
waters of the Township unless the fees prescribed by state law and
administrative rule for the vessel are paid, the certificate of number
assigned to the vessel is on board and is in full force and effect, and,
except for the following, the identifying number and decal are displayed
on each side of the forward half of the vessel in accordance with the
rules promulgated by the State of Michigan.
(1) A decal and identifying number for a wooden hull and historic
vessel as that term is defined in the State Administrative Rule
80124 may be displayed in the manner described in Section
980126(2) of the Michigan Administrative Code.
(2) A decal for an inflatable boat may be displayed on the transom of
the boat.
B. If a vessel is actually numbered in another state of principal use in
accordance with a federally approved numbering system, it is in
compliance with the numbering requirements of the State of Michigan
while it is temporarily being used in this state. This subsection applies
to a vessel for which a valid temporary certificate is issued to the
vessel's owner by the issuing authority of the state in which the vessel is
principally used.
C. If a vessel is removed to the State of Michigan as the new state of
principal use, a number awarded by any other issuing authority is valid
for not more than 60 days before numbering is required by this state.
§ 153-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-4
1:255
§ 153-4. Exemptions.
§ 153-5. Certificate of number; temporary permit; vessels for lease
or rent.
A. The owner of a vessel is not required to pay a fee and a vessel is not
required to be numbered and to display a decal under this chapter if the
vessel is one or more of the following:
(1) Used temporarily on the waters of the State of Michigan and the
owner and the vessel are from a country other than the United
States.
(2) A vessel that is owned by the United States, used in the public
service for purposes other than recreation, and clearly identifiable
as such a vessel.
(3) A vessel's lifeboat.
(4) An all-terrain vehicle not used as a vessel.
(5) A raft, sailboard, surfboard, or swim float.
(6) A vessel 16 feet or less, propelled by hand either with oars or
paddles, and not used for rental or other commercial purposes.
(7) A nonmotorized canoe or kayak not used for rental or other
commercial purposes.
B. The owner of a vessel documented by the United States Coast Guard or
a federal agency that is the successor to the United States Coast Guard
shall comply with this chapter, including the payment of fees as
provided in this chapter. However, the vessel shall not be required to
display numbers under this chapter.
C. This chapter does not prohibit the numbering of an undocumented
vessel pursuant to this chapter upon request by the owner, even though
the vessel is exempt from the numbering requirements of this chapter.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the owner of a vessel
required to be numbered and to display a decal shall file an application
for a certificate of number with the Secretary of State. The Secretary of
State shall prescribe and furnish certificate of title application forms. If
a vessel requiring a certificate of title under Part 803 of the Michigan
Administrative Code is sold by a dealer, that dealer shall combine the
application for a certificate of number that is signed by the vessel
owner with the application for a certificate of title. The dealer shall
obtain the certificate of number in the name of the owner. The owner of
the vessel shall sign the application. A person shall not file an
application for a certificate of number that contains false information. A
dealer who fails to submit an application as required by this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than
90 days or a fine of not more than $100, or both.
§ 153-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-5
1:256
B. A dealer who submits an application for a certificate of number as
provided in Subsection A may issue to the owner of the vessel a fifteenday
temporary permit, on forms prescribed by the Secretary of State,
for the use of the vessel while the certificate of number is being issued.
C. A dealer may issue a fifteen-day permit, on a form prescribed by the
Secretary of State, for the use of a vessel purchased in this state and
delivered to the purchaser for removal to a place outside of this state, if
the purchaser certifies by his or her signature that the vessel will be
registered and primarily used and stored outside of this state and will
not be returned to this state by the purchaser for use or storage. A
certificate of number shall not be issued for a vessel holding a permit
under this subsection.
D. A fifteen-day temporary permit issued under Subsection B or C shall not
be renewed or extended.
E. A person shall operate or permit the operation of a vessel for which a
fifteen-day temporary permit has been issued under this section only if
the temporary permit is valid and displayed on the vessel as prescribed
by rule promulgated in the Michigan Administrative Code.
F. Upon receipt of an initial application for a certificate of number in
approved form and payment of the required fee, the Secretary of State
shall enter the information upon the official records and issue to the
applicant a certificate of number containing the number awarded to the
vessel, the name and address of the owner, and other information that
the Secretary of State determines necessary. The Secretary of State
shall issue a certificate of number that is pocket size and legible. Except
as provided in Subsection G, a person operating a vessel shall present
that vessel's certificate of number to a peace officer upon the peace
officer's request.
G. The owner or authorized agent of the owner of a vessel less than 26 feet
in length that is leased or rented to a person for noncommercial use for
not more than 24 hours may retain, at the place from which the vessel
departs or returns to the possession of the owner or the owner's
representative, the certificate of number for that vessel if a copy of the
lease or rental is on the vessel. Upon the demand of a peace officer, the
operator shall produce for inspection either the certificate of number or
a copy of the lease or rental agreement for that vessel. The lease or
rental agreement shall contain each of the following:
(1) The vessel number that appears on the certificate of number.
(2) The period of time for which the vessel is leased or rented.
(3) The signature of the vessel's owner or that person's authorized
agent.
(4) The signature of the person leasing or renting the vessel.
§ 153-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-5
1:257
§ 153-6. Surrender of certificate of number upon sale, transfer or
destruction of vessel; duplicate certificate.
H. Upon receipt of a certificate of number for a vessel, the owner of that
vessel shall paint on or attach in a permanent manner to each side of
the forward half of the vessel the number identified in the certificate of
number, in the manner prescribed by the rules contained in the
Michigan Administrative Code. The Secretary of State shall assign to
the owner of vessels for rent or lease a block of numbers sufficient to
number consecutively all of that owner's rental or lease vessels. The
owner shall maintain the numbers in a legible condition. A vessel
documented by the United States Coast Guard or a federal agency that
is the successor to the United States Coast Guard is not required to
display numbers under this chapter but shall display a decal indicating
payment of the fee required by law and shall otherwise be in
compliance with this chapter. This subsection does not apply to a
nonpowered vessel 12 feet or less in length.
I. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of number in an
approved form and payment of the fee required by law, the Secretary of
State shall issue a decal that is color-coded and dated to identify the
year of its expiration, and the decal shall be displayed as required by
state law or administrative rule.
A. The owner of a vessel shall notify the Secretary of State within 15 days
if the vessel is destroyed, abandoned, or sold; if an interest in the vessel
is transferred, either wholly or in part, to another person; or if the
owner's address no longer conforms to the address appearing on the
certificate of number. The notice shall consist of a surrender of the
certificate of number, on which the proper information shall be noted on
a place to be provided on the certificate. When the surrender of the
certificate is due to the vessel being destroyed or abandoned, the
Secretary of State shall cancel the certificate and enter that fact in the
Secretary of State's records, and the number may be reassigned.
B. If the surrender of the certificate of number is due to a change of the
owner's address, the new address shall be recorded by the Secretary of
State and a certificate of number bearing that information shall be
returned to the owner.
C. The transferee of a vessel registered under the State of Michigan,
within 15 days after acquisition of a vessel, shall make application to
the Secretary of State for transfer to the transferee of the certificate of
number issued to the vessel. The transferee shall provide his or her
name and address and the number of the vessel and pay to the
Secretary of State a transfer fee. Unless the application is made and the
fee paid within 15 days after acquisition of the vessel, the vessel shall
be considered to be without certificate of number and a person shall not
operate the vessel until a certificate is issued. Upon receipt of the
application and appropriate fees, the Secretary of State shall transfer
§ 153-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-6
1:258
§ 153-7. Dealer certificates of number and dealer decals.
§ 153-8. Court records; abstracts to be forwarded to Secretary of
State.
the certificate of number issued for the vessel to the new owner. The
certificate of number shall be valid for a three-year period.
D. If a certificate of number is lost, mutilated, or illegible, the owner of the
vessel shall obtain a duplicate of the certificate upon application and
payment of a fee.
A. A dealer shall apply for and obtain from the Secretary of State dealer
certificates of number and dealer decals for each vessel of the dealer
that is tested, demonstrated, or otherwise operated. A single dealer
certificate of number and dealer decal issued pursuant to this section
may be used on only one vessel at a time.
B. The operator of a vessel governed by this chapter shall do each of the
following:
(1) Maintain the dealer certificate of number on board the vessel.
(2) Upon demand of a peace officer, display the dealer certificate of
number.
(3) Permanently or temporarily display the identifying number and
dealer decal on the vessel in accordance with rules promulgated by
the State of Michigan.
C. A person shall not operate a vessel numbered under this section unless
the dealer is on board the vessel or the operator has the written
authorization of the dealer to operate the vessel. A person shall not use
a vessel numbered under this section for commercial purposes that
include the rental of the vessel or the carrying of passengers for hire on
the vessel.
A. Each judge and each clerk of a court of record shall keep a full record of
every case in which a person is charged with or cited for a violation of
this chapter corresponding to regulating the operation of vessels.
B. Within 14 days after a conviction, forfeiture of bail, entry of a civil
infraction determination, or default judgment upon a charge of, or
citation for, violating this chapter regulating the operation of vessels,
the judge or clerk of the court of record shall prepare and immediately
forward to the Secretary of State an abstract of the record of the court
for the case. The abstract shall be certified to be true and correct by
signature, stamp, or facsimile signature by the person required to
prepare the abstract. If the Township is authorized to accept a payment
of money as a settlement for a violation of this chapter, the Township
shall send a full report of each case in which a person pays any amount
§ 153-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-8
1:259
§ 153-9. Casualties involving vessels.
of money to the Township to the Secretary of State upon a form
prescribed by the Secretary of State.
C. The abstract or report required under this section shall be made upon a
form furnished by the Secretary of State.
D. Every person required to forward abstracts to the Secretary of State
under this section shall certify for the period from January 1 through
June 30 and for the period from July 1 through December 31 that all
abstracts required to be forwarded during the period have been
forwarded. The certification shall be filed with the Secretary of State
not later than 28 days after the end of the period covered by the
certification. The certification shall be made upon a form furnished by
the Secretary of State.
E. The court shall not submit, and the Secretary of State shall discard and
not enter on the boating record, an abstract for a conviction of civil
infraction determination for a violation of this chapter that could not be
the basis for the Secretary of State's issuance of an order not to operate
a vessel on the waters of this state. The Secretary of State shall discard
and not enter on the boating record an abstract for a bond forfeiture
that occurred outside this state.
F. If a conviction or civil infraction determination is reversed upon appeal
the court shall transmit a copy of the order of reversal to the Secretary
of State, and the Secretary of State shall enter the order in the proper
book or index in connection with the record of the conviction or civil
infraction determination.
A. Applicability.
(1) Subsections B and D of this section apply to a vessel operated on
waters subject to the jurisdiction of the Township when the vessel
is either of the following:
(a) Operated by its operator for recreational purposes.
(b) Required to be numbered in the State of Michigan.
(2) This Subsection A does not apply to a vessel required to have a
certificate of inspection under Chapter I of Title 46 of the Code of
Federal Regulations.
B. Assistance to injured persons.
(1) The operator of a vessel involved in a collision, accident, or other
casualty, and the operator of any other vessel, to the extent that he
or she can do so without serious danger to his or her own vessel,
crew, and passengers, shall render reasonable assistance to a
person affected by the collision, accident, or other casualty,
including the transporting of the injured person to a physician or
§ 153-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-9
1:260
§ 153-10. Operation of motorboats by children.
surgeon for medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that
treatment is necessary or when requested by the injured person.
(2) A person who complies with Subsection B(1), or who gratuitously
and in good faith renders assistance at the scene of a vessel
collision, accident or other casualty without objection of the person
assisted, is not liable for civil damages as a result of the rendering
of assistance, or for an act or omission in providing or arranging
towage, medical treatment, or other assistance, if the assisting
person acts as an ordinary, reasonably prudent person would have
acted under the same or similar circumstances.
C. Exchange of identification. In the case of collision, accident or other
casualty involving a vessel, the operator shall stop his or her vessel and
give his or her name and address and identification of his or her vessel,
and the name and address of the owner of the vessel if he or she is not
the operator, to the operator or occupants of any other vessel involved
or to the owner or his or her agents of any property damaged by the
accident.
D. Report.
(1) In the case of collision, accident, or other casualty involving a
vessel, the operator shall report the collision, accident, or other
casualty to the nearest peace officer, state police post, or the sheriff
of the county in which the collision, accident, or other casualty
occurred.
(2) A report of a collision, accident, or other casualty involving a vessel
that is made to a peace officer other than the sheriff of the county
in which the collision, accident, or other casualty occurred shall be
reported without delay by the peace officer to the sheriff of the
county in which the collision, accident, or other casualty occurred.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D, a person less than 12
years of age shall not operate a motorboat on the waters of the
Township unless all of the following conditions are met:
(1) He or she is under the direct supervision of a person on board the
motorboat who is 16 years of age or older.
(2) The motorboat he or she operates is powered by a motor or motors
totaling no more than 35 horsepower.
B. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D, a person 12 through 15
years of age may operate a motorboat on the waters of the Township
only if that person complies with either of the following:
(1) He or she is accompanied by at least one person 16 years of age or
older.
§ 153-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-10
1:261
§ 153-11. Wearing of personal flotation device by child required;
exception for charter boats.
§ 153-12. (Reserved)41
§ 153-13. Vessels approaching or passing other vessels.
(2) He or she is in possession of a boating safety certificate issued after
he or she has satisfactorily completed an approved course in
boating safety.
C. A person 12 through 15 years of age operating a motorboat pursuant to
Subsection B(2) shall present the boating safety certificate issued to
him or her upon the demand of any peace officer.
D. This section does not apply to the operation of a motorboat that is
powered by a motor or motors totaling no more than six horsepower.
A. Except as provided in Subsection C, a person shall not operate a vessel
on the waters of the Township unless each person in an open deck area
on board the vessel who is less than six years of age is wearing a Type I
or Type II personal flotation device as described in R281.1234 of the
Michigan Administrative Code.
B. A parent or guardian of a child less than six years of age who
accompanies that child on board a vessel that is not a charter boat
described in Subsection C shall ensure that the child is wearing a
personal flotation device that complies with this section.
C. This section does not apply to a charter boat bearing either of the
following:
(1) A valid certificate of inspection issued by the United States Coast
Guard that verifies the charter boat's compliance with Subchapter
H or Subchapter T of the Code of Federal Regulations, 46 CFR
70.01-1 to 80.40 and 175.01-1 to 185.30-30.
(2) A valid certificate of inspection issued by the State of Michigan for
a Class C vessel that is greater than 45 feet in length.
D. As used in this section, "charter boat" and "Class C vessel" mean those
terms as defined in Section 44501 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
E. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction
and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.
A. When vessels are being operated in such a manner as to make collision
imminent or likely, the following rules apply:
41.Editor's Note: Former § 153-12, Operation of personal watercraft, was deleted 7-22-2008.
§ 153-10 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-13
1:262
§ 153-14. Operation of vessels; speed; interference with use of
waters by others.
A person operating or propelling a vessel upon the waters of the Township
shall operate it in a careful and prudent manner and at such a rate of speed
so as not to endanger unreasonably the life or property of any person. A
person shall not operate any vessel at a rate of speed greater than will
permit him or her, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the vessel to
a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. A person shall not operate
a vessel in a manner so as to interfere unreasonably with the lawful use by
others of any waters.
§ 153-15. Speed limit for motorboats.
(1) When two vessels are approaching each other head-on, or nearly
so, the operator of each shall cause his or her vessel to pass on the
port side of the other.
(2) When overtaking a vessel proceeding in the same direction, the
operator of the overtaking vessel, unless it is not feasible to do so,
shall pass on the port side of the vessel ahead.
(3) When two vessels are approaching each other at right angles or
obliquely so as to involve risk of collision, other than when one
vessel is overtaking another, the operator of the vessel that has the
other on his or her own port side shall hold his or her course and
speed, and the operator of the vessel that has the other on his or
her own starboard side shall give way to the other by directing his
or her course to starboard so as to cross the stern of the other
vessel or, if necessary to do so, shall slacken his or her speed, stop,
or reverse.
(4) When a motorboat and a vessel under sail are proceeding in a
manner that involves a risk of collision, the operator of the
motorboat shall give way to the vessel under sail.
(5) When a motorboat and a vessel not propelled by sail or mechanical
means are proceeding in a manner that involves risk of collision,
the operator of the motorboat shall give way to the other vessel.
(6) When, by any of the rules provided in this section, the operator of a
vessel is required to give way to the other, the operator of the other
vessel shall maintain his or her direction and speed.
B. This section does not relieve the operator of a vessel otherwise
privileged by this section from the duty to operate with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the waters of the Township.
A. On waters of the Township for which a motorboat speed limit is not
established by the State of Michigan or the Township, or on any waters
for which stricter speed restrictions are not established pursuant to an
act, a maximum speed limit of 55 miles per hour is established, except
§ 153-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-15
1:263
§ 153-16. Reckless operation of vessels.
§ 153-17. Operating motorboat at more than slow - no wake speed.
in an emergency and except for authorized peace and conservation
officers when engaged in official duties. The maximum speed limit of
55 miles per hour shall not apply to the Great Lakes and Lake St. Clair,
except for an area within one mile of the shoreline measured at a right
angle from the shoreline.
B. A person shall not operate a motorboat on the waters of the Township at
a speed greater than slow - no wake speed or the minimum speed
necessary for the motorboat to maintain forward movement when
within 100 feet of the shoreline where the water depth is less than three
feet, as determined by vertical measurement, except in navigable
channels not otherwise posted.
C. A person operating a motorboat in violation of this section is guilty of
reckless operation of a motorboat punishable as a misdemeanor with a
fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days.
A. If a person carelessly or heedlessly operates a vessel upon the waters of
the Township in disregard of the rights or safety of others, without due
caution and circumspection, or at a rate of speed or in a manner that
endangers or is likely to endanger a person or property, that person is
guilty of reckless operation of a vessel punishable as a misdemeanor
with a fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90
days and subject also to the provision of Subsection C.
B. If a person while being towed on water skis, a water sled, a surfboard,
or a similar contrivance upon the waters of the Township carelessly and
heedlessly navigates, steers, or controls himself or herself in disregard
of the rights and safety of others or without due caution and
circumspection and in a manner that endangers or is likely to endanger
a person or property, then that person is guilty of reckless operation of
the contrivance that he or she controls and is subject to the penalties
described in Subsection C.
C. Upon a person's conviction under this section, the court may issue an
order prohibiting that person from operating a vessel on the waters of
the State of Michigan for a period of not more than two years. Upon a
person's subsequent conviction under this section, the court shall order
that person to participate in and complete a marine safety educational
program approved by the State of Michigan. An order issued pursuant
to this subsection is in addition to any other penalty authorized under
this chapter.
A. Subject to the exceptions described in Subsection B, a person shall not
operate a motorboat at more than slow - no wake speed if any of the
following circumstances exist:
§ 153-15 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-17
1:264
§ 153-18. Operation of vessels in counterclockwise fashion;
distance between persons being towed and other objects.
Persons operating vessels on the waters of this Township of Grosse Ile
in areas not marked by well-defined channels, canals, rivers, or stream
courses shall operate the vessels in a counterclockwise fashion to the extent
that it is reasonably possible. These persons and persons being towed on
water skis or on a water sled, kite, surfboard, or similar contrivance shall
maintain a distance of 100 feet from any dock, raft, buoy or occupied
bathing area, or vessel moored or at anchor, except when the vessel is
proceeding at a slow - no wake speed or when water skiers are being picked
up or dropped off, if that operation is otherwise conducted with due regard
to the safety of persons and property and in accordance with the laws of the
State of Michigan.
§ 153-19. Operation of vessels prohibited in certain areas.
A person shall not operate a vessel on any of the waters of the Township
of Grosse Ile within a lawfully authorized restricted area clearly marked
by buoys, beacons, or other distinguishing devices as being prohibited to
vessels.
§ 153-20. Towing of persons prohibited during certain hours.
An operator of any vessel shall not have in tow or otherwise be assisting
in the propulsion of a person on water skis or on a water sled, surfboard,
or other similar contrivance during the period of one hour after sunset to
one hour prior to sunrise. Any person permitting himself or herself to be
towed on water skis or on a water sled, surfboard, or similar contrivance in
violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 153-21. Observation of persons being towed.
(1) A person is located on or in the bow of the motorboat and that
motorboat is not manufactured to provide bow seating.
(2) A person or a portion of a person's body extends beyond the
exterior port or starboard walls of the hull of the motorboat.
B. This section does not apply to either of the following:
(1) A person engaged in the operation of a sailboat that is not being
powered by a motor.
(2) A person on board a vessel who is attempting to anchor, moor, dock,
or otherwise secure the vessel.
A. A person shall not operate a vessel on the waters of Grosse Ile Township
if he or she is towing or otherwise assisting a person on water skis or on
a water sled, aquaplane, surfboard, or other similar contrivance unless
a person capable of communicating to the vessel operator the condition
§ 153-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-21
1:265
§ 153-22. Use of portions of vessel for other than designed purpose.
Any occupant or operator of any vessel under way on the waters of Grosse
Ile Township shall not sit, stand, or walk upon any portion of the vessel not
specially designed for that purpose, except when immediately necessary for
the safe and reasonable navigation or operation of the vessel.
§ 153-23. Interference with operation of vessel.
A person not in a boat shall not intentionally rock, tip, jostle, or otherwise
interfere with the operation of any vessel, except under supervised training.
§ 153-24. Divers; marking point of submergence; distance from
diver's flag.
Any person diving or submerging in any of the waters of Grosse Ile
Township with the aid of a diving suit or other mechanical diving device
shall place a buoy or boat in the water at or near the point of submergence.
The buoy or boat shall bear a red flag not less than 14 inches by 16 inches
with a white stripe of 3 1/2 inches running from one upper corner to a
diagonal lower corner. The flag shall be in place only while actual diving
operations are in progress. A vessel shall not be operated within 200 feet of
a buoyed diver's flag unless it is involved in tendering the diving operation.
A person diving shall stay within a surface area of 100 feet of the diver's
flag.
§ 153-25. Muffler or underwater exhaust system required on
motorboats.
and needs of the person being towed or assisted is on board the vessel
and positioned to observe the person being towed or assisted.
B. Subsection A does not apply to vessels used by duly constituted ski
schools in the giving of instructions or to vessels used in sanctioned ski
tournaments, competitions, expositions, or trials. Vessels described in
this subsection shall be equipped with a one-hundred-seventy-degree
wide-angle rearview mirror affixed in a manner that will permit the
operator to observe the progress of the person being towed.
C. This section does not apply to motorboats less than 16 feet in length
actually operated by the person being towed and so constructed as to
be incapable of carrying the operator in or on the motorboat.
A. Subject to Subsection B, a person shall not operate a motorboat on the
waters of Grosse Ile Township unless the motorboat is equipped and
maintained with an effective muffler or underwater exhaust system that
does not produce sound levels in excess of 90 db(A) when subjected to a
stationary sound level test as prescribed by SAE J2005 or a sound level
in excess of 75 db(A) when subjected to a shoreline sound level
measurement procedure as described by SAE J1970. The operator of a
motorboat shall present the motorboat for a sound level test as
§ 153-21 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-25
1:266
§ 153-26. Responsibility of vessel owner for damage caused by
vessel wake.
The owner of any vessel operated upon the waters of Grosse Ile Township
is personally responsible for any damage to life or property resulting from a
prescribed by SAE J2005 upon the request of a peace officer. If a
motorboat is equipped with more than one motor or engine, the test
shall be performed with all motors or engines operating. To determine
whether a person is violating this subsection, a peace officer may
measure sound levels pursuant to procedures prescribed in SAE J1970,
issued 1991-92. If these decibel levels are modified by the State of
Michigan, then those amendments are herein incorporated by
reference and all of the following apply:
(1) A person shall not operate a motorboat on the waters of Grosse Ile
Township if the motorboat produces sound levels that exceed the
maximum decibel level or levels established under this chapter.
(2) The operator of a motorboat shall present the motorboat for the
sound level test established pursuant to this chapter upon the
request of a peace officer.
(3) A motorboat equipped with more than one motor or engine shall be
tested with all motors or engine operating.
B. Subsection A does not apply to any of the following:
(1) A motorboat being operated by a boat or marine engine
manufacturer for the purpose of testing or development.
(2) A motorboat that qualifies as an historic vessel.
(3) A motorboat tuning up or testing for or participating in official
trials for speed records or a sanctioned race conducted pursuant to
a permit issued by a unit of government.
C. A person shall not operate on the waters of Grosse Ile Township a
motorboat that is equipped with a cutout, bypass, amplifier, or other
similar device.
D. As used in this section, "db(A)" means decibels on the "A" scale on a
sound meter having characteristics of a general purpose sound meter
as defined by American National Standards Institute S1.4-1983.
E. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days and a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $500. Additionally, before putting the
motorboat back in use, a person who violates this section shall be
required to install an effective muffler or underwater exhaust system
that meets the requirements of this section on the motorboat in
violation at his or her expense.
§ 153-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-26
1:267
wake or swell created by the negligent operation or propulsion of the vessel,
if the vessel is being operated with his or her consent.
§ 153-27. Authority of peace officers; inspections.
A. Upon the direction of a peace officer, the operator of a vessel moving on
the waters of Grosse Ile Township shall immediately bring the vessel to
a stop or maneuver it in a manner that permits the peace officer to
come beside the vessel. The operator of the vessel and any person on
the vessel shall do the following upon the request of the peace officer:
(1) Provide his or her correct name and address.
(2) Exhibit the certificate of number awarded for the vessel.
(3) If the vessel does not bear a decal as required by this chapter, state
law or administrative rule, submit to a reasonable inspection of the
vessel and to a reasonable inspection and test of the equipment of
the vessel.
B. A peace officer who conducts an inspection of a vessel authorized under
this section shall include in that inspection a reasonable examination
and test of the equipment on that vessel. If the peace officer does not
find a violation of a marine law, he or she shall affix to the vessel an
adhesive copy of the uniform marine safety inspection decal and shall
complete a receipt for that decal.
C. A completed receipt for a decal shall include all of the following:
(1) The name of the peace officer.
(2) The time, date, and place of the inspection.
(3) The vessel's identifying number.
D. A peace officer shall deliver to his or her supervisor or person
designated by that supervisor a receipt for a decal within 48 hours of
affixing the decal to a vessel. The supervisor or person designated by
the supervisor shall maintain receipts received under this section for a
period of one year.
E. Except for inspection of a vessel to determine the number and adequacy
of personal flotation devices on that vessel, a peace officer shall not
stop and inspect a vessel bearing the decal described in this section
during the period the decal remains in effect unless that peace officer
has probable cause to believe the vessel or the vessel's operator is in
violation of a marine law or local ordinance.
F. A person who is detained for a violation of this chapter and who
furnishes a peace officer false, forged, fictitious, or misleading verbal or
written information identifying the person as another person is guilty of
a misdemeanor.
§ 153-26 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-27
1:268
§ 153-28. Penalty.
§ 153-29. Negligent crippling or death.
A person who, by the operation of any vessel at an immoderate rate of
speed or in a careless, reckless, or negligent manner, but not willfully or
wantonly, injuries so as to cripple or cause the death of another is guilty of
a misdemeanor.
§ 153-30. Operation of vessel by person under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance.
G. A peace officer who observes a criminal marine law violation or criminal
ordinance violation may immediately arrest the person without a
warrant or issue to the person a written or verbal warning.
A. Unless otherwise specified under this chapter, penalties for violation of
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, § 1-3. [Amended 7-22-2008]
B. Any person convicted of reckless operation of a vessel as defined in
§ 153-16, or of operating a vessel while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs, in addition to any other penalty,
may be refused by the court having jurisdiction of the violation the right
of operating any vessel on any of the waters of Grosse Ile Township of
the State of Michigan for a period of not more than two years.
A. Prohibited acts.
(1) A person shall not operate a vessel on the waters of the Township of
Grosse Ile if either of the following applies:
(a) The person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a
controlled substance, or both.
(b) The person has a blood alcohol content of 0.10 gram or more
per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67
milliliters of urine.
(2) The owner of a vessel or a person in charge or in control of a vessel
shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vessel to be operated
on the waters of Grosse Ile Township by a person who is under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or both,
or who has a blood alcohol content of 0.10 gram or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of
urine.
(3) A person shall not operate a vessel on the waters of Grosse Ile
Township when, due to the consumption of an intoxicating liquor or
a controlled substance, or both, the person's ability to operate the
vessel is visibly impaired. If a person is charged with violating
§ 153-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:269
Subsection A(1), a finding of guilty under this subsection may be
rendered.
B. Violation of Subsection A(1) and (2); sanctions.
(1) If a person is convicted of violating Subsection A(1) the following
apply:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B(1)(b), the person
is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by one or
more of the following:
[1] Community service for not more than 45 days.
[2] Imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
[3] A fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500.
(b) If the violation occurs within seven years of a prior conviction,
the person shall be sentenced to both a fine of not less than
$200 nor more than $1,000 and either of the following:
[1] Community service for not less than 10 days nor more than
90 days, and may be imprisoned for not more than 90 days.
[2] Imprisonment for not less than 48 consecutive hours nor
more than 90 days, and may be sentenced to community
service for not more than 90 days.
(2) A term of imprisonment imposed under Subsection B(1)(b)[2] shall
not be suspended. A person sentenced to perform service to the
community under this Subsection B shall not receive compensation
and shall reimburse the Township of Grosse Ile for the cost of
supervision incurred by the Township as a result of the person's
activities in that service.
(3) In addition to the sanctions prescribed under Subsection B(1), the
court may, pursuant to the Code of Criminal Procedure, Act No. 175
of the Public Acts of 1927, being MCL §§ 760.1 to 776.21, order the
person to pay the costs of the prosecution. The court shall also
impose sanctions under Subsections J and K of this section.
(4) A person who is convicted of violating Subsection A(2) is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90
days or a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500, or both.
(5) As used in this Subsection B, "prior conviction" means a conviction
for a violation of any of the following:
(a) Subsection A(1) of this section.
(b) Former Section 171(1), (4) or (5) of the Marine Safety Act.
(c) Former Section 73 of the Marine Safety Act.
§ 153-30 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-30
1:270
(d) A local ordinance substantially corresponding to Subsection
A(1) of this section or former Section 73 of the Marine Safety
Act.
(e) A law of another state substantially corresponding to
Subsection A(1) of this section or former Section 73 of the
Marine Safety Act.
C. Violation of Subsection A(3); sanctions.
(1) If a person is convicted of violating Subsection A(3) the following
apply:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection C(1)(b) and (c), the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of
the following:
[1] Community service for not more than 45 days.
[2] Imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
[3] A fine of not more than $300.
(b) If the violation occurs within seven years of one prior
conviction, the person shall be sentenced to both a fine of not
less than $200 nor more than $1,000 and either of the
following:
[1] Community service for not less than 10 days nor more than
90 days, and may be sentenced to imprisonment for not
more than 90 days.
[2] Imprisonment for not more than 90 days, and may be
sentenced to community service for not more than 90
days.
(c) If the violation occurs within 10 years of two or more prior
convictions, the person shall be sentenced to both a fine of not
less than $200 nor more than $1,000 and either of the
following:
[1] Community service for a period of not less than 10 days
nor more than 90 days, and may be sentenced to
imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
[2] Imprisonment for not more than 90 days, and may be
sentenced to community service for not more than 90
days.
(2) In addition to the sanctions prescribed in Subsection C(1), the
court may, pursuant to the Code of Criminal Procedure, Act No. 175
of the Public Acts of 1927, being MCL §§ 760.1 to 776.21, order the
person to pay the costs of the prosecution. The court shall also
impose sanctions under Subsections J and K of this section.
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:271
(3) A person sentenced to perform service to the community under this
Subsection C shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse
the Township of Grosse Ile for the cost of supervision incurred by
the Township as a result of the person's activities in that service.
(4) As used in this Subsection C, "prior conviction" means a conviction
for a violation of any of the following:
(a) Subsection A(1) and (3) of this section.
(b) Former Section 171(1) of the Marine Safety Act.
(c) Former Section 73 of the Marine Safety Act.
(d) Former Section 73b of the Marine Safety Act.
(e) A local ordinance substantially corresponding to Subsection
A(1) and (3) of this section, former Section 73 of the Marine
Safety Act, or former Section 73b of the Marine Safety Act.
(f) A law of another state substantially corresponding to
Subsection A(1) and (3) of this section, former Section 73 of the
Marine Safety Act, or former Section 73b of the Marine Safety
Act.
D. Enhanced sentencing based on prior convictions; conditions; attempted
violation of Subsection A(1) or (3).
(1) If the prosecuting attorney intends to seek an enhanced sentence
under Subsection B or C based upon the defendant having one or
more prior convictions, the prosecuting attorney shall include on
the complaint and information filed in district court, circuit court,
recorder's court, municipal court, or probate court a statement
listing the defendant's prior convictions.
(2) A prior conviction shall be established at sentencing by one or more
of the following:
(a) An abstract of conviction.
(b) A copy of the defendant's boating record.
(c) An admission by the defendant.
(3) A person who is convicted of an attempted violation of Subsection
A(1) or (3) shall be punished as if the offense had been completed.
(4) When issuing an order under this chapter, the Secretary of State
and the court shall treat a conviction of an attempted violation of
Subsection A(1) or (3) of this section, former Section 171(1) or (3)
of the Marine Safety Act, a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to Subsection A(1) or (3) of this section, or a law of
another state substantially corresponding to Subsection A(1) or (3)
of this section the same as if the offense had been completed.
§ 153-30 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-30
1:272
E. Peace officer; arrest without warrant; reasonable cause; conditions;
returning vessel and occupants to shore; effect of not charging person
receiving citation.
(1) A peace officer, without a warrant, may arrest a person if the peace
officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person was, at the
time of an accident, the operator of a vessel involved in the
accident in this Township while in violation of Subsection A(1) or
(3).
(2) A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person
was operating a vessel on the waters of Grosse Ile Township and
that, by the consumption of intoxicating liquor, the person may
have affected his or her ability to operate a vessel may require the
person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The
following apply with respect to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis:
(a) Only a peace officer who has successfully completed a training
course taught by a state-certified instructor in the
administration of the preliminary chemical breath analysis may
administer that test.
(b) A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part
upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis.
(c) The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis are
admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime described in
Subsection A(1) or (3) or Subsection L(1) or in an
administrative hearing solely to assist the court or hearing
officer in determining a challenge to the validity of an arrest
This subsection does not limit the introduction of other
competent evidence offered to establish the validity of an
arrest.
(d) A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis remains subject to the requirements of Subsections K
to N for the purposes of chemical tests described in those
sections.
(e) A person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical
breath analysis upon a lawful request by a peace officer is
responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a
civil fine of not more than $100.
(3) A peace officer making an arrest under this Subsection E shall take
measures to assure that the vessel and its occupants are safely
returned to shore.
(4) If, within 60 days after the issuance of a citation for a civil
infraction under this Subsection E, the person to whom the citation
is issued is not charged with a violation of Subsection A(1) or (3),
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:273
the citation issued for the civil infraction is void. Upon application
of the person to whom the citation is issued, money paid by the
person as fine, costs, or otherwise shall be immediately returned.
F. Chemical test and analysis of blood, urine or breath; collection of
sample or specimen; application of administrative rules.
(1) The following apply with respect to a chemical test and analysis of a
person's blood, urine, or breath, other than a preliminary chemical
breath analysis:
(a) The amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance,
or both, in an operator's blood at the time alleged as shown by
chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, or breath is
admissible into evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding.
(b) A person arrested for a crime described in Subsection A(1) or
(3) or Subsection L(1) shall be advised of all of the following:
[1] That if the person takes a chemical test of his or her blood,
urine, or breath administered at the request of a peace
officer, the person has the right to demand that someone of
the person's own choosing administer one of the chemical
tests; that the results of the test are admissible in a judicial
proceeding as provided under this chapter and shall be
considered with other competent evidence in determining
the innocence or guilt of the defendant; and that the
person is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of a
test sample obtained pursuant to the person's own
request.
[2] That if the person refuses the request of a peace officer to
take the test described in Subsection F(1)(b)[1], the test
shall not be given without a court order, but the peace
officer may seek to obtain such a court order.
[3] That the person's refusal of the request of a peace officer
to take the test described in Subsection F(1)(b)[1] will
result in issuance of an order that the person not operate a
vessel on the waters of the state or Township for at least
six months.
(2) A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and
collected in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or a
licensed nurse or medical technician under the direction of a
licensed physician, qualified to withdraw blood and acting in a
medical environment, may withdraw blood at the request of a
peace officer for the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol
or presence of a controlled substance, or both, in a person's blood,
as provided in this subsection. A qualified person who withdraws or
analyzes blood, or assists in the withdrawal or analysis, in
accordance with this chapter is not liable for a crime or civil
§ 153-30 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-30
1:274
damages predicated on the act of withdrawing or analyzing blood
and related procedures unless the withdrawal or analysis is
performed in a negligent manner.
(3) A rule relating to a chemical test for alcohol or a controlled
substance promulgated under the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No.
300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being MCL §§ 257.1 to 257.923,
applies to a chemical test administered under this chapter.
G. Chemical test; administration at request of peace officer, during
medical treatment or by medical examiner if operator of vessel is
deceased; procedures.
(1) A chemical test described in Subsection F shall be administered at
the request of a peace officer having reasonable grounds to believe
the person has committed a crime described in Subsection A(1). A
person who takes a chemical test administered at the request of a
peace officer, as provided in Subsection F(1), shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to have someone of the person's own
choosing administer one of the chemical tests described in
Subsection F within a reasonable time after the person's detention,
and the results of the test are admissible and shall be considered
with other competent evidence in determining the innocence or
guilt of the defendant. If the person charged is administered a
chemical test by someone of the person's own choosing, the person
charged is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of the test
sample.
(2) If, after an accident, the operator of a vessel involved in the
accident is transported to a medical facility and a sample of the
operator's blood is withdrawn at that time for the purpose of
medical treatment, the results of a chemical analysis of that sample
are admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding to show the
amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance, or both, in
the person's blood at the time alleged, regardless of whether the
person had been offered or had refused a chemical test. The
medical facility or person performing the chemical analysis shall
disclose the results of the analysis to a prosecuting attorney who
requests the results for use in a criminal prosecution as provided in
this subsection. A medical facility or person disclosing information
in compliance with this subsection is not civilly or criminally liable
for making the disclosure.
(3) If, after an accident, the operator of a vessel involved in the
accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent's blood shall be
withdrawn in a manner directed by the medical examiner for the
purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or the presence of a
controlled substance, or both, in the decedent's blood. The medical
examiner shall give the results of the chemical analysis of the
sample to the law enforcement agency investigating the accident,
and that agency shall forward the results to the State of Michigan.
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:275
H. Chemical test; introduction of other competent evidence; availability of
test results.
(1) The provisions of Subsections F and G relating to chemical testing
do not limit the introduction of any other competent evidence
bearing upon the question of whether or not a person was impaired
by, or under the influence of, intoxicating liquor or a controlled
substance, or both, or whether the person had a blood alcohol
content of 0.10 gram or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210
liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
(2) If a chemical test described in Subsections F and G is administered,
the results of the test shall be made available to the person charged
or the person's attorney upon written request to the prosecution,
with a copy of the request filed with the court. The prosecution
shall furnish the results at least two days before the day of the trial.
The results of the test shall be offered as evidence by the
prosecution in that trial. Failure to fully comply with the request
bars the admission of the results into evidence by the prosecution.
I. Chemical analysis of blood, urine or breath; amount of alcohol in
operator's blood; presumptions; refusal to submit to chemical test as
evidence.
(1) Except in a prosecution relating solely to a violation of Subsection
A(1)(b), the amount of alcohol in the operator's blood at the time
alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine,
or breath gives rise to the following presumptions:
(a) If at the time the defendant had an alcohol content of 0.07
gram or less per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of
breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that
the defendant's ability to operate a vessel was not impaired
due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor and that the
defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(b) If at the time the defendant had an alcohol content of more
than 0.07 gram but less than 0.10 gram per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, it
shall be presumed that the defendant's ability to operate a
vessel was impaired within the provisions of Subsection A(3)
due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor.
(c) If at the time the defendant had an alcohol content of 0.10
gram or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of
breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that
the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(2) A person's refusal to submit to a chemical test as provided in
Subsections F and G is admissible in a criminal prosecution for a
crime described in Subsection A(1) or (3) or Subsection L only for
the purpose of showing that a test was offered to the defendant but
§ 153-30 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-30
1:276
not as evidence in determining innocence or guilt of the defendant.
The jury shall be instructed accordingly.
J. Advising defendant of penalties and sanctions; ordering screening;
assessment and rehabilitative services.
(1) Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere under
Subsections A to D, the court shall advise the accused of the
maximum possible term of imprisonment and the maximum
possible fine that may be imposed for the violation and shall advise
the defendant that the maximum possible sanctions that may be
imposed will be based upon the boating record maintained by the
Secretary of State or other evidence of a prior conviction as
provided in Subsection C.
(2) Before imposing sentence, other than court-ordered operating
sanctions, for a violation of Subsection A(1) or (3), the court shall
order the person to undergo screening and assessment by a person
or agency designated by the Office of Substance Abuse Services to
determine whether the person is likely to benefit from
rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education or
treatment programs. As part of the sentence, the court may order
the person to participate in and successfully complete one or more
appropriate rehabilitative programs. The person shall pay for the
costs of the screening, assessment, and rehabilitative services.
K. Sentencing as multiple offender; consideration of prior convictions;
sanctions.
(1) Immediately upon acceptance by the court of a plea of guilty or
nolo contendere or upon entry of a verdict of guilty for a violation of
Subsection A(1) or (3), whether or not the person is eligible to be
sentenced as a multiple offender, the court shall consider all prior
convictions currently entered upon the boating record of the
person or other evidence of prior convictions established under
Subsection C, except those convictions that, upon motion by the
defendant, are determined by the court to be constitutionally
invalid, and shall impose the following sanctions:
(a) For a conviction under Subsection A(1):
[1] If the court finds that the person has no prior convictions
within seven years for a violation of Subsection A(1) or (3),
former Section 171(1), (3), (4) or (5) of the Marine Safety
Act, or another boating substance abuse offense, or that
the person has one prior conviction within seven years for
a violation of Subsection A(3), former Section 171(3) of the
Marine Safety Act, former Section 73b of the Marine
Safety Act, a local ordinance substantially corresponding
to Subsection A(3) of this section or former Section 73b of
the Marine Safety Act, or a law of another state
substantially corresponding to Subsection A(3) of this
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:277
section or former Section 73b of the Marine Safety Act, the
court may order that the person not operate a vessel on
the waters of this state for not less than one year nor more
than two years.
[2] If the court finds that the person has one or more prior
convictions within seven years for a violation of Subsection
A(1) or (3), former Section 73 of the Marine Safety Act, a
local ordinance substantially corresponding to Subsection
A(1) of this section or former Section 73 of the Marine
Safety Act, or a law of another state substantially
corresponding to Subsection A(1) of this section or former
Section 73 of the Marine Safety Act, the court shall order
that the person not operate a vessel on the waters of this
state for not less than two years.
[3] If the court finds that the person has two or more prior
convictions within 10 years for a violation of Subsection
A(1) or (3) of this section or former Section 171(1), (3), (4),
or (5) of the Marine Safety Act or another boating
substance abuse offense, the court shall order with no
expiration date that the person not operate a vessel on the
waters of this state.
(b) For a conviction under Subsection A(3) or a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to Subsection A(3):
[1] If the court finds that the convicted person has no prior
conviction within seven years for a violation of Subsection
A(1) or (3) or former Section 171(1), (3), (4) or (5) of the
Marine Safety Act or another boating substance abuse
offense, the court may order that the person not operate a
vessel on the waters of this state for not less than six
months nor more than one year.
[2] If the court finds that the person has one prior conviction
within seven years for a violation of Subsection A(1) or (3)
of this section, former Section 73 of the Marine Safety Act,
a local ordinance substantially corresponding to
Subsection A(1) of this section or former Section 73 of the
Marine Safety Act, or a law of another state substantially
corresponding to Subsection A(1) of this section or former
Section 73 of the Marine Safety Act, the court shall order
that the person not operate a vessel on the waters of this
state for not less than two years.
[3] If the court finds that the person has two or more prior
convictions within 10 years for a violation of Subsection
A(1) or (3) of this section or former Section 171(1), (3) or
(5) of the Marine Safety Act or another boating substance
abuse offense, the court shall order with no expiration date
§ 153-30 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-30
1:278
that the person not operate a vessel on the waters of this
state.
(2) As used in this section, "another boating substance abuse offense"
means former Section 73 or 73b of the Marine Safety Act, a local
ordinance substantially corresponding to Subsection A(1) or (3) of
this section or former Section 73 or 73b of the Marine Safety Act or
a law of another state substantially corresponding to Subsection
A(1) or (3) of this section or former Section 73 or 73b of the Marine
Safety Act.
L. Consent to chemical tests of blood, breath or urine; circumstances;
exception; administration.
(1) A person who operates a vessel on the waters of Grosse Ile
Township is considered to have given consent to chemical tests of
his or her blood, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the
amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance, or both, in
his or her blood in all of the following circumstances:
(a) The person is arrested for a violation of Subsection A(1) or (3).
(b) The person is arrested for negligent homicide, manslaughter,
or murder resulting from the operation of a vessel and the
peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the
person was operating the vessel while impaired by, or under
the influence of, intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance,
or both, or while having a blood alcohol content of 0.10 gram
or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or
per 67 milliliters of urine.
(2) A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes, or a condition
requiring the use of an anticoagulant under the direction of a
physician shall not be considered to have given consent to the
withdrawal of blood.
(3) A chemical test described in Subsection L(1) shall be administered
as provided in Subsections F and G.
M. Refusal to submit to chemical test at request of peace officer; obtaining
court order; forwarding report to Secretary of State.
(1) If a person refuses the request of a peace officer to submit to a
chemical test offered pursuant to Subsection F or G, a test shall not
be given without a court order, but the officer may seek to obtain
the court order.
(2) If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to Subsection F
and G, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the
test shall immediately forward a written report to the Secretary of
State. The report shall state that the officer had reasonable
grounds to believe the person committed a crime described in
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:279
Subsection A(1) or Subsection L(1) and that the person refused to
submit to the test upon the request of the peace officer and has
been advised of the consequences of the refusal. The form of the
report shall be prescribed and furnished by the Secretary of State.
N. Refusal to submit to chemical test; notice of right to request hearing.
(1) If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to
Subsection F or G, the peace officer shall immediately notify the
person in writing that within 14 days of the date of the notice the
person may request a hearing as provided in Subsection O. The
form of the notice shall be prescribed and furnished by the
Secretary of State.
(2) The notice shall specifically state that failure to request a hearing
within 14 days will result in issuance of an order that the person
not operate a vessel on the waters of this state. The notice shall
also state that there is not a requirement that the person retain
counsel for the hearing, though counsel is permitted to represent
the person at the hearing.
O. Refusal to submit to chemical test; failure to request hearing; manner
and conditions of hearing if requested; record of proceedings; order;
petitions to review order or to review determination of hearing officer.
(1) If a person who refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to
Subsection F or G does not request a hearing within 14 days of the
date of notice pursuant to Subsection N, the Secretary of State
shall issue an order that the person not operate a vessel on the
waters of this state for six months or, for a second or subsequent
refusal within seven years, for one year.
(2) If a hearing is requested, the Secretary of State shall hold the
hearing in the same manner and under the same conditions as
provided in Section 322 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300
of the Public Acts of 1949, being MCL § 257.322. A person shall not
order a hearing officer to make a particular finding on any issue
enumerated under Subsection O(2)(a) to (d). Not less than five
days' notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the person requesting
the hearing, to the peace officer who filed the report under
Subsection M and, if the prosecuting attorney requests receipt of
the notice, to the prosecuting attorney of the county where the
arrest was made. The hearing officer may administer oaths, issue
subpoenas for the attendance of necessary witnesses, and grant a
reasonable request for an adjournment. Not more than one
adjournment shall be granted to a party, and the length of an
adjournment shall not exceed 14 days. A hearing under this
subsection shall be scheduled to be held within 45 days after the
date of arrest and, except for delay attributable to the
unavailability of the defendant, a witness, or material evidence or
to an interlocutory appeal or exceptional circumstances, but not for
§ 153-30 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-30
1:280
delay attributable to docket congestion, shall be finally adjudicated
within 77 days after the date of arrest. The hearing shall cover only
the following issues:
(a) Whether the peace officer had reasonable grounds to believe
that the person had committed a crime described in Subsection
A(1) or Subsection L(1).
(b) Whether the person was placed under arrest for a crime
described in Subsection A(1) or Subsection L(1).
(c) If the person refused to submit to the test upon the request of
the officer, whether the refusal was reasonable.
(d) Whether the person was advised of his or her rights under
Subsection F.
(3) The hearing officer shall make a record of proceedings held
pursuant Subsection O(2). The record shall be prepared and
transcribed in accordance with Section 86 of the Administrative
Procedures Act of 1969, Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of 1969,
being MCL § 24.286. Upon notification of the filing of a petition for
judicial review in circuit court and not less than 10 days before the
matter is set for review, the hearing officer shall transmit to the
court in which the petition is filed the original or a certified copy of
the official record of the proceedings. The parties to the
proceedings for judicial review may stipulate that the record be
shortened. A party unreasonably refusing to stipulate to a
shortened record may be taxed by the court in which the petition is
filed for the additional costs. The court may permit subsequent
corrections to the record.
(4) After a hearing, if the person who requested the hearing does not
prevail, the Secretary of State shall order that the person not
operate a vessel on the waters of this state for six months or, for a
second or subsequent refusal within seven years, for one year. The
person may file a petition in the circuit court of the county in which
the arrest was made to review the order. If after the hearing the
person who requested the hearing prevails, the peace officer who
filed the report under Subsection M may, with the consent of the
prosecuting attorney, file a petition in the circuit court of the
county in which the arrest was made to review the determination of
the hearing officer.
P. Order not to operate vessel on waters of state; convictions requiring
issuance of order by Secretary of State; effectiveness of order if more
than one conviction results from the same incident.
(1) Notwithstanding a court order issued under Subsection A(1) or (3),
Subsections J and K, former Section 171(1), (3), (4) or (5), 181 or
182 of the Marine Safety Act, former Section 73 or 73b of the
Marine Safety Act, or a local ordinance substantially corresponding
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-30
1:281
to Subsection A(1) or (3), J or K of this section, or former Section 73
or 73b of the Marine Safety Act, if a court has not ordered a person
not to operate a vessel as authorized by this chapter, the Secretary
of State shall issue an order that the person not operate a vessel
on the waters of this state for not less than six months nor more
than two years, if the person has the following convictions within a
seven-year period, whether under the law of the State of Michigan,
a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this state,
or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of the
State of Michigan:
(a) One conviction under Subsection A(1), former Section 171(1)
of the Marine Safety Act, or former Section 73 of the Marine
Safety Act.
(b) Any combination of two convictions under Subsection A(3),
former Section 171(3) of the Marine Safety Act, or former
Section 73b of the Marine Safety Act.
(c) One conviction under Subsection A(1), former Section 171(1)
of the Marine Safety Act, or former Section 73 of the Marine
Safety Act and one conviction under Subsection A(3), former
Section 171(3) of the Marine Safety Act, or former Section 73b
of the Marine Safety Act.
(2) If the Secretary of State receives records of more than one
conviction of a person resulting from the same incident, an order
not to operate shall be issued solely for that violation for which an
order could be effective for the longest period of time under this
Subsection P.
Q. Failure to answer citation or notice to appear in court or comply with
judgment or order; notice of issuance of order without expiration date;
conditions terminating order.
(1) If a person is charged with or convicted of a violation of Subsection
A(1), (2) or (3), or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to
Subsection A(1), (2) or (3), and the person fails to answer a citation
or a notice to appear in court, or for any matter pending, or fails to
comply with an order or judgment of the court, including but not
limited to paying all fines, costs, and crime victim rights
assessments, the court shall immediately give notice by first-class
mail sent to the person's last known address that if the person fails
to appear within seven days after the notice is issued or fails to
comply with the order or judgment of the court, including but not
limited to paying all fines, costs, and crime victim rights
assessments, within 14 days after the notice is issued, the
Secretary of State will issue an order with no expiration date that
the person not operate a vessel on the waters of this state. If the
person fails to appear within the seven-day period or fails to comply
with the order or judgment of the court, including but not limited to
§ 153-30 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-30
1:282
§ 153-31. Violation of order not to operate vessel.
paying all fines, costs, and crime victim rights assessments, within
the fourteen-day period, the court shall immediately inform the
Secretary of State, who shall immediately issue the order and send
a copy to the person by personal service or first-class mail sent to
the person's last known address.
(2) An order imposed under Subsection Q(1) remains in effect until
both of the following occur:
(a) The court informs the Secretary of State that the person has
appeared before the court and that all matters relating to the
violation are resolved.
(b) The person has paid to the court an administrative order
processing fee of $25.
A. A person who is ordered not to operate a vessel on the waters of this
state or of the Township of Grosse Ile and who has been notified of the
order by personal service or first-class mail shall not operate a vessel on
the waters of Grosse Ile Township. A person shall not knowingly permit
a vessel owned by the person to be operated on the waters of Grosse Ile
Township by a person who is subject to such an order. A person who
violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as
follows:
(1) By imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more
than $500, or both.
(2) For a second or subsequent violation punishable under this
subsection, by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of
not more than $1,000, or both.
B. Upon receiving a record of the conviction of a person upon a charge of
unlawful operation of a vessel while the person is subject to an order
not to operate a vessel on the waters of Grosse Ile Township, the
Secretary of State shall immediately extend the length of the order for
an additional like period. If the Secretary of State receives records of
more than one conviction resulting from the same incident, all of the
convictions shall be treated as a single violation for purposes of
extending the length of an order under this subsection.
C. Before a person is arraigned before a judge or district court magistrate
on a charge of violating this section, the arresting officer shall obtain
the boating record of the person from the Secretary of State and shall
furnish the record to the court. The boating record of the person may be
obtained from the Secretary of State's computer information network.
D. This section does not apply to a person who operates a vessel solely for
the purpose of protecting human life or property, if the life or property
is endangered and the summoning or giving of prompt aid is essential.
§ 153-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-31
1:283
§ 153-32. Impoundment of vessel; storage.
§ 153-33. Conviction based on plea of nolo contendere.
A conviction based on a plea of nolo contendere shall be treated in the same
manner as a conviction based upon a plea of guilty or a finding of guilt for
all purposes under this chapter.
§ 153-34. Use of public docks, piers, wharfs or retaining walls
prohibited under certain wind conditions.
E. If a person is convicted of violating Subsection A, the court shall order
confiscation of the vessel's certificate of number and cancellation of the
vessel's registration numbers, unless the vessel was stolen or
permission to use the vessel was not knowingly given. The Secretary of
State shall not assign a registration number to or issue a certificate of
number for a vessel whose number is canceled and certificate
confiscated until after the expiration of 90 days after the cancellation or
confiscation, whichever is later.
A. When a person is convicted under § 153-31A, the vessel, if it is owned in
whole or in part by that person, shall be ordered impounded for not less
than 30 nor more than 120 days from the date of judgment. An order of
impoundment issued pursuant to this subsection is valid throughout the
state. Any peace officer may execute the impoundment order. The order
shall include the implied consent of the owner of the vessel to the
storage for insurance coverage purposes.
B. The owner of a vessel impounded pursuant to this section is liable for
expenses incurred in the removal and storage of the vessel whether or
not the vessel is returned to him or her. The vessel shall be returned to
the owner only if the owner pays the expenses for removal and storage.
If redemption is not made or the vessel is not returned as provided in
this section within 30 days after the time set in the impoundment order
for return of the vessel, the vessel shall be considered abandoned.
C. Nothing in this section affects the rights of a conditional vendor, chattel
mortgagee, or lessor of a vessel registered in the name of another
person as owner who becomes subject to this chapter.
A. When wind conditions on the Great Lakes attain a magnitude whereby
1/3 of the waves resulting from the conditions cause any public dock,
pier, wharf, or retaining wall to be awash, it constitutes a state not
conducive to the orderly and safe use and occupancy of those
structures.
B. When the conditions described in Subsection A exist, any harbormaster,
peace or police officer, or other authorized official may rope off or
barricade entry to these structures or post in a conspicuous manner
notices that entry on those structures for the purpose of fishing,
swimming, or other recreational activity is prohibited.
§ 153-31 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-34
1:284
§ 153-35. Requirements for watercraft and pontoon boats.
C. A person shall not knowingly enter or remain upon any public dock,
pier, wharf, or retaining wall for the purpose of fishing, swimming, or
other recreational activity when the structure is roped, cabled, or
otherwise barricaded in a manner designed to exclude intruders, when
notice against entry is given by posting in a conspicuous manner, or
when notice to leave or stay off is personally communicated to that
person by a peace or police officer or other authorized official of the
local unit of government.
A. Watercraft subject to this chapter shall be:
(1) Of sound and substantial construction and in good seaworthy
condition.
(2) Equipped by the livery operator with oars and paddles, as
hereinafter provided, which shall be of sturdy construction and
without holes, large chips, or cracks which will diminish their
operation effectiveness or structural strength. This subsection
applies to all watercraft, including those propelled by machinery or
sail. Watercraft with oarlock sockets shall be equipped with not
fewer than two oars and two oarlock horns. Watercraft without
oarlock sockets shall be equipped with not fewer than two paddles.
(3) Equipped by the livery operator with an anchor of sufficient size
and weight and an anchor line of sufficient strength and length to
accommodate the watercraft in normal depth of the waters on
which it is to be used. This requirement does not apply to canoes.
(4) Equipped by the livery operator with one lifesaving cushion or
other approved lifesaving device, in good condition, per person.
Lifesaving equipment shall be of the type approved by the United
States Coast Guard and shall bear a stamp or label indicating such
approval. Other equipment currently prescribed by law shall also
be carried on board.
(5) Provided with sufficient buoyancy to keep the watercraft from
sinking when it is filled with water and passengers are clinging to it
if the aggregate weight of motor, passengers, and equipment
carried in or attached to the watercraft does not exceed its
maximum weight capacity, as determined by the maximum weight
capacity formula contained in these rules.
B. Pontoon boats shall meet the following deck requirements:
(1) The deck shall not exceed the width at the pontoons.
(2) The deck shall not be greater than six inches above the pontoons.
(3) The deck length within railings shall not be greater than 80% of
pontoon length and shall not overhang the pontoons.
§ 153-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-35
1:285
§ 153-36. Maximum capacity tags.
§ 153-37. Weight capacity.
(4) The deck shall drain freely.
A. Generally. The sheriff of each county or any peace officer duly
authorized by him shall issue to the owner, for each watercraft, a
maximum capacity tag. This tag shall be placed by or in the presence of
the inspecting officer on the watercraft in such a location and manner
as to be clearly visible and legible from the position designed or
normally intended to be occupied by the operator of the watercraft
when underway.
B. Watercraft for use with outboard motors. The capacity tag for a
watercraft for use with an outboard motor shall contain:
(1) The total weight of persons, motor, gear, and other articles placed
aboard which the watercraft is capable of carrying with safety
under normal conditions.
(2) The recommended number of persons commensurate with the
weight capacity of the watercraft at a presumed weight of 150
pounds per person.
(3) The maximum horsepower of the motor the watercraft is designed
or intended to accommodate.
(4) A notice that the information appearing on the capacity tag applies
under normal conditions and that the weight of the outboard motor
and its associated equipment is considered to be part of the weight
capacity.
C. Watercraft not for use with outboard motors. The capacity tag for a
watercraft not for use with an outboard motor, such as a canoe,
rowboat, inboard boat, or inboard-outboard boat, shall contain:
(1) The total weight of persons, gear, and other articles placed aboard
which the watercraft is capable of carrying with safety under
normal conditions.
(2) The recommended number of person commensurate with the
weight capacity of the watercraft at a presumed weight of 150
pounds per person.
(3) A notice that the information appearing on the capacity plate
applies under normal conditions.
A. The capacity tag shall contain the weight capacity of the watercraft
determined as hereinafter provided.
B. The weight capacity of a watercraft for use with an outboard motor,
except a watercraft dependent solely upon the buoyancy of pontoons or
§ 153-35 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-37
1:286
§ 153-38. Horsepower capacity.
similar flotation devices, shall be determined by either of the following
methods:
(1) The formula WC = 7 1/2 LBD, where WC is the weight capacity in
pounds, L is the center-line length, B is the maximum beam
amidships, and D is the effective depth figured from keel to lowest
freeboard.
(2) Reference to the manufacturer's capacity tag installed in a
watercraft if manufactured or offered for original sale in this state
on or after January 1, 1968, or in accordance with standards
approved by the State of Michigan Waterways Commission or its
successor.
C. The weight capacity of a watercraft with a permanently installed
engine, except watercraft dependent solely upon the buoyancy of
pontoons or similar flotation devices, shall be determined in the same
manner as for watercraft for use with outboard motors, except that the
weight of all machinery and associated operating gear, including
battery, fuel, and fuel system, shall be subtracted.
D. The weight capacity of a watercraft dependent solely upon the
buoyancy of pontoons or similar flotation devices shall be determined
by applying the formula WC = [(621/2V) - Boat Wgt.]: 2, where WC is
the weight capacity of the watercraft and V is the volume of both
pontoons. If equipped with a permanently installed engine, the weight
of all machinery and associated operating gear, including battery, fuel,
and fuel system, shall be subtracted from the weight capacity.
E. The weight capacity of a rowboat and any other watercraft for use
without an outboard motor shall be determined in the same manner as
for a watercraft for use with an outboard motor, following the formula
expressed as WC = 7 1/2 LBD.
F. The weight capacity of a canoe shall be determined by the formula WC
= 7 1/2 LBD x 2.
G. The livery operator shall provide the inspecting officer with information
relative to the weight of the watercraft either by reference to the
manufacturer's rating or by actual weighing of the watercraft.
A. The horsepower capacity of an outboard watercraft, excepting canoes
or pontoon craft, shall be determined by either of the following
methods:
(1) The horsepower capacity of an outboard watercraft, other than a
canoe, and except one dependent solely upon the buoyancy of
pontoons or similar flotation devices, shall not exceed the value
given by the Boat Horsepower Table in Figure 1. The horsepower
capacity of an outboard watercraft, other than a canoe, and
§ 153-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-38
1:287
dependent solely upon the buoyancy of pontoons or similar
flotation devices shall not exceed the value given by multiplying the
cubic feet of flotation in the pontoons by the pontoon length in feet
and dividing by the pontoon diameter in inches. If the pontoons are
not circular in cross section, the diameter of the largest circle that
can be inscribed in the pontoon shall be used.
(2) By reference to a manufacturer's capacity plate installed in a
watercraft, if manufactured or offered for original sale in this state
on or after January 1, 1968, or in accordance with standards
approved by the State of Michigan Waterways Commission or its
successor, or the horsepower capacity recommended by the livery
operator, whichever is the lesser.
Figure 1
Boat Horsepower Table
Multiply overall length _________ x stern width
________ = Factor (both measurements in
decimal feet)
(nearest whole
number)
Remote
steering
and 20" or
equivalent
No remote
steering or
transom less
than 20" or
equivalent
Factor is under
40 40-45 46-49
50-53 54-57
over 57 over 57
H.P. Cap is 5 10 15
20 25
(2 x
Factor)
–90
(3/4 Factor)
–20
H.P. Cap = __________(raise to even 5 h.p.
increment)
B. Horsepower capacity for canoes. The horsepower capacity for canoes
shall be determined by the following table, or by the horsepower
capacity recommended by the livery operator, whichever is the lesser:
Length of Canoe
(feet) Horsepower
Under 15 4
15 to 18 5
Over 18 8
§ 153-38 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-39
1:288
§ 153-39. Passenger capacity.
Passenger capacity shall be determined by applying that one of the
following formulas resulting in the lesser capacity:
§ 153-40. Numbers and decals.
A. (WC - M):150, where M is the weight of the largest outboard motor and
associated operating equipment which the watercraft is represented to
accommodate if usable with outboard motor and 150 is the presumed
pound weight per person. For a watercraft with an inboard or inboardoutboard
motor, divide WC by 150.
B. Boat length multiplied by the maximum boat beam divided by 15. This
formula is not applicable to canoes.
A. Applicability. This section regarding the numbering of vessels and
motorboats applies to all motorboats and all other vessels 12 feet in
length or over which are required to be numbered or to display a decal
indicating payment of fees under the state laws of Michigan and which
are operated on any waters within the territorial limits of Grosse Ile
Township.
B. Form of number.
(1) Each number required by the Act shall consist of capital letters MC
denoting the State of Michigan followed by four numerals followed
by two capital letters (example: MC 0000 AA).
(2) A number suffix shall not include the letters I, O, or Q which may be
mistaken for numerals.
C. Display, size and color of number.
(1) Each number required by this chapter or the state laws of Michigan
shall meet all of the following requirements. It shall:
(a) Be painted on or permanently attached to each side of the
forward half of the vessel or motorboat except as allowed by
Subsection C(2) or required by Subsection C(3).
(b) Be in plain vertical block characters of not less than three
inches in height.
(c) Contrast with the color of the background and be distinctly
visible and legible.
(d) Have spaces or hyphens that are equal to the width of the
letter "M" between the letter and number groupings (example:
MC 0000 AA or MC-0000-AA).
(e) Read from left to right.
(f) Be as high above the water line as practical.
§ 153-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-40
1:289
(2) When a vessel or motorboat is used by a manufacturer or dealer for
testing or demonstrating, the number may be painted on or
attached to removable plates that are temporarily but firmly
attached to each side of the forward half of the vessel or motorboat.
(3) On vessels or motorboats so configured that a number on the hull
or superstructure would not be easily visible, the number must be
painted on or attached to a backing plate that is attached to the
forward half of the vessel or motorboat so that the number is visible
from each side of the vessel or motorboat.
D. Other numbers prohibited. A person may not use a vessel or motorboat
to which this chapter applies that has any number that is not issued by
the Secretary of State for that vessel or motorboat on its forward half.
E. Decals.
(1) Each decal required by the laws of the State of Michigan to indicate
payment of fees required of vessels documented by the United
States Coast Guard or federal agency successor thereto shall be:
(a) Identical to the validation decal prescribed in R281.1208 of the
Michigan Administrative Code.
(b) Permanently affixed to each side of the forward half of the
vessel.
(c) As high above the water line as practical.
(2) When a decal is lost, destroyed, or defaced, the owner of the
documented vessel shall apply to the Secretary of State for a
duplicate decal.
F. Removal of number. The person whose name appears on a certificate of
number as the owner of a motorboat or vessel shall remove the number
and validation decal from the vessel when one of the following occurs:
(1) The motorboat or vessel is documented by the United States Coast
Guard or federal agency successor thereto; however, the decal
prescribed in R281.1206 of the Michigan Administrative Code shall
then be displayed.
(2) The certificate of number is invalid under the Act.
(3) The motorboat or vessel is no longer principally used in this state.
G. Validation decals; display; size; color.
(1) The validation decal required by the laws of the State of Michigan
shall meet the following requirements. It shall:
(a) Be permanently attached to each side of the forward half of the
motorboat or vessel.
§ 153-40 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-40
1:290
§ 153-41. Immediate notification of death or disappearance.
§ 153-42. Report of collision, accident or other casualty.
(b) Be approximately three inches square.
(c) Indicate the year in which the decal expires by the colors blue,
international orange, green, and red, in rotation beginning
with blue decals that expire in 1973 (example: decal expires
December 31, 1973, blue; expires December 31, 1974,
international orange; expires December 31, 1975, green;
expires December 31, 1976, red; expires December 31, 1977,
blue, etc.).
(d) Be displayed on each side of the motorboat or vessel three
inches beyond the last letter of the assigned number and on the
same strake or level as the number.
(2) When a validation decal is lost, destroyed, or defaced, the owner of
the motorboat or vessel shall apply to the Secretary of State for a
duplicate.
A. When, as a result of an occurrence that involves a vessel or its
equipment, a person dies or disappears from a vessel, the operator shall
notify without delay, by the quickest means available, the sheriff of the
county in which the collision, accident or other casualty occurred or the
nearest peace officer or state police post of the following:
(1) The date, time and exact location of the occurrence.
(2) The name of each person who died or disappeared.
(3) The number and name of the vessel.
(4) The names and addresses of the owner and operator.
B. When the operator of a vessel cannot give the notice required by
Subsection A, each person on board the vessel shall give the required
notice or determine that the notice has been given.
A. The report required by the laws of the State of Michigan shall be made
by the operator of a vessel when, as a result of an occurrence that
involves the vessel or its equipment, any of the following occur:
(1) A person dies.
(2) A person loses consciousness or receives medical treatment or is
disabled for more than 24 hours.
(3) Damage to the vessel and other property damage totals more than
$100.
(4) A person disappears from the vessel under circumstances that
indicate death or injury.
§ 153-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-42
1:291
§ 153-43. Equipment.
B. The report required by the laws of the State of Michigan shall be made
as follows:
(1) Within 48 hours of the occurrence if a person dies within 24 hours
of the occurrence.
(2) Within 48 hours of the occurrence if a person loses consciousness
or receives medical treatment or is disabled for more than 24 hours
or disappears from a vessel.
(3) Within five days of the occurrence or death if an earlier report is
not required by this Subsection B.
C. When the operator of a vessel cannot make the report required by law,
the owner shall make the report.
A. Applicability. This section pertaining to equipment applies to vessels
and associated equipment used, to be used, or carried in vessels used
on any waters within the Township of Grosse Ile, except:
(1) Foreign vessels temporarily using waters subject to state
jurisdiction.
(2) Military or public vessels of the United States, except recreationaltype
public vessels.
(3) A vessel whose owner is a state or political subdivision thereof,
other than this state and its political subdivisions, which is used
principally for governmental purposes, and which is clearly
identifiable as such.
(4) A ship's lifeboat.
B. Navigation lights. Navigation lights shall be of sufficient intensity so
that the candlepower outside the lens is not less than that amount
corresponding to the required distance of visibility as described in
R281.1233 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended.
C. Personal flotation devices.
(1) Personal flotation devices required by this chapter to be carried
aboard vessels shall be of the following types:
(a) Type I, an approved device designed to turn an unconscious
person in the water from a face downward position to a vertical
or slightly backward position and to have more than 20 pounds
of buoyancy.
(b) Type II, an approved device designed to turn an unconscious
person in the water from a face down position to a vertical or
slightly backward position and to have at least 15.5 pounds of
buoyancy.
§ 153-42 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-43
1:292
(c) Type III, an approved device designed to keep a conscious
person in a vertical or slightly backward position and to have at
least 15.5 pounds of buoyancy.
(d) Type IV, an approved device designed to be thrown to a person
in the water and not worn. It is designed to have at least 16.5
pounds of buoyancy.
(2) Personal flotation devices required by this chapter to be carried
aboard vessels shall be:
(a) Approved by the United States Coast Guard.
(b) Legibly marked with the approval number issued by the United
States Coast Guard.
(c) Of an appropriate size for the person for whom it is intended.
(d) Readily accessible and immediately available.
(e) In good and serviceable condition.
D. Fire-extinguishing equipment.
(1) All hand-portable fire extinguishers, semiportable fireextinguishing
systems and fixed fire-extinguishing systems
required by this chapter shall be of a type approved by the United
States Coast Guard.
(2) Hand-portable fire extinguishers and semiportable fireextinguishing
systems are classified by a combination letter and
number symbol, the letter indicating the type of fire which the unit
could be expected to extinguish and the number indicating the
relative size of the unit.
(3) For the purpose of this chapter, all required hand-portable fire
extinguishers and semiportable fire-extinguishing systems are of
the "B" type, that is, suitable for extinguishing fires involving
flammable liquids, greases, and so forth.
(4) The number designations for size start with "I" for the smallest to
"III" for the largest. Sizes I and II are considered hand-portable fire
extinguishers, and Size III is considered a semiportable fireextinguishing
system which shall be fitted with a suitable hose and
nozzle or other practicable means so that all portions of the space
concerned may be covered. Examples of size graduations for some
of the typical hand-portable fire extinguishers and semiportable
fire-extinguishing systems are as indicated in Table 4 of R281.1285
of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended.
(5) All hand-portable fire extinguishers and semiportable fireextinguishing
systems shall have permanently attached thereto a
metallic nameplate giving the name of the item, the rated capacity
§ 153-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-43
1:293
in gallons, quarts, or pounds, the name and address of the person
or firm for whom or which approved, and the identifying mark of
the actual manufacturer.
(6) Vaporizing-liquid-type fire extinguishers containing carbon
tetrachloride or chlorobromomethane or other toxic liquids are not
acceptable as equipment required by this chapter.
(7) Hand-portable or semiportable extinguishers which are required
on their nameplates to be protected from freezing shall not be
located where freezing temperatures may be expected.
(8) A dry chemical, stored pressure, fire extinguisher not fitted with
pressure gauge or indicating device, manufactured prior to January
1, 1965, may be carried on motorboats so long as it is maintained in
good and serviceable condition. The following maintenance and
inspections are required for such an extinguisher:
(a) When the date on the inspection record tag on the extinguisher
shows that six months have elapsed since the last weight check
ashore, the extinguisher is no longer accepted as meeting
required maintenance conditions until reweighed ashore and
found to be in a serviceable condition and within required
weight conditions.
(b) If the weight of the container is 1/4 ounce less than that
stamped on the container, it shall be serviced.
(c) If the outer seals, which indicate tampering or use when
broken, are not intact, the officer shall inspect the extinguisher
to see that the frangible disc in the neck of the container is
intact, and if the disc is not intact, the container shall be
serviced.
(d) If there is evidence of damage, use, or leakage, such as dry
chemical powder observed in the nozzle or elsewhere on the
extinguisher, the container shall be replaced and the
extinguisher properly serviced or the extinguisher replaced
with another approved extinguisher.
(9) A dry chemical, stored pressure, fire extinguisher without pressure
gauge or indicating device manufactured after January 1, 1965,
shall not be carried on motorboats as required equipment.
(10) When a fixed fire-extinguishing system is installed, it shall be of a
carbon-dioxide type approved and installed as required by the
United States Coast Guard.
(11) Fire extinguishers are required if any of the following conditions
exist:
(a) Closed compartment under thwarts and seats where portable
fuel tanks may be stored.
§ 153-43 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-43
1:294
(b) Double bottoms not sealed to the hull or which are not
completely filled with flotation material.
(c) Closed living spaces.
(d) Closed compartments in which combustible or flammable
materials are stored.
(e) Permanently installed fuel tanks.
(12) The following conditions do not, in themselves, require that fire
extinguishers be carried:
(a) Bait wells.
(b) Glove compartments.
(c) Buoyant flotation material.
(d) Open slatted flooring.
(e) Ice chests.
E. Backfire flame control.
(1) Every gasoline engine installed in a motor boat after April 25, 1940,
except outboard motors, shall be equipped with an acceptable
means of backfire flame control.
(2) Installations made before November 19, 1952, need not meet the
detailed requirements of this subsection and may be continued in
use as long as they are serviceable and in good condition.
Replacements shall meet the applicable conditions in this
subsection.
(3) Installations consisting of backfire flame arresters bearing United
States Coast Guard approval No. 162.015 may be continued in use
as long as they are serviceable and in good condition.
Replacements shall meet the applicable conditions of this
subsection.
(4) Installations consisting of engine air and fuel induction systems
and given United States Coast Guard Approval No. 162.015 may be
continued in use as long as they are serviceable and in good
condition. Replacements shall meet the applicable conditions of
this subsection.
(5) The following are acceptable means of backfire flame control for
gasoline engines:
(a) A backfire flame arrester constructed in accordance with
specifications of, and approved by, the United States Coast
Guard. The flame arrester shall be suitably secured to the air
intake with flame-tight connections.
§ 153-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-43
1:295
(b) An engine air and fuel induction system which provides
adequate protection from propagation of backfire flame to the
atmosphere equivalent to that provided by an approved
backfire flame arrester. A gasoline engine utilizing an air and
fuel induction system and operated without an approved
backfire flame arrester shall have the installation tested and
labeled in accordance with the specifications of, and approved
by, the United States Coast Guard.
(c) Any attachment to the carburetor or location of the engine air
induction system by means of which flames caused by engine
backfire will be dispersed to the atmosphere outside the vessel
in such a manner that the flames will not endanger the vessel,
persons on board or nearby vessels and structures. All
attachments shall be of metallic construction with flame-tight
connections and firmly secured to withstand vibration, shock,
and engine backfire. The installations do not require formal
approval and labeling but will be accepted by state and local
law enforcement officers on the basis of compliance with this
subsection.
(d) Where manufacturers wish to produce vessels having an
integrated engine-vessel design, a pre-market approval of an
engine air induction system is available. An installation shall be
tested and labeled in accordance with the specifications of, and
approval by, the United States Coast Guard.
F. Ventilation. All motorboats, except open boats, the construction or
decking over of which is commenced after April 25, 1940, and which
use fuel having a flash point of 110° F. or less, shall have at least two
ventilator ducts, fitted with cowls or their equivalent, for the efficient
removal of explosive or flammable gases from the bilges of every engine
and fuel tank compartment. There shall be at least one exhaust duct
installed so as to extend from the open atmosphere to the lower portion
of the bilge and at least one intake duct installed so as to extend to a
point at least midway to the bilge or at least below the level of the
carburetor intake. The cowls shall be located and trimmed for
maximum effectiveness and in such a manner so as to prevent displaced
fumes from being recirculated.
G. Muffler; cutouts. The exhaust of all internal combustion engines used
on any waters of Grosse Ile Township shall be muffled effectively by
equipment so constructed and used as to muffle the noise of the exhaust
or the engine in a reasonable manner. The use of cutouts, bypasses or
similar devices is prohibited. A modern device, underwater exhaust
system or a system discharging cold water through the exhaust of an
inboard engine, each of which is capable of muffling the noise of the
exhaust of the engine in a reasonable manner, shall be considered as
meeting the requirement of this subsection.
§ 153-43 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-43
1:296
§ 153-44. Outboard motorboats.
H. Violation. A person shall not operate a vessel on waters of Grosse Ile
Township unless equipped in accordance with this chapter.
A. Outboard motorboats less than 16 feet in length. An outboard
motorboat less than 16 feet in length shall be equipped as follows:
(1) If the motorboat is not an open boat, it shall be equipped with two
ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified in
R281.1237 of the Michigan Administrative Code as amended.
(2) One Type I, II, III or IV Coast Guard approved personal flotation
device as specified in R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, in good and serviceable condition, for each
person aboard. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased
in plastic bags or other type containers.
(3) If the motorboat is constructed so that it has decking or
compartments where explosive or flammable gases may be
entrapped as illustrated in Figure 2, it shall be equipped with one
BI-type Coast Guard approved fire extinguisher in good and
serviceable condition and as specified in R281.1235 of the
Michigan Administrative Code, as amended.42 When a fixed fireextinguishing
system is installed in the machinery space, one less
BI-type fire extinguisher is required.
(4) If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight
showing all around the horizon and visible two miles and a
combination twenty-point bowlight forward, showing green to
starboard and red to port, visible one mile, or in lieu of this
requirement may display lights as specified by the international
rules of the road.
(5) If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the
Great Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special
anchorage area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part
of the motorboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
direction.
(6) All lights shall be as specified by R281.1233 of the Michigan
Administrative Code, as amended.
(7) A muffler as specified by R281.1238 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, for each motor.
B. Outboard motorboats 16 feet or over and less than 26 feet in length. An
outboard motorboat 16 feet or over and less than 26 feet in length shall
be equipped as follows:
42.Editor's Note: Figure 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-44
1:297
(1) If the motorboat is not an open boat, it shall be equipped with two
ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified in
R281.1237 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended.
(2) One Type I, II, or III Coast Guard approved personal flotation
device as specified in R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, in good and serviceable condition, for each
person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable device. The devices
shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or other type
containers.
(3) One hand-, mouth- or power-operated whistle, capable of
producing a blast of two seconds or more in duration, and audible
for at least 1/2 mile.
(4) If the motorboat is constructed so that is has decking or
compartments where explosive or flammable gases may be
entrapped, it shall be equipped with one BI-type Coast Guard
approved fire extinguisher in good and serviceable condition and as
specified in R281.1235 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as
amended. When a fixed fire-extinguishing system is installed in the
machinery space, one less BI-type fire extinguisher is required.
(5) If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight
showing all around the horizon and visible two miles and a
combination twenty-point bowlight forward, showing green to
starboard and red to port, visible one mile, or in lieu of this
requirement may display lights as specified by the international
rules of the road.
(6) If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the
Great Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special
anchorage area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part
of the motorboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
direction.
(7) All lights shall be as specified by R281.1233 of the Michigan
Administrative Code, as amended.
(8) A muffler as specified by R281.1238 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, for each motor.
C. Outboard motorboats 26 feet or over and less than 40 feet in length. An
outboard motorboat 26 feet or over and less than 40 feet in length shall
be equipped as follows:
(1) If the motorboat is not an open boat, it shall be equipped with two
ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified in
R281.1237 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended.
§ 153-44 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-44
1:298
(2) One Type I, II, or III Coast Guard approved personal flotation
device as specified in R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, in good and serviceable condition, for each
person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable device. The devices
shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or other type
containers.
(3) An efficient fog bell which, when struck, produces a clear bell-like
tone of full round characteristics.
(4) One hand- or power-operated whistle capable of producing a blast
of two seconds or more duration and audible for a distance of at
least one mile.
(5) If the motorboat is constructed so that it has decking or
compartments where explosive or flammable gases may be
entrapped, it shall be equipped with two BI-type Coast Guard
approved hand-portable fire extinguishers in good and serviceable
condition and as specified in R281.1235 of the Michigan
Administrative Code, as amended. One BII-type Coast Guard
approved fire extinguisher may be substituted for two BI types.
When a fixed fire-extinguishing system is installed in the machinery
space, one less BI-type fire extinguisher is required.
(6) If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight
showing all around the horizon and visible two miles, one white
light forward showing 20 points and visible two miles, a green light
to starboard showing 10 points and visible one mile and a red light
to port showing 10 points and visible one mile, or in lieu of this
requirement may display lights as specified by the international
rules of the road.
(7) If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the
Great Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special
anchorage area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part
of the motorboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
direction.
(8) All lights shall be as specified by R281.1233 of the Michigan
Administrative Code, as amended.
(9) A muffler as specified by R281.1238 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, for each motor.
D. Outboard motorboats 40 feet or over and not more than 65 feet in
length. An outboard motorboat 40 feet or over and not more than 65
feet in length shall be equipped as follows:
(1) If the motorboat is not an open boat, it shall be equipped with two
ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified in
R281.1237 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended.
§ 153-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-44
1:299
§ 153-45. Inboard and inboard-outboard motorboats.
(2) One Type I, II, or III Coast Guard approved personal flotation
device as specified in R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, in good and serviceable condition, for each
person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable device. The devices
shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or other
containers.
(3) An efficient fog bell which, when struck, produces a clear bell-like
tone of full round characteristics.
(4) One power-operated whistle capable of producing a blast of two
seconds or more duration and audible for a distance of at least one
mile.
(5) If the motorboat is constructed so that it has decking or
compartments where explosive or flammable gases may be
entrapped, it shall be equipped with three BI-type Coast Guard
approved hand-portable fire extinguishers in good and serviceable
condition and as specified in R281.1235 of the Michigan
Administrative Code, as amended. One BII-type Coast Guard
approved fire extinguisher may be substituted for two BI types.
When a fixed fire-extinguishing system is installed in the machinery
space, one less BI-type fire extinguisher is required.
(6) If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight
showing all around the horizon and visible two miles, one white
light forward showing 20 points and visible two miles, a green light
to starboard showing 10 points and visible one mile and a red light
to port showing 10 points and visible one mile, or in lieu of this
requirement may display lights as specified by the international
rules of the road.
(7) If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the
Great Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special
anchorage area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part
of the motorboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
direction.
(8) All lights shall be as specified by R281.1233 of the Michigan
Administrative Code, as amended.
(9) A muffler as specified by R281.1238 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, for each motor.
A. Inboard and inboard-outboard motorboats less than 16 feet in length.
An inboard or inboard-outboard motorboat less than 16 feet in length
shall be equipped as follows:
§ 153-44 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-45
1:300
(1) One Coast Guard approved backfire flame arrester as specified in
R281.1236 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended, on
each carburetor of all gasoline engines.
(2) At least two ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified
in R281.1237 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended.
(3) One Type I, II, III or IV Coast Guard approved personal flotation
device as specified in R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, in good and serviceable condition for each
person aboard. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased
in plastic bags and other containers.
(4) One BI-type Coast Guard approved hand-portable fire extinguisher
in good and serviceable condition and as specified in R281.1235 of
the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended. When a fixed fireextinguishing
system is installed in the machinery space, one less
BI-type fire extinguisher is required.
(5) If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight
showing all around the horizon and visible two miles and a
combination twenty-point bowlight forward, showing green to
starboard and red to port, visible one mile, or in lieu of this
requirement may display lights as specified by the international
rules of the road.
(6) If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the
Great Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special
anchorage area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part
of the motorboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
direction.
(7) All lights shall be as specified by R281.1233 of the Michigan
Administrative Code, as amended.
B. Inboard and inboard-outboard motorboats 16 feet or over and less than
26 feet in length. An inboard or inboard-outboard motorboat 16 feet or
over and less than 26 feet in length shall be equipped as follows:
(1) One Coast Guard approved backfire flame arrester as specified in
R281.1236 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended, on
each carburetor of all gasoline engines.
(2) At least two ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified
in R281.1237 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended.
(3) One Type I, II, or III Coast Guard approved personal flotation
device as specified in R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, in good and serviceable condition for each
person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable device. The devices
§ 153-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-45
1:301
shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or other
containers.
(4) One hand-, mouth- or power-operated whistle capable of producing
a blast of two seconds or more duration and audible for at least 1/2
mile.
(5) One BI-type Coast Guard approved hand-portable fire extinguisher
in good and serviceable condition and as specified in R281.1235 of
the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended. When a fixed fireextinguishing
system is installed in the machinery space, one less
BI-type fire extinguisher is required.
(6) If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight
showing all around the horizon and visible two miles and a
combination twenty-point bowlight forward, showing green to
starboard and red to port, visible one mile, or in lieu of this
requirement may display lights as specified by the international
rules of the road.
(7) If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the
Great Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special
anchorage area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part
of the motorboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
direction.
(8) All lights shall be as specified by R281.1233 of the Michigan
Administrative Code, as amended.
(9) A muffler as specified by R281.1238 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, for each motor.
C. Inboard and inboard-outboard motorboats 26 feet and over and less
than 40 feet in length. An inboard or inboard-outboard motorboat 26
feet or over and less than 40 feet in length shall be equipped as follows:
(1) One Coast Guard approved backfire flame arrester as specified in
R281.1236 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended, on
each carburetor of all gasoline engines.
(2) At least two ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified
in R281.1237 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended.
(3) An efficient fog bell which, when struck, produces a clear, bell-like
tone of full round characteristics.
(4) One hand- or power-operated whistle capable of producing a blast
of two seconds or more duration and audible for a distance of at
least one mile.
(5) One Type I, II or III Coast Guard approved personal flotation device
as specified in R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as
§ 153-45 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-45
1:302
amended, in good and serviceable condition for each person
aboard, plus one Type IV throwable device. The devices shall be
ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or other containers.
(6) At least two BI-type Coast Guard approved hand-portable fire
extinguishers in good and serviceable condition and as specified in
R281.1235 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended. One
BII-type Coast Guard approved fire extinguisher may be
substituted for two BI types. When a fixed fire-extinguishing system
is installed in the machinery space, one less BI-type fire
extinguisher is required.
(7) If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight
showing all around the horizon and visible two miles, one white
light forward showing 20 points and visible two miles, a green light
to starboard showing 10 points and visible one mile and a red light
to port showing 10 points and visible one mile, or in lieu of this
requirement may display lights as specified by the international
rules of the road.
(8) If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the
Great Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special
anchorage area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part
of the motorboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
direction.
(9) All lights shall be as specified by R281.1233 of the Michigan
Administrative Code, as amended.
(10) A muffler as specified by R281.1238 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, for each motor.
D. Inboard and inboard-outboard motorboats 40 feet and over and not
more than 65 feet in length. An inboard or inboard-outboard motorboat
40 feet or over and not more than 65 feet in length shall be equipped as
follows:
(1) One Coast Guard approved backfire flame arrester as specified in
R281.1236 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended, on
each carburetor of all gasoline engines.
(2) At least two ducts fitted with cowls or their equivalent as specified
in R281.1237 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended.
(3) An efficient fog bell which, when struck, produces a clear bell-like
tone of full round characteristics.
(4) One power-operated whistle, capable of producing a blast of two
seconds or more duration and audible a distance of at least one
mile.
§ 153-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-45
1:303
§ 153-46. Sailboat without motor.
(5) One Type I, II or III Coast Guard approved personal flotation device
as specified in R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as
amended, in good and serviceable condition for each person
aboard, plus one Type IV throwable device. The devices shall be
ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or other containers.
(6) At least three BI-type Coast Guard approved hand-portable fire
extinguishers in good and serviceable condition and as specified in
R281.1235 of the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended. One
BII-type Coast Guard approved fire extinguisher may be
substituted for two BI types. When a fixed fire-extinguishing system
is installed in the machinery space, one less BI-type fire
extinguisher is required.
(7) If underway between sunset and sunrise, the motorboat shall be
equipped with an Exhibit 1 white light aft higher than the bowlight
showing all around the horizon and visible two miles, one white
light forward showing 20 points and visible two miles, a green light
to starboard showing 10 points and visible one mile and a red light
to port showing 10 points and visible one mile, or in lieu of this
requirement may display lights as specified by the international
rules of the road.
(8) If the motorboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the
Great Lakes or water connected thereto and not in a special
anchorage area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part
of the motorboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
direction.
(9) All lights shall be as specified by R281.1233 of the Michigan
Administrative Code.
(10) A muffler as specified by R281.1238 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, for each motor.
A. Sailboat without motor, less than 16 feet in length. A sailboat without a
motor and less than 16 feet in length shall be equipped as follows:
(1) One Type I, II, III or IV Coast Guard approved personal flotation
device as specified in R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, in good and serviceable condition for each
person aboard. The devices shall be ready at hand and not encased
in plastic bags or other containers.
(2) If underway between sunset and sunrise, the sailboat shall be
equipped with a lantern showing a white light which shall be ready
at hand and which shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent
collision.
§ 153-45 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-46
1:304
§ 153-47. Sailboat with motor.
A sailboat with a motor shall be equipped as follows:
(3) If the sailboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage
area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part of the
sailboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
direction.
B. Sailboat without motor, 16 feet or over in length. A sailboat without a
motor and 16 feet or over in length shall be equipped as follows:
(1) One Type I, II, III or IV Coast Guard approved personal flotation
device as specified in R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, as amended, in good and serviceable condition for each
person aboard, plus one Type IV throwable device. The devices
shall be ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or other
containers.
(2) If underway between sunset and sunrise, the sailboat shall be
equipped with a lantern showing a white light which shall be ready
at hand and which shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent
collision.
(3) If the sailboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage
area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part of the
sailboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
direction.
A. Personal flotation devices, backfire flame arresters, ventilation ducts
and cowls, fire extinguishers, whistles and bells and mufflers, as
required by these rules for motorboats of the same length.
B. If underway between sunset and sunrise shall be equipped with and
exhibit navigation lights as required by these rules for motorboats of
the same length, except:
(1) A sailboat 26 feet or over in length under sail alone on the Great
Lakes and waters connected thereto between sunset and sunrise
shall be equipped with and exhibit a green light to starboard
showing 10 points and visible one mile and a red light to port
showing 10 points and visible one mile and a lantern showing a
white light which shall be ready at hand and which shall be
exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
(2) If the sailboat is anchored between sunset and sunrise on the Great
Lakes or waters connected thereto and not in a special anchorage
area, a white light shall be displayed on the forward part of the
sailboat so as to be visible to a boat approaching from any
§ 153-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-47
1:305
§ 153-48. Rowboats.
§ 153-49. Canoes and kayaks.
§ 153-50. Speed limits.
direction. In lieu of these lighting requirements sailboats may
display lights as specified by the international rules of the road.
A. A rowboat shall be equipped with personal flotation devices as required
by this chapter for a motorboat of the same length.
B. If underway between sunset and sunrise a rowboat shall be equipped
with a lantern showing a white light which shall be ready at hand and
which shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
A. A canoe or kayak shall be equipped with one Type I, II, III or IV Coast
Guard approved personal flotation device as specified in R281.1234 of
the Michigan Administrative Code, as amended, in good and
serviceable condition for each person aboard. The devices shall be
ready at hand and not encased in plastic bags or other type containers.
B. If underway between sunset and sunrise a canoe or kayak shall be
equipped with a lantern showing a white light which shall be ready at
hand and which shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision.
A. Speed within 1,000 feet of shore, dock or pierhead. On the waters of the
Detroit River and connected waters, Town 4 South, Range 11 East and
Town 5 South, Range 11 East, Grosse Ile Township, Wayne County, it is
unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow - no wake speed
when within 1,000 feet of any shore, dock or pierhead, except:
(1) East of Grosse Ile and west of Ballards Reef Channel from Black
Can Buoy No. 1 upstream to Grosse Ile Split Lighted Buoy LL 969
(HB 1 QK FLW);
(2) West of Grosse Ile and east of the mainland of Wayne County from
Red Nun No. 6 upstream to Grosse Ile Split Lighted Buoy LL 969
(HB 1 QK FLW); and
(3) On those waters adjacent to the Island of Mama Juda, Powder
House, and Stony.
B. Thorofare Canal. On the waters of the Thorofare Canal, P.C. 549, 550,
551 and 555, Town 4 South, Range 11 East, Grosse Ile Township, Wayne
County, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow - no
wake speed.
C. Frenchman Creek and connected waters. On the waters of Frenchman
Creek, passages east and west of Round Island and the connected
artificial canal, Town 4 South, Range 11 East, Town 5 South, Range 11
§ 153-47 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-50
1:306
§ 153-51. Personal watercraft and associated equipment. [Added
5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 269]
East, Grosse Ile Township, Wayne County, it is unlawful for the operator
of a vessel to exceed a slow - no wake speed.
D. Meso-Hickory Passage. On the waters of the passage between Meso
and Hickory Islands, Town 5 South, Range 11 East, Grosse Ile
Township, Wayne County, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to
exceed a slow - no wake speed.
E. Swan Island Canal. On the waters of the Canal between Swan Island
and the mainland of Grosse Ile, Town 4 South, Range 11 East, Town 5
South, Range 11 East, Grosse Ile Township, Wayne County, it is
unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow - no wake speed.
F. Elba Island Canals. On the waters of the natural and artificial channels
and canals adjacent to Elba Island, P.C. 553, 554 and 557, Town 4
South, Range 11 East and Town 5 South, Range 11 East, Grosse Ile
Township, Wayne County, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to
exceed a slow - no wake speed.
G. If the slow - no wake offense appears to be inadvertent and not
intentional, the violator is responsible for a civil infraction. [Added
5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 269]
H. This section shall not be enforced when waived by the State of Michigan
Natural Resources Commission or its successor for marine events
pursuant to Act No. 303 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, being
MCL §§ 281.1072a and 281.1151.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT — Any of the following that are not radio
equipment:
BOATING SAFETY CERTIFICATE — Either of the following:
An original system, part, or component of a personal watercraft
at the time that boat was manufactured, or a similar part or
component manufactured or sold for replacement.
(1)
Repair or improvement of an original or replacement system, part,
or component.
(2)
An accessory or equipment for, or appurtenance to, a personal
watercraft.
(3)
A marine safety article, accessory, or equipment intended for use
by a person on board a boat.
(4)
The document issued by the Department under the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act that certifies that the
(1)
§ 153-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-51
1:307
BOATING SAFETY COURSE — A course that meets both of the
following requirements:
BOAT LIVERY — That term as defined in Section 44501 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL
§ 324.44501.
CHANNEL — Either of the following:
DEALER — A person and an authorized representative of that person
who annually purchases from a manufacturer, or who is engaged in
selling or manufacturing, six or more personal watercraft that require
certificates of number under part 801 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL §§ 324.80101 to
324.80199.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Natural Resources.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Natural Resources.
MANUFACTURER — A person engaged in any of the following:
individual named in the document has successfully completed a
boating safety course and passed an examination approved and
administered as required under MCLA § 324.80211. [Amended
7-22-2008]
A document issued by the United States Coast Guard auxiliary
that certifies that the individual named in the document has
successfully completed a United States Coast Guard auxiliary
course concerning boating safety.
(2)
A written rental agreement provided to an individual named in the
rental agreement entered into under Section 44522 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL
§ 324.44522, only on the date or dates indicated on the rental
agreement while the named individual is operating a personal
watercraft leased, hired, or rented from a boat livery.
(3)
Provides instruction on the safe operation of a personal watercraft
that meets or exceeds the minimum course content for boating
or personal watercraft education established by the National
Association of State Boating Law Administrators Education
Committee (October 1996).
(1)
(2) Is approved by the Department.
The deepest part of a stream, bay, or straight through which the
main current flows.
(1)
The part of a body of water deep enough for navigation through
an area otherwise not suitable for navigation that is marked by a
single or double line of navigational aids or range markers.
(2)
§ 153-51 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-51
1:308
OPERATE — To be in control of a personal watercraft that is under way
and is not docked or at anchor or secured in another way.
OPERATOR — The person who is in control or in charge of a personal
watercraft while that vessel is under way.
OWNER — A person who claims or is entitled to lawful possession of
a personal watercraft by virtue of that person's legal title or equitable
interest in a personal watercraft.
PEACE OFFICER — One or both of the following:
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, governmental entity, or other legal entity.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A vessel that meets all of the following
requirements:
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — Grosse Ile Township.
SLOW – NO WAKE SPEED — The use of vessel at a very slow speed so
that the resulting wake or wash is minimal.
USE — Operate, navigate, or employ.
VESSEL — Every description of watercraft used or capable of being
used as a means of transportation on water.
The manufacture, construction, or assembly of personal watercraft
or associated equipment.
(1)
The manufacture or construction of components for personal
watercraft and associated equipment to be sold for subsequent
assembly.
(2)
The importation of a personal watercraft or associated equipment
into the state for sale.
(3)
A law enforcement officer as that term is defined in Section 2 of the
Michigan Law Enforcement Officers Training Council Act, 1965, PA
203, MCL § 28.602.
(1)
A deputy who is authorized by a sheriff to enforce the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act and who has
satisfactorily completed at least 40 hours of law enforcement
training, including training specific to the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act. [Amended 7-22-2008]
(2)
Uses a motor-driven propeller or an internal combustion engine
powering a water jet pump as its primary source of propulsion.
(1)
Is designed without an open load carrying area that would retain
water.
(2)
Is designed to be operated by one or more persons positioned on,
rather than within, the confines of the hull.
(3)
§ 153-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-51
1:309
WATERS OF THIS STATE — Any waters within the territorial limits of
this state, and includes those waters of the Great Lakes that are under
the jurisdiction of this state.
B. Applicability.
(1) This section applies to personal watercraft and associated
equipment used on the waters of Grosse Ile.
(2) Except where expressly indicated otherwise, this section does not
apply to a personal watercraft that is all of the following:
(a) Owned by a state or political subdivision of a state other than
this state and its political subdivisions.
(b) Used principally for governmental purposes.
(c) Clearly marked and identifiable as a personal watercraft that is
used principally for governmental purposes.
C. Rules. The rules promulgated by the Department for Natural Resources
or its successor under the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969
PA 306, MCL §§ 24.201 to 24.328, are incorporated herein with regards
to personal watercraft.
D. Operation of personal watercraft; requirements.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not
operate a personal watercraft on the waters of Grosse Ile unless
each person 12 years of age or older riding on or being towed
behind the personal watercraft is wearing a Type I, Type II, or Type
III personal flotation device as described in R281.1234 of the
Michigan Administrative Code.
(2) A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
Grosse Ile unless each person on board or being towed by the
personal watercraft who is less than 12 years of age is wearing a
Type I or Type II personal flotation device as described in
R281.1234 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
(3) A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
Grosse Ile unless each person on board the personal watercraft is
wearing a personal flotation device that is not inflatable.
(4) A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
Grosse Ile unless the child is in the company of his or her parent or
guardian or a designee of the parent or guardian.
(5) While operating a personal watercraft equipped by the
manufacturer with a lanyard-type engine cutoff switch on the
waters of Grosse Ile, a person shall have the lanyard attached to his
or her person, clothing, or personal flotation device as is
appropriate for the personal watercraft.
§ 153-51 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-51
1:310
(6) A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
Grosse Ile during the period that begins one hour before sunset and
ends at 8:00 a.m. As used in this subsection, "sunset" means that
time as determined by the National Weather Service.
(7) A person operating a personal watercraft on the waters of Grosse
Ile shall not cross within 150 feet behind another vessel, other that
a personal watercraft, unless the person is operating the personal
watercraft at slow - no wake speed.
(8) A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
Grosse Ile where the water depth is less than two feet, as
determined by vertical measurement, unless one or both of the
following circumstances exist:
(a) The personal watercraft is being operated at slow - no wake
speed.
(b) The personal watercraft is being docked or launched.
(9) A person shall operate a personal watercraft in a reasonable and
prudent manner. A maneuver that unreasonably or unnecessarily
endangers life, limb, or property, including but not limited to all of
the following, constitutes reckless operation of a personal
watercraft under Subsection F:
(a) Weaving through congested vessel traffic.
(b) Jumping the wake of another vessel unreasonably or
unnecessarily close to the other vessel or when visibility
around the other vessel is obstructed.
(c) Waiting until the last possible moment before swerving to
avoid a collision.
(10) A person shall not operate a personal watercraft on the waters of
Grosse Ile carrying more persons than the personal watercraft is
designed to carry.
(11) A violation of Subsection D(10) is prima facie evidence of reckless
operation of a watercraft under Subsection F.
(12) A person operating a personal watercraft in excess of the speeds
established under Part 801 of the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL §§ 324.80101 to
324.80199, is guilty of reckless operation of a personal watercraft
under Subsection F.
(13) This Subsection D does not apply to a performer engaged in a
professional exhibition or a person preparing to participate or
participating in a regatta, race, marine parade, tournament, or
exhibition held in compliance with Section 80164 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL
§ 153-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-51
1:311
§ 324.80164, under a permit issued by the Department and at the
time and place specified in the permit.
E. Operation of personal watercraft; prohibition; violation; penalty.
(1) A person shall not operate a personal watercraft in the waters of
Grosse Ile outside of a channel or in an area where aquatic rooted
vegetation is visible above the surface of the water in the deltaic
wetlands of a lake that is greater that 32 square miles and less that
144 square miles in area.
(2) A person who violates Subsection E(1) is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of $100, plus court
costs.
F. Reckless operation of personal watercraft; penalties; impoundment.
(1) If a person carelessly and heedlessly operates a personal
watercraft upon the waters of Grosse Ile in disregard of the rights
or safety of others, without due caution and circumspection, or at a
rate of speed or in a manner that endangers or is likely to endanger
a person or property, that person is guilty of reckless operation of a
personal watercraft and is subject to the penalties described in
Subsection F(2) or (3), or both, as applicable.
(2) Upon a person's conviction under this Subsection F, the court may
issue an order prohibiting the person from operating a personal
watercraft on the waters of this state for a period of not more that
two years and shall order the person to participate in and complete
a boating safety course. An order issued pursuant to this subsection
is in addition to any other penalty authorized under Subsection N
or Subsection F(3).
(3) Upon a person's second or subsequent conviction under this
Subsection F, the court may issue an order impounding the
personal watercraft that the person was operating at the time the
person violated Subsection F(1) for a period of not more that one
year, if either of the following conditions exists:
(a) The person is an owner of the personal watercraft.
(b) The person is the minor child of an owner of the personal
watercraft.
(4) The cost of storage for an impoundment ordered under Subsection
F(3) shall be paid by the owner of the personal watercraft.
G. Operation of personal watercraft; distance requirements; exceptions.
(1) Except when traveling at slow - no wake speed perpendicular to the
shoreline, a person who operates a personal watercraft on one of
the Great Lakes that is under the jurisdiction of Grosse Ile shall
maintain a distance of 200 feet from the shoreline.
§ 153-51 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-51
1:312
(2) Except as provided in Subsection G(4), a person who operates a
personal watercraft or a person who is being towed by a personal
watercraft on a water sled, kite, surfboard, parachute, tube, water
ski, or similar equipment on the waters of Grosse Ile shall maintain
a distance of not less that 100 feet from a dock, raft, or buoyed or
occupied bathing or swimming area, a person in the water or on the
water in a personal flotation device, or a vessel moored, anchored,
drifting, or sitting in dead water.
(3) A person who operates a personal watercraft or a person who is
being towed by a personal watercraft on a water sled, kite,
surfboard, parachute, tube, water ski, or similar equipment on the
waters of Grosse Ile shall maintain a distance of not less that 200
feet from a submerged diver, vessel engaged in underwater diving
activities, or a flotation device displaying the international diving
insignia.
(4) Subsection G(2) does not apply under either of the following
conditions:
(a) The personal watercraft being operated or the person being
towed is proceeding at a slow - no wake speed.
(b) The personal watercraft being operated or the person being
towed is in a navigable channel, canal, river, or stream not
otherwise posted.
H. Individual required to complete boating safety course; certificate
required. An individual who is required to complete a boating safety
course under the state law of Michigan shall not operate a personal
watercraft upon the waters of Grosse Ile unless that individual has in
his or her immediate possession a boating safety certificate.
I. Display of boating safety certificate.
(1) An individual who is required to complete a boating safety course
under the state law of Michigan and who operates a personal
watercraft on the waters of Grosse Ile shall display his or her
boating safety certificate upon the demand of a peace officer who
identifies himself or herself as a peace officer.
(2) A person shall display only his or her own boating safety certificate
upon the demand of a peace officer under Subsection I(1).
(3) A person shall not display a fraudulent boating safety certificate to
a peace officer under Subsection I(1).
(4) A peace officer shall not stop a personal watercraft solely for the
purpose of determining whether the operator has in his or her
possession a boating safety certificate.
J. Operation of personal watercraft; graduated age provisions.
[Amended 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 297]
§ 153-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-51
1:313
(1) Except as provided in Subsection J(2) and (3), a person under the
age of 14 shall not use a personal watercraft on the waters of the
Township.
(2) A person who is 12 or more and less than 14 years of age before
January 1, 1999, may use a personal watercraft on the waters of
this Township if before January 1, 1999, he or she obtained a
boating safety certificate.
(3) A person who is 12 or more and less than 14 years of age may use a
personal watercraft on the waters of this Township if all of the
following circumstances exist:
(a) The person is accompanied solely by the person's parent or
legal guardian.
(b) Both the person and the parent or legal guardian have
obtained a boating safety certificate.
(c) The personal watercraft is equipped by the manufacturer with
a lanyard-type engine cutoff switch, and the parent or legal
guardian has the lanyard attached to his or her person,
clothing, or personal flotation device.
(d) The personal watercraft is designed to carry not fewer than
two persons.
(4) A person who was born after December 31, 1978, shall not operate
a personal watercraft upon the waters of this Township unless he or
she first obtains a boating safety certificate.
(5) The owner of a personal watercraft or a person having charge over
or control of a personal watercraft shall not authorize or knowingly
permit the personal watercraft to be operated in violation of this
Subsection J.
(6) This Subsection J does not apply to a performer engaged in a
professional exhibition or a person preparing to participate or
participating in a regatta, race, marine parade, tournament, or
exhibition held in compliance with MCL § 324.80164 under a
permit issued by the Department and at the time and place
specified in the permit.
K. Certification requirements for out-of-state residents.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection K(2), the certification
requirements prescribed in Subsections H and J do not apply to a
person who is not a resident of this state.
(2) Beginning April 1, 2000, a person who is not a resident of Grosse
Ile shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters of this state
only if he or she has one of the following in his or her possession:
§ 153-51 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-51
1:314
(a) A boating safety certificate.
(b) A certificate issued by his or her state of residence that reflects
education and training that is substantially similar to the
education and training required to obtain a boating safety
certificate under this section.
(c) A certificate showing that he or she has successfully completed
a course that meets the requirement prescribed in Subsection
(1) of the definition of "boating safety course" in Subsection A
of this section.
L. Sources of boating safety courses; failure of dealer to advise; violation;
fine.
(1) A dealer of a new or used personal watercraft shall advise each
person who buys a personal watercraft from the dealer of the
sources of boating safety courses in the area.
(2) A dealer who violates this Subsection L is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and shall be ordered to pay a civil fine in
the amount of $100.
M. Availability of documents to dealer; providing documents to buyer; fine.
A dealer shall provide a copy of a summary of the laws of the State of
Michigan that pertain to personal watercraft and a summary of the
safety features of the personal watercraft to each person who buys a
personal watercraft from the dealer. A dealer who violates this
subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall be
ordered to pay a civil fine in the amount of $100.
N. Violation of ordinance as misdemeanor; penalty. Unless otherwise
specified in this section, a person who violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or
a fine of not more than $100, or both. In addition, a person who violates
this section may be required to participate in and complete a boating
safety course.
O. Enforcement. Peace officers shall enforce this section. If a person has
received a citation for a violation of a certification requirement
prescribed in this section, the court may waive any fine and costs upon
receipt, not more than 10 days after the citation is issued, of proof of
certification by a law enforcement agency that the person, before the
appearance date on the citation, produced a valid boating safety
certificate or other certification described in this section, as applicable,
that was valid on the date the violation occurred.
P. Compliance with MCL §§ 324.80101 to 324.80199. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, a personal watercraft operator shall comply
with Part 801 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
Act, 1994 PA 451, MCL §§ 324.80101 to 324.80199.
§ 153-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-51
1:315
Chapter 155
MINORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 12.
Amusements — See Ch. 16.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 80.
Q. Failure to exercise due caution. Any person who violates any provision
of this chapter by operating any watercraft, boat, vessel, or personal
watercraft in such a manner as to fail to exercise due caution on the
waters of Grosse Ile is responsible for a municipal civil infraction with a
fine not to exceed $100 plus court costs. This infraction shall not be
reported to the Secretary of State or State of Michigan.
§ 153-51 GROSSE ILE CODE § 153-51
1:316
ARTICLE I
Curfew
[Adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 137 as Ch. 10 of the Grosse Ile
Township Code; amended in its entirety 1-25-2010 by Ord. No.
10-01]
§ 155-1. Curfew hours.
§ 155-2. Abetting violation.
Any person assisting, aiding, abetting or encouraging any minor under the
age of 17 years to violate the provisions of § 155-1 hereof shall be guilty of a
violation of this article, and when the minor is found violating the provisions
of said § 155-1, a presumption shall arise that the parent or legal guardian
having the care and custody of the said minor assisted, aided, abetted, and
encouraged such minor in so violating said section.
§ 155-3. Parental responsibility.
The parent or guardian of the minor child shall be held responsible for the
violation of § 155-1 or 155-2 by his/her child or ward.
§ 155-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter,
idle, congregate, or otherwise be in or on any public roadway, park or
any public place or place open to the general public:
(1) If the minor is 13 years of age or younger, between the hours of
10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(2) If the minor is 14 to 15 years of age, between the hours of 11:30
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(3) If the minor is 16 years of age, between the hours of 12:30 a.m. and
6:00 a.m.
B. The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply when the minor is
accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult above 21 years of
age delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany such child, or
where the presence of a minor in said place is connected with and
required by some legitimate work, trade, profession, or occupation in
which said minor is engaged, or where such minor is upon an
emergency errand or other legitimate business directed by his or her
parent or guardian; or when the minor is going to or coming from a
legitimate church, municipal or school function or returning from the
theater with the permission of the parent, guardian, or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor.
§ 155-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-4
1:317
MINOR — Any juvenile under the age of 17 years.
PARENT — Includes the mother, father, legal guardian and any other person
having the care or custody of a minor or such other adult with whom a minor
may be found residing.
§ 155-5. Arrest or detention of minors.
Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for an offense committed
within the Township of Grosse Ile, the parent of such minor shall be
immediately notified by the Police Department advising the parent of such
arrest or detention, the reason therefor, and his/her responsibility under
this article. A record of such notifications shall be kept by the Grosse Ile
Police Department.
§ 155-6. Parental neglect.
It shall be unlawful for the parent of any minor to fail to exercise reasonable
parental control which results in the minor committing any criminal act or
violation of this Code or to allow or encourage any minor to commit any
criminal act or to become delinquent in accordance with the Probate Code
of the State of Michigan as it pertains to juveniles.
§ 155-7. Criteria for failure to exercise reasonable parental control.
Failure to exercise reasonable parental control shall include but not be
limited to the following:
§ 155-8. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3.
A. Knowingly permitting the minor to violate this article.
B. Knowingly permitting the minor to keep stolen property.
C. Knowingly permitting the minor to associate with known juvenile
delinquents.
D. Knowingly permitting the minor to be absent without cause from
regular school sessions.
E. Knowingly permitting the minor to possess unlawful drugs and
narcotics.
F. Knowingly permitting the minor to be without proper supervision in the
absence of the parents.
§ 155-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 155-8
1:318
ARTICLE II
Possession of Spray Paint
[Adopted 2-22-1993 by Ord. No. 194; amended in its entirety
1-25-2010 by Ord. No. 10-01]
§ 155-9. Defacing of property and possession of spray paint.
§ 155-10. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use spray paint or any other
means of marking the property of others to injure, destroy, or in
furtherance of the practice of defacing (graffiti) the property of others.
For purposes of this article, the term "spray paint" shall mean any
adherent, paint, varnish, lacquer, stain, or other similar solvent or
substance commonly used in painting and applied by a spraying method
or similar technique.
B. No person under the age of 18 years shall possess, buy, transfer
possession, or receive possession of spray paint, except as otherwise
provided herein.
C. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall sell or transfer
possession of any cans of spray paint to a person under 18 years of age;
provided, however, that a person may sell or transfer possession of
spray paint to a person under 18 years of age for lawful uses for said
individual under the age of 18 who has in his or her possession and
exhibits the written consent of his or her parent or guardian.
D. The owner of any property defaced through the use of spray paint or
other device shall remove or paint over such defaced property as soon
as possible after discovery of its existence so as to preclude further
vandalism or defacement of the structure or immediate surroundings.
E. If the individual found violating this article shall be under the age of 18
years, to the extent practical, the individual shall be required to remove
the graffiti and to repaint the structure defaced or otherwise restore
the premises to the condition that existed immediately prior to the
defacement of said property.
F. A person under the age of 18 years may possess, buy, transfer
possession, or receive possession of spray paint for lawful purposes
when said individual has in his or her possession and exhibits the
written consent of his or her parent or guardian.
§ 155-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-10
1:319

ARTICLE III
Tobacco Products
[Adopted 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 205]
§ 155-11. Purchase or possession of smoking devices and tobacco
products.
No person under the age of 18 years shall purchase, offer or attempt to
purchase, have in his or her possession or use any product which is used for
the formation of a smoking device, tobacco, tobacco snuff, chewing tobacco
or tobacco in any other form.
§ 155-12. Penalty.
A person under the age of 18 years who violates this section shall be
responsible for committing a municipal civil infraction and subject to the
payment of a civil fine up to $100 and costs incurred by Grosse Ile Township.
§ 155-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-12
1:321
Chapter 157
MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Operation of motor vehicles — See Ch. 161. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 261.
§ 155-12 GROSSE ILE CODE § 155-12
1:322
ARTICLE I
Safety Standards
§ 157-1. Statutory authority; intent.
This chapter derives its authority from the Motor Carrier Safety statute,
being MCL § 480.11 et seq., P.A. No. 181, 1963, as amended, and is intended
to facilitate enforcement, at the local Township level, of the safety
requirements for truck drivers and trucking equipment and rigs mandated
thereby and the terms of said Act are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference.
§ 157-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT — MCL § 480.11 et seq, P.A. No. 181, 1963, as amended.
HIGHWAY — Any street or roadway, and includes the entire width between
the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof
is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicle travel.
MOTOR VEHICLE AND VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled or a
vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley
wires, but not operated upon rails.
TRAILER — A vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for carrying
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
TRUCK TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than
a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
§ 157-3. Qualifications of truck or truck tractor operators.
A person shall not drive, and an individual, partnership, association,
corporation, or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court shall not
employ, engage, hire, or contract for hire any person to operate, drive,
or maintain, any truck, truck tractor, or trailer unless the person meets
the qualifications as set forth by the Department of State Police under the
authority of the Act.
§ 157-4. Safety standards for drivers or operators and for
equipment and devices.
An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees or
receivers appointed by any court shall not operate any truck, truck tractor,
or trailer or permit any person to drive any truck or truck tractor which
does not meet driver or operator safety standards, safety standards for
equipment and devices on trucks, truck tractors, or trailers and the loading
§ 157-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-4
1:323
and unloading thereof as set forth in rules promulgated by the Department
of State Police.
§ 157-5. Safety standards for property transportation facilities.
An individual, partnership, association, corporation, or their lessees or
receivers appointed by any court shall not operate or maintain any facility
used in connection with the transportation of property by any truck, truck
tractor, or trailer which facility does not meet safety standards for the
operation and maintenance of such facility as set forth in rules promulgated
by the Department of State Police.
§ 157-6. Rules and regulations.
Reference to those rules and regulations which have been or are hereafter
promulgated by the Michigan Department of State Police, and are set
forth in the Michigan Administrative Code at Rule 460.16101 thereof, et
seq., may be had wherever necessary to clarify and give greater detail
to the precise violation being cited against any defendant, in a summons,
complaint or citation issued by any peace officer or Township police official,
to aid in the enforcement of the chapter and said rules and regulations are
hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
§ 157-7. Violations; authority to stop and inspect vehicles; driver
audit; exception.
A. Except as provided in § 157-8, any driver or operator who violates this
chapter or a rule promulgated under the Act, or any owner or user of
any truck, truck tractor, or trailer, or any officer or agent of any
individual, partnership, corporation, or association or their lessees or
receivers appointed by any court which is the owner or user of any
vehicle, who requires or permits the driver or operator to operate or
drive any truck, truck tractor, or trailer in violation of this chapter, the
Act or a rule promulgated under the Act, is guilty of a misdemeanor for
each violation.
B. A peace officer or an officer of the motor carrier division of the
Department of State Police, upon reasonable cause to believe that a
motor vehicle is being operated in violation of this chapter, the Act or a
rule promulgated pursuant to the Act, may stop the motor vehicle and
inspect the motor vehicle. If a violation is found, the officer may issue a
notice to appear for that violation.
C. In addition to any penalty imposed under this chapter, the Act or rules
promulgated pursuant to the Act, a third or subsequent violation within
one year of the rules promulgated pursuant to the Act with respect to
hours of service and recording those hours in a daily log may result in
an audit of the driver of the vehicle by the motor carrier division of the
Department of State Police.
§ 157-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-7
1:324
§ 157-8. Commission of serious safety defects; penalty.
§ 157-9. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter are intended to be enforced, pursuant to
authority of statute being MCL § 480.18 et seq., as a violation occurring in
the Township of Grosse Ile, where the motor vehicle driver or operator was
present within the Township limits when the offense was committed.
§ 157-10. Penalty.
Except as otherwise mandated by the rules and regulations promulgated by
the Michigan State Police pursuant to the Administrative Code, a violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall be penalized by a fine sufficient to
deter further or future violation, but not to exceed the sum of $500 for each
separate offense and a jail sentence not to exceed 90 days, or a combination
thereof.
D. This chapter does not apply to a unit of government or its employees,
officers, or representatives or to a motor vehicle, truck, truck tractor, or
trailer owned or operated thereby, except as provided in § 601a of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being
§ 257.601a of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
A. A driver or operator or an owner or user of any truck, truck tractor, or
trailer, or any officer or agent of an individual, partnership, corporation,
or association or their lessees or receivers appointed by any court that
is the owner or user of any vehicle, who requires or permits the driver
or operator to commit a serious safety defect is subject to a fine of not
more than $300 for each violation.
B. As used in this section, "serious safety defect" means a violation of this
chapter, the Act, or a rule promulgated pursuant to the Act relative to
brakes, tires, steering, coupling devices, headlights, tail lights, brake
lights, and turn signals that result in the vehicle being placed out of
service.
§ 157-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-10
1:325

ARTICLE II
Motor Carrier Requirements
§ 157-11. General size, weight and load requirements.
§ 157-12. Maximum width of vehicles; exceptions.
A. Unless specifically declared to be a civil infraction, it is a misdemeanor
for a person to drive, operate or move or for the owner to cause or
permit to be driven, operated or moved on a highway a vehicle or
vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the limitations stated in this
chapter or otherwise in violation of this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter governing size, weight, and load shall not
apply to a fire apparatus, or to an implement of husbandry incidentally
moved upon a highway, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a
special permit issued as provided in this chapter.
C. The State Transportation Department, pursuant to Act No. 306 of the
Public Acts of 1969, as amended, has promulgated rules permitting and
regulating the operation of a vehicle or vehicles of a size or weight
which exceeds the size or weight limitations in this chapter. The rules
may restrict or proscribe the conditions of operation of a vehicle or
vehicles of a size or weight which exceeds the size or weight limitations
in this chapter, if the restriction or proscription is necessary to protect
the public safety or to prevent undue damage to a road foundation or
surface, a structure, or an installation. The rules may provide for a
reasonable inspection fee for an inspection of a vehicle or vehicles to
determine whether their sizes and weights are in conformance with Act
No. 306 of Public Acts of 1969, and may require other security
necessary to compensate for damage caused by the vehicle or vehicles
described in this subsection. Those rules are hereby adopted and are
incorporated herein by reference.
A. The total outside width of a vehicle or the load on a vehicle shall not
exceed 96 inches, except as otherwise provided in this section.
B. A person may operate or move an implement of husbandry of any width
on a highway as required for normal farming operations without
obtaining a special permit for an excessively wide vehicle or load under
§ 157-22. The operation or movement of the implement of husbandry
shall be in a manner so as to minimize the interruption of traffic flow. A
person shall not operate or move an implement of husbandry to the left
of the center of the roadway from 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hour
before sunrise, under the conditions specified in § 157-22, or at any
time visibility is substantially diminished due to weather conditions. A
person operating or moving an implement of husbandry shall follow all
traffic regulations.
§ 157-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-12
1:327
§ 157-13. Passenger-type vehicles; projected load.
§ 157-14. Vehicle height and length; combinations; bumpers and
axles.
C. The total outside width of the load of a vehicle hauling concrete pipe,
agricultural products, or unprocessed logs, pulpwood, or wood bolts
shall not exceed 108 inches.
D. Except as provided in Subsection B, if a vehicle which is equipped with
pneumatic tires is operated on a highway, the maximum width from the
outside of one wheel and tire to the outside of the opposite wheel and
tire shall not exceed 102 inches, and the outside width of the body of
the vehicle or the load on the vehicle shall not exceed 96 inches.
E. The total outside width of a bus shall not exceed 102 inches.
F. A vehicle shall not extend beyond the center line of a state trunk line
highway except when authorized by law. Except as provided in
Subsection B, if the width of the vehicle makes it impossible to stay
away from the center line, a permit shall be obtained under § 157-22.
G. The Director of the State Transportation Department, a county road
commission, or the Township may designate a highway under the
agency's jurisdiction as a highway on which a person may operate a
vehicle or vehicle combination which is not more than 102 inches in
width, including load, the operation of which would otherwise be
prohibited by this section. The agency making the designation may
require that the owner or lessee of the vehicle or of each vehicle in the
vehicle combination secure a permit before operating the vehicle or
vehicle combination. This section does not restrict the issuance of a
special permit under § 157-22.
H. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
The owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section.
A. A passenger type vehicle shall not be operated on a highway with a load
carried on the vehicle extending beyond the line of the fenders on the
left side of the vehicle nor extending more than six inches beyond the
line of the fenders on the right side of the vehicle.
B. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
A. Height; collision with bridge or viaduct, liability for damages. Except as
provided in Subsection B, a vehicle unloaded or with load shall not
exceed a height of 13 feet six inches. The owner of a vehicle which
collides with a lawfully established bridge or viaduct shall be liable for
all damage and injury resulting from a collision caused by the height of
the vehicle, whether the clearance of the bridge or viaduct is posted or
not.
§ 157-12 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-14
1:328
B. Height of vehicle transporting flammable liquids. A truck, truck tractor,
semitrailer, or trailer manufactured on or after July 27, 1978, shall not
be used to transport flammable liquids, in bulk, having a flashpoint at or
below 70° F., if the truck, truck tractor, semitrailer, or trailer exceeds 11
feet 8 1/2 inches in height. However, safety equipment and those
appurtenances which are required by state law or Township ordinance,
when added to a vehicle, may cause the vehicle height to exceed 11 feet
8 1/2 inches, but shall not cause the vehicle height to exceed 13 feet six
inches. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
C. Length of combinations; exceptions. A vehicle, except a truck tractor,
trailer, or semitrailer, including load, or articulated buses operated by a
local public transit system funded by Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of
1951, being §§ 247.651 to 247.675 of the Michigan Compiled Laws,
shall not exceed a total length of 40 feet. The total length of a
semitrailer operating in a truck tractor and semitrailer combination
shall not exceed 53 feet, including load. All semitrailers longer than 50
feet shall have a wheelbase of 40.5 feet plus or minus 0.5 feet,
measured from the kingpin coupling to the center of the rear axles or to
the center of the tandem axle assembly if equipped with two axles.
Articulated buses operated by a local public transit system funded by
Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951 may operate with a maximum
length of 65 feet. A combination of truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer,
or truck and semitrailer or trailer, or a combination of truck tractor and
two semitrailers, including load, shall not exceed a total overall length
of 59 feet except as provided for on routes designated and approved by
the State Transportation Department and by local authorities with
respect to highways under their jurisdiction on which a person may
operate a combination of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer or a
truck tractor and two semitrailers with no limit on the overall
combination length, if the length of each semitrailer or trailer including
load does not exceed 28 1/2 feet or the overall length of the semitrailer
and trailer or two semitrailers as measured from the front of the first
towed unit to the rear of the second towed unit while the units are
coupled together does not exceed an overall length of 58 feet, including
load. The State Transportation Department, county and the Township
with respect to highways under their jurisdiction may designate
highways where the overall length of a truck and trailer or semitrailer
shall not exceed 65 feet. A truck tractor and semitrailer combination
with a semitrailer length longer than 50 feet shall not be allowed to
operate with more than two axles on the semitrailer. All truck tractor
and semitrailer combinations with a semitrailer length longer than 50
feet shall travel exclusively on highways designated by the appropriate
road authority. Township authorities shall have the option of prohibiting
stops within their jurisdictions unless the stop occurs along appropriate
designated routes, or is necessary for emergency purposes or to reach
shippers, receivers, warehouses, and terminals along designated
routes. A truck tractor shall not haul more than one trailer and one
semitrailer or more than two semitrailers in combination at any one
§ 157-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-14
1:329
time, except that a farm tractor may haul two wagons or trailers or
garbage and refuse haulers may, during daylight hours, haul up to
four trailers for garbage and refuse collection purposes, not exceeding
in any combination a total length of 55 feet at a speed of not to
exceed 15 miles per hour. In determining the length of a vehicle or
a vehicle combination under this subsection, the length shall not be
considered to include safety and energy conservation devices including,
but not limited to, impact absorbing bumpers, rear view mirrors, turn
signals, lamps, marker lamps, steps and hand holds for entry and
egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, or splash and spray
suppressant devices; load induced tire bulge; refrigeration or heating
units; or air compressors. A device shall be excluded from a
determination of length only if it is not designed or used for the
carrying of cargo. Semitrailers and trailers shall be measured from
the front vertical plane of the foremost transverse load supporting
structure to the rearmost transverse load supporting structure.
D. Combination of two semitrailers; fifth wheel. If a combination of two
semitrailers is pulled by a truck tractor, a fifth wheel connecting
assembly which conforms with motor carrier safety rules promulgated
by the Department of State Police pursuant to the Motor Carrier Safety
Act of 1963, Act No. 181 of the Public Acts of 1963, as amended, being
§§ 480.11 to 480.21 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, shall be used on
each semitrailer.
E. Vehicle not to carry load extending more than three feet beyond front. A
train of vehicles or a vehicle operated alone shall not carry a load
extending more than three feet beyond the front of the train of vehicles
or vehicle.
F. Rear bumpers on certain vehicles; underride guards. A motor vehicle,
trailer, or semitrailer whose frame or body extends more than 36 inches
beyond the rear of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches above the
highway shall not be operated on the highways of this Township unless
equipped with a fender or bumper on the extreme rear of the frame or
body to within 30 inches of the roadway and be of substantial
construction. In addition to the requirements of Subsection G, no
vehicle which is required by federal law to have an underride guard of
not more than 22 inches above the roadway shall be operated upon the
highways of this Township without such an underride guard.
G. Semitrailer length exceeding 50 feet; underride guard. A truck tractor
and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length longer than 50
feet whose frame or body extends more than 36 inches beyond the rear
of its rear axle and is more than 30 inches above the highway shall not
be operated on the highways of this Township unless equipped with an
underride guard on the extreme rear of the frame or body. The
underride guard shall meet all of the following requirements:
§ 157-14 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-14
1:330
(1) Provide a continuous horizontal beam having a maximum ground
clearance of 22 inches, as measured with the vehicle empty and on
level ground.
(2) Extend to within four inches of the lateral extremities of the trailer
on both left and right sides.
H. Semitrailer length exceeding 50 feet; lamps and reflectors. A truck
tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length longer
than 50 feet shall not be operated on the highways of this Township at
the times specified in § 157-12B unless equipped with all of the
following lamps and reflectors, in addition to any other lamps and
reflectors required under this chapter:
(1) Two side marker lamps which display an amber light, one on each
side of the semitrailer, located at 1/2 the distance from the front to
the rear of the semitrailer.
(2) Two reflectors which reflect an amber light, one on each side of the
semitrailer, located at 1/2 the distance from the front to the rear of
the semitrailer.
(3) Two clearance lamps, one on each side of the semitrailer, located at
1/2 the distance from the front to the rear and as near to the top of
the semitrailer as practicable.
I. Visibility of lamps and reflectors. A lamp required under Subsection H
shall be lighted at the times specified in P.A. 1949, No. 300, as
amended, which is incorporated herein by reference, and shall be
visible when lighted at a distance of 500 feet from the side of the
semitrailer on which it is mounted. A reflector required under
Subsection H shall be visible at the times specified in P.A. 1949, No.
300, as amended, from all distances from 50 feet to 500 feet from the
semitrailer when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps.
J. Combination transporting assembled motor vehicles. Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this section, a person may operate a
combination of truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer, or truck tractor
and semitrailer or trailer designed and used exclusively to transport
assembled motor vehicles or bodies, recreational vehicles, or boats,
which does not exceed a total length of 65 feet. Stinger-steered
combinations of truck tractor and semitrailer shall not exceed a total
length of 75 feet. The load on the combination of vehicles may extend
an additional three feet beyond the front and four feet beyond the rear
of the combination of vehicles. Retractable extensions used to support
and secure the load that do not extend beyond the allowable overhang
for the front and rear shall not be included in determining the length of
a loaded vehicle or combination of vehicles. As used in this subsection,
"stinger-steered" means a semitrailer combination in which the fifth
wheel is located on a drop frame located behind and below the rearmost
axle of the power unit.
§ 157-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-14
1:331
§ 157-15. Transportation of mobile homes.
K. Combination of vehicles not to have in excess of 11 axles. A combination
of vehicles shall not have more than 11 axles.
L. Transportation of wholly or partially assembled motor vehicles.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a number of motor
vehicles, wholly or partially assembled, may be transported over the
highways of this Township in combination, utilizing one tow bar or three
saddle mounts with full mount mechanisms and utilizing the motive
power of one of the vehicles in combination. Its combination shall not
exceed the maximum length of 65 feet for the transportation of
assembled motor vehicles, and the vehicles in the combination shall be
adequately and securely fastened together in compliance with
regulations of the state and of any federal agency having jurisdiction
over the transportation. If motor vehicles are towed by means of triple
saddle mounts, the towed vehicles shall have brakes acting on all
wheels which are in contact with the roadway. A combination exceeding
55 feet in length may be operated only on highways and routes
approved and designated for that operation by the State Transportation
Department, county and by Township authorities with respect to
highways under their jurisdiction.
M. Transportation of saw logs, pulpwood, and tree length poles.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a person may
operate a truck and semitrailer or trailer designed and used to
transport saw logs, pulpwood, and tree length poles that does not
exceed an overall length of 70 feet including load. These combinations
of vehicles shall only be operated upon highways designated by the
State Transportation Department, County of Wayne or Township
authorities with respect to highways under their jurisdiction.
N. Total gross weights, vehicles or combinations exceeding 59 feet. The
total gross weights of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer
combination or a truck tractor and two semitrailers combination which
exceed 59 feet in length shall not exceed a ratio of 400 pounds per
engine net horsepower delivered to clutch or its equivalent specified in
the SAE handbook published by the Society of Automotive Engineers,
Inc. (1971), which terms are incorporated herein by reference.
O. Violations. Except as provided in Subsection B, a person who violates
this section is responsible for a civil infraction. The owner of the vehicle
may be charged with a violation of this section.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a person shall not
operate a towing vehicle, having attached a mobile home having a body
length in excess of 45 feet and having a combined length of over 60
feet, a realistic body width of over 100 inches at base rail, and a height
of over 12 1/2 feet on the highways located in Grosse Ile Township.
However, the Township may issue permits to mobile home transport
companies or to mobile home manufacturers or dealers, for the
§ 157-14 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-15
1:332
§ 157-16. Security of load; spilling on highway prohibited.
movement, in the ordinary course of their business, of mobile homes
to width of 14 1/3 feet plus normal appurtenances not to exceed six
inches; of mobile homes to a realistic body length of 80 feet and having
a combined length of 95 feet; of combinations of prebuilt housing
modules or mobile homes to a width of 14 1/3 feet, plus an eave not to
exceed two feet in width over all highways. A prebuilt housing module
or mobile home whose width including an eave of two feet exceed 14
feet shall be moved only on the lane furthest to the right of the operator
of the vehicle moving the module or mobile home and shall be moved
in a manner so that the eave portion of the module or mobile home
shall overhang on the shoulder of the highway on which the module
or mobile home is moved. The permit shall provide the days and the
times of day, but not on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, or the 12:00 noon
before until the 12:00 noon after a holiday, during which the movement
shall take place. The permit shall be issued only upon condition that
the permittee comply with permit requirements and limitations of law,
to insure the operation of a mobile home under permit in a manner
which will not impede traffic on the highways and with safety in the
movement of a mobile home, and only at a safe speed and when the
pavement is not slippery. A mobile home that is 14 or more feet in
width shall not be moved when the wind velocity exceed 25 miles per
hour. On units exceeding 80 feet in overall combination length, or 12
feet in overall width, the permit shall provide that the mobile hone be
equipped with two flashing amber lights on the rear of the mobile home
and one flashing amber light on the top of the towing vehicle. Signs
with the words "oversize load" shall be displayed on the front bumper of
the towing vehicle and the back of the mobile home. The signs shall be
of durable material, in good condition, with black lettering on interstate
yellow background. Each letter shall be of block lettering not less than
12 inches high at the front and not less than 16 inches high at the rear
of the unit. A vehicle escort shall be required on those roads where
the Township police consider escort vehicles necessary for highway
safety. The distance between mobile home axle centers shall not be less
than 34 inches. The axles and tires shall meet standards established
by the State Transportation Department. This section shall not grant
or give authority to the Township that did not exist on May 1, 1982, in
accordance with Section 1 of Public Law 85-767, 23 U.S.C. § 127.
B. As used in this section, "mobile home" means a prebuilt housing module
or a home which is designed to be transported by a motor vehicle upon
a public highway and designed, equipped, and used for sleeping, eating,
and living quarters, or is intended to be used for these purposes.
C. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
The owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section.
A. A person shall not drive or move a vehicle, except a vehicle carrying
logs or tubular products, on a highway unless the vehicle is so
§ 157-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-16
1:333
constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, shifting,
leaking, blowing off, or otherwise escaping from the vehicle. This
requirement does not apply to a vehicle transporting agricultural or
horticultural products when hay, straw, silage, or residue from a
product, but not including the product itself, or when materials such
as water used to preserve and handle agricultural or horticultural
products while in transportation, escape from the vehicle in an amount
that does not interfere with other traffic on the highway. The tailgate,
faucets, and taps on a vehicle shall be securely closed to prevent
spillage during transportation whether the vehicle is loaded or empty,
and the vehicle shall not have any holes or cracks through which
material can escape. Any highway maintenance vehicle engaged in
either ice or snow removal shall be exempt from this section.
B. Actual spillage of material on the highway or proof of that spillage is not
necessary to prove a violation of this section.
C. A vehicle carrying a load, other than logs or tubular products, which is
not completely enclosed shall meet either of the following
requirements:
(1) Have the load covered with firmly secured canvas or a similar type
of covering. A device used to comply with the requirement of this
subsection shall not exceed a width of the 108 inches nor by design
or use have the capability to carry cargo by itself.
(2) Have the load securely fastened to the body or the frame of the
vehicle with binders of adequate number and of adequate breaking
strength to prevent the dropping off or shifting of the load.
D. A company or individual who loads or unloads a vehicle or causes it to
be loaded or unloaded, with knowledge that it is to be driven on a public
highway, in a manner so as to cause a violation of Subsection A shall be
prima facie liable for a violation of this section.
E. A person shall not operate a motor vehicle carrying logs or tubular
products on a highway unless the following conditions are met:
(1) If the logs or tubular products are loaded crosswise or at right
angles to the side of the vehicle, the load of logs or tubular
products shall be securely fastened to the body or frame of the
vehicle with not less than two binders which are secured to the
frame and binders completely encircle the load.
(2) If the vehicle is a truck or trailer carrying logs which has a loading
surface more than 33 feet in length and the logs are loaded
crosswise or at right angles to the side of the vehicle, the vehicle
shall be equipped with a center partition located approximately 1/2
the distance from the front to the rear of the loading surface of the
truck or trailer. The center partition shall be either a center
mounted hydraulic loader or a center set of stakes and shall be
pinned, bolted, or otherwise securely fastened to the frame. The
§ 157-16 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-16
1:334
load shall be secured as required by Subsection E(1) and, in
addition, the two lengthwise tie downs shall be attached or
threaded through the center partition at a level not less than one
foot below the load height.
(3) If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the vehicle,
obliquely or parallel to the sides, with metal stakes and pockets, the
load of logs or tubular products shall be secured as follows:
(a) With two tie downs from frame to frame for every tier.
(b) So that not more than 1/2 the diameter of the top log or tubular
product extends higher than the stake tops.
(c) With two cross chains per tier if the load extends more than
five feet above the loading surface.
(d) So that every 10 linear feet, and any remaining fraction
thereof, has not less than one tie down from frame to frame.
(4) If the logs or tubular products are loaded lengthwise of the vehicle,
obliquely or parallel to the sides, with permanent metal gusseted
bunks, the load of logs or tubular products shall be secured by
follows:
(a) With two tie downs from frame to frame every tier.
(b) So that not more than 1/2 the diameter of the top log extends
higher than the stake tops.
(c) So that every 10 linear feet, and any remaining fraction
thereof, has not less than one tie down from frame to frame.
(5) The tie downs, cross chains, stakes, and other materials used to
secure loads of logs or tubular products as required under
Subsection E(1) to (4) shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
(a) Chain shall be of steel and shall be of a strength not less than
5/16 inch in diameter "transport," which is embossed with a
grade stamp representative of grade 70, or not less than 3/8
inch in diameter "high test," which is embossed with a grade
stamp representative of grade 40. Chain shall not be repaired
by welding, wire, or cold shuts.
(b) Wire rope shall be of improved plow steel and not less than 3/8
inch in diameter.
(c) Webbing strap shall be not less than three inches in width and
shall have a minimum breaking strength of 14,000 pounds.
(d) Metal stakes shall be of sufficient strength to hold and contain
the load.
§ 157-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-16
1:335
§ 157-17. Trailers towed by passenger vehicle.
(e) Connecting links and hooks shall be at least as strong as the tie
down material used.
F. Subsection C shall not apply to a person operating a vehicle to
transport agricultural commodities in the normal operation of a farm.
However, a person operating a vehicle to transport agricultural
commodities in the normal operation of the farm who violates
Subsection A or D is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in Subsection I.
G. Subsection C(1) shall not apply to a motor vehicle transporting items of
a load which because of their weight will not fall off the moving vehicle
and which have their centers of gravity located at least six inches below
the top of the enclosure nor to a motor vehicle carrying metal which
because of its weight and density is so loaded as to prevent it from
dropping or falling off the moving vehicle.
H. Subsection C(1) shall not apply to motor vehicles and other equipment
engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street in a designated
work area.
I. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days, or both.
J. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CROSS CHAIN — A chain which extends through the load of logs or
tubular products and is connected at each end to a side stake.
LOGS — Sawlogs, pulpwood, or tree length poles.
TIE DOWN — A high-strength material which is used to secure the load
of logs or tubular products to the frame or the bed of the vehicle.
TIER — A vertical pile or stack of logs or tubular products.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection E, a passenger vehicle or a
pickup truck shall not be driven upon a highway drawing or having
attached to the passenger vehicle or pickup truck more than one
vehicle or trailer.
B. The drawbar or other connection between two vehicles, one of which is
towing or drawing the other on a highway, shall not exceed 15 feet in
length from one vehicle to the other. If the connection consists of a
chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon the connection a red
flag or other signal or cloth not less than 12 inches both in length and
width.
C. A vehicle or trailer towed or drawn by a vehicle shall be attached to the
vehicle with forms of coupling devices in a manner so that when the
§ 157-16 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-17
1:336
§ 157-18. Wheel and axle loads.
combination is operated in a linear alignment on a level, smooth, paved
surface, the movement of the towed or drawn vehicle or trailer does
not deviate more than three inches to either side of the path of the
towing vehicle that tows or draws it. The vehicle or trailer shall also be
connected to the towing vehicle, by suitable safety chains or devices,
one on each side of the coupling and at the extreme outer edge of the
vehicle or trailer and each chain or device and connection used shall be
of sufficient strength to haul the vehicle or trailer when loaded.
D. A pickup truck with a fifth wheel assembly shall not tow a semitrailer
unless the fifth wheel assembly conforms to motor carrier safety rule
§ 460.16442 of the Michigan Administrative Code which terms are
incorporated herein by reference.
E. Notwithstanding Subsection A, a pickup truck with a towing rating
equal to, or greater than, the weight being towed, equipped with a fifth
wheel assembly which conforms with motor carrier safety rules
promulgated by the Department of State Police pursuant to the Motor
Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Act No. 181 of the Public Acts of 1963, being
§§ 480.11 to 480.21 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, which terms are
incorporated in this chapter, towing attached with a semitrailer
designed for recreational living purposes may tow an additional trailer
or semitrailer under the following conditions:
(1) The additional trailer or semitrailer shall be attached pursuant to
Subsection C. The safety chains described in Subsection C shall be
securely attached at the extreme outer edge of the attached trailer
or semitrailer with a locking mechanism. The towing vehicle hitch
shall be of substantial material and shall be attached in a proper
and skillful manner to the frame of the towing vehicle.
(2) The total length of the pickup truck, semitrailer designed for
recreational living purposes, and additional trailer or semitrailer
shall not exceed 59 feet.
(3) The gross weight of the additional trailer or semitrailer towed or
drawn shall not exceed the empty weight of the pickup truck or the
empty weight of the semitrailer.
F. For the purposes of this section, a pickup truck towing a semitrailer and
additional trailer shall be considered a passenger vehicle and shall
comply with the speed limit requirements of § 627(5), P.A. 1949, No.
300, as amended, which terms are incorporated herein by reference.
G. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
A. The maximum axle load shall not exceed the number of pounds
designated in the following provisions which prescribe the distance
between axles:
§ 157-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-18
1:337
(1) When the axle spacing is nine feet or more between axles, the
maximum axle load shall not exceed 18,000 pounds for vehicles
equipped with high-pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
(2) When the axle spacing is less than nine feet between two axles but
more than 3 1/2 feet, the maximum axle load shall not exceed
13,000 pounds for high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
(3) When axles are spaced less than 3 1/2 feet apart, the maximum axle
load shall not exceed 9,000 pounds per axle.
(4) Subsection A(1), (2) and (3) shall be known as the normal loading
maximum.
B. When normal loading is in effect, the State Transportation Department,
County of Wayne and Township with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction may designate certain highways, or sections of those
highways, where bridges and road surfaces are adequate for heavier
loading, which designation may be revised as needed, on which the
maximum tandem axle assembly loading shall not exceed 16,000
pounds for any axle of the assembly, if there is no other axle within nine
feet of any axle of the assembly.
C. On a legal combination of vehicles, only one tandem axle assembly shall
be permitted on the designated highways at the gross permissible
weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if there is no other axle within nine
feet of any axle of the assembly, and if no other tandem axle assembly in
the combination of vehicles exceeds a gross weight of 13,000 pounds
per axle. When the maximum gross weight of a combination of vehicles
with load does not exceed 73,280 pounds, two tandem axle assemblies
shall be permitted on the designated highways at a gross permissible
weight of 16,000 pounds per axle, if there is no other axle within nine
feet of any axle of the assembly.
D. The normal size of tires shall be the rated size as published by the
manufacturers, and the maximum wheel load permissible for any wheel
shall not exceed 700 pounds per inch of width of tire.
E. During the months of March, April and May in each year, the maximum
axle load allowable on concrete pavement, or pavements with a
concrete base, shall be reduced by 25% from the maximum axle load as
specified in this chapter, and the maximum axle loads allowable on all
other types of roads during these months shall be reduced by 35% from
the maximum axle loads as specified. The maximum wheel load shall
not exceed 525 pounds per inch of tire width on all other roads during
the period the seasonal road restrictions are in effect.
F. The State Transportation Department, County of Wayne or Township
with respect to highways under its jurisdictions, may suspend the
restrictions imposed by this section when and where, in its discretion,
conditions of the highways or the public health, safety, and welfare so
warrant, and may impose the restricted loading requirements of this
§ 157-18 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-18
1:338
section on designated highways at any other time that the conditions of
the highway may require.
G. For the purpose of enforcement of this Act, the gross vehicle weight of a
single vehicle and load or a combination of vehicles and loads, shall be
determined by weighing individual axles or groups of axles, and the
total weight on all the axles shall be the gross vehicle weight. In
addition, the gross axle weight shall be determined by weighing
individual axles or by weighing a group of axles and dividing the gross
weight of the group of axles by the number of axles in the group. The
overall gross weight on a group of two or more axles shall be
determined by weighing individual axles or several axles, and the total
weight of all the axles in the group shall be the overall gross weight of
the group.
H. Grosse Ile Airport Commerce Park road weight limits. All vehicles shall
be subject to the following weight limits for the roads located within the
Grosse Ile Airport Commerce Park:43 [Added 6-8-2009 by Ord. No.
09-02]
Road Limits
Year Round Weight
Limit
(pounds per axle)
East Drive 13,000
Fourth 13,000
Hornet 13,000
Intrepid Meridian, West to
Yorktown
Single axle: 18,000
Tandem axle: 16,000
Kitty Hawk Intrepid North 13,000
Kitty Hawk Intrepid South Single axle: 18,000
Tandem axle: 16,000
Liberty Ranger to Lexington 13,000
Liberty Ranger to Truck wells
61/62
Single axle: 18,000
Tandem axle: 16,000
Midway 13,000
Ranger Single axle: 18,000
Tandem axle: 16,000
Saratoga Kitty Hawk to Ranger Single axle: 18,000
Tandem axle: 16,000
43.Editor's Note: A map depicting year-round weight limits at the Grosse Ile Airport
Commerce Park is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-18
1:339
§ 157-19. Transportation of flammable liquids.
Road Limits
Year Round Weight
Limit
(pounds per axle)
Saratoga Meridian Road to Kitty
Hawk
13,000
Saratoga Ranger to Lexington 13,000
Yorktown 13,000
(1) Notice to be posted. Notice of these weight limits shall be posted at
the entrances of all restricted roads. Such signage shall be legible,
posted in a conspicuous location, and be of weather-resistant
materials. Any Grosse Ile Airport Commerce Park road subject to a
weight limit may be posted at any time of the year that the
Township Board and/or the Airport/Commerce Park Manager
deems necessary.
(2) Additional roads. The Township Board reserves the right to add
roads temporarily to those listed above or to amend the stated
weight limits without amendment to this subsection when it is
deemed necessary to do so to prevent unreasonable damage or
extraordinary municipal maintenance expense. Such temporary
changes shall be effective for 30 days.
(3) Exemptions. The Township Board reserves the right to grant
exemptions from the above weight limits for limited times and
purposes upon specific application. Any person seeking such an
exemption shall apply to the Township Board or the Airfield/
Commerce Park Manager upon such form as the Township Board or
the Airfield/Commerce Park Manager prescribes, and such permit
may be issued if, in the opinion of the Township Board or the
Airfield/Commerce Park Manager, the issuance of the permit will
not be detrimental to the preservation of the Town roads nor
detrimental to public safety. In issuing such permit, the Township
Board or the Airfield/Commerce Park Manager may attach such
conditions as it or he/she deems to be in the best interests of the
public, including, but not limited to, the establishment of bonding
and restoration requirements.
(4) Exemptions for certain vehicles. In addition to the exemption
provisions stated above, the Township Board may exempt some or
all of the following categories of vehicles from the operation of this
subsection: Township vehicles, Fire Department vehicles,
emergency vehicles while going to and from the scene of an
emergency, commercial solid waste disposal vehicles, oil or gas
delivery vehicles, postal vehicles, and school buses.
§ 157-18 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-19
1:340
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck tractor
pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination or a truck tractor pulling
two semitrailers shall not transport, except between the hours of 12:00
midnight to 6:00 a.m. on routes and at times designated by the State
Fire Safety Board, a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flashpoint at
or below 70° F. In addition, a truck, a truck pulling trailer, or a truck
tractor pulling a semitrailer shall not transport, except between the
hours of 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. on routes and at times designated
by the State Fire Safety Board, a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a
flashpoint at or below 70° F., in a quantity of more than 9,000 gallons.
The exceptions provided by this subsection for transport on routes
designated by the State Fire Safety Board shall be construed to permit
that transport only for the purpose of picking up or delivering a
flammable liquid at a supply depot.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck, truck
pulling a trailer, truck tractor pulling a semitrailer, a truck tractor
pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination, or a truck tractor pulling
two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which
has a flashpoint at or below 70° F. within this Township, unless the
truck, truck and trailer combination, truck tractor, semitrailer, and
trailer combination, or truck tractor and two semitrailer combinations
meet safety standards as determined by the State Fire Safety Board.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck pulling a
trailer, a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination, or a
truck tractor pulling two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable
liquid, in bulk, which has a flashpoint at or below 70° F. within this
Township.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section other than
Subsections C and E, a truck with a water capacity of more than 9,500
gallons, a truck tractor pulling a trailer, a truck tractor pulling a
semitrailer and trailer combination, or a truck tractor pulling two
semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a
flashpoint at or below 70° F. in this Township, unless the existing
manhole or inspection ports of each truck, semitrailer, or trailer in the
vehicle combination has been equipped with devices which are capable
of withstanding the forces caused by an internal pressure of 50 pounds
per square inch, applied and held at least 50 milliseconds, and then
released to two pounds per square inch, without having any residual
venting of flammable liquid during the subsequent two pounds per
square inch condition.
E. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck or a truck
tractor pulling a semitrailer, a semitrailer and trailer combination, or
two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, which
has a flashpoint at or below 70° F. in this Township, if the truck or
semitrailer, a semitrailer and trailer combination, or two semitrailers
are manufactured after July 1, 1982, or was manufactured before July 1,
1982, but was not a vehicle registered in this state by the secretary of
§ 157-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-19
1:341
§ 157-20. Information to be on certain trucks and vehicles;
removable devices.
state at any time between January 1, 1985, and October 1, 1985, unless
the truck or the semitrailer, a semitrailer and trailer combination, or
two semitrailers have a water capacity of less than 13,800 gallons.
F. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck or truck
tractor pulling a semitrailer shall not transport a flammable liquid, in
bulk, which has a flashpoint at or below 70° F. in a quantity of more than
13,400 gallons.
G. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a truck or truck
tractor pulling a trailer or semitrailer, a semitrailer or trailer
combination, or two semitrailers shall not transport a flammable liquid,
in bulk, which has a flashpoint at or below 70° F. in a quantity of more
than 13,400 gallons unless the owner of the truck or truck tractor
pulling the trailer or semitrailer, combination semitrailer or trailer, or
two semitrailers files with the Department of State Police a notarized
statement that the truck or truck tractor pulling the trailer or
semitrailer, semitrailer or trailer combination, or two semitrailers did
transport a flammable liquid, in bulk, having a flashpoint at or below
70° F., at any time between March 1, 1985, and October 1, 1985.
Attached to the notarized statement shall be one of the following:
(1) A copy of the bill of lading containing the date the flammable liquid
was transported and the permanent identification number of the
trailer or semitrailer in which the flammable liquid was
transported.
(2) A copy of the daily log prepared by the driver of the vehicle
transporting the flammable liquid which contains the date the
flammable liquid was transported and the permanent identification
number of the trailer or semitrailer in which the flammable liquid
was transported.
H. The owner or driver of a vehicle which transports a flammable liquid in
violation of Subsection A, B, C, D, E, F, or G is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $3,000, or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days, or both.
I. This section shall be enforced only by a police officer.
A. All motor trucks or truck tractors of more than 5,000 pounds registered
weight and all towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles in
operation upon the highways of this Township shall have the name, city,
and state or the registered logo or emblem of the registered owner of
the vehicle, and lessee of the vehicle if the vehicle is being operated
under lease, painted or permanently attached on each side of the cab on
a motor truck or truck tractor in letters of not less than three inches in
height, not lower than the bottom edge of the door, except that motor
§ 157-19 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-20
1:342
§ 157-21. Stopping vehicles for weighing.
trucks with closed van bodies may place the information on each side
of the van body not lower than the bottom edge of the cab door. This
information shall be in sharp color contrast to the background.
B. Except for towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles, the
identification requirements of Subsection A may be met through the use
of removable devices which meet the requirements of Subsection A.
These devices shall be of durable construction and securely attached to
each side of the motor truck or truck tractor. The removable devices
shall be attached so that the identification is in a horizontal position.
C. This section shall not apply to trucks eligible for and equipped with
farm license plates.
D. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
A. Submission to a weighing. A police officer or a duly authorized agent of
the State Transportation Department or a county road commission
having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is
unlawful may require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the
vehicle by either portable or stationary scales approved and sealed by
the Department of Agriculture or other state agency or department as
required by law, and may require that the vehicle be driven to the
nearest weighing station of the Township, county, or other city which is
providing facilities to the Township to enforce this chapter for the
purpose of allowing an officer or agent of the State Transportation
Department or county road commission to determine whether the
conveyance is loaded in conformity with this chapter.
B. Overweight vehicle, unloading; bond; impounding. When the officer or
agent, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that the weight is
unlawful, the officer or agent may require the driver to stop the vehicle
in a suitable place and remain standing until that portion of the load is
shifted or removed as necessary to reduce the gross axle load weight of
the vehicle to the limit permitted under this chapter. All material
unloaded as provided under this subsection shall be cared for by the
owner or operator of the vehicle at the risk of the owner or operator. A
judge or magistrate imposing a civil fine and costs under this section
which are not paid in full immediately or for which a bond is not
immediately posted in double the amount of the civil fine and costs shall
order the driver or owner to move the vehicle at the driver's own risk to
a place of safekeeping within the jurisdiction of the judge or magistrate,
inform the judge or magistrate in writing of the place of safekeeping,
and keep the vehicle there until the fine and costs are paid or sufficient
bond is furnished or until the judge or magistrate is satisfied that the
fine and costs will be paid. The officer or agent who has determined,
after weighing a vehicle and load, that the weight is unlawful, may
require the driver to proceed to a judge or magistrate within the county.
If the judge or magistrate is satisfied that the probable civil fine and
§ 157-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-21
1:343
costs will be paid by the owner or lessee, the judge or magistrate may
allow the driver to proceed, after the load is made legal. If the judge
or magistrate is not satisfied that the owner or lessee, after a notice
and a right to be heard on the merits is given, will pay the amount of
the probable civil fine and costs, the judge or magistrate may order the
vehicle to be impounded until trial on the merits is completed under
conditions set forth in this section for the impounding of vehicles after
the civil fine and costs have been imposed. Removal of the vehicle,
and forwarding, care, or preservation of the load shall be under the
control of and at the risk of the owner or lessee. Vehicles impounded
shall be subject to a lien, subject to a prior valid bona fide lien of
prior record, in the amount of the civil fine and costs and if the civil
fine and costs are not paid within 90 days after the seizure, the judge
or magistrate shall certify the unpaid judgment to the prosecuting
attorney of the Township, who shall proceed to enforce the lien by
foreclosure sale in accordance with procedure authorized in the case
of chattel mortgage foreclosures. When the duly authorized agent of
the State Transportation Department or county road commission or
Township is performing duties under this chapter, the agent shall have
all the powers conferred upon peace officers by the general laws of this
state.
C. Fines for excess weight; discretionary power. An owner of a vehicle or a
lessee of the vehicle of an owner-operator, or other person, who causes
or allows a vehicle to be loaded and driven or moved on a highway,
when the weight of that vehicle violates § 157-18, is responsible for a
civil infraction and shall pay a civil fine in an amount equal to $0.03 per
pound for each pound of excess load over 1,000 pounds when the
excess is 2,000 pounds or less; $0.06 per pound of excess load when the
excess is over 2,000 pounds but not over 3,000 pounds; $0.09 per
pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 3,000
pounds but not over 4,000 pounds; $0.12 per pound for each pound of
excess load when the excess is over 4,000 pounds but not over 5,000
pounds; $0.15 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess
is over 5,000 pounds but not over 10,000 pounds; and $0.20 per pound
for each pound of excess load when the excess is over 10,000 pounds.
However, the court shall have discretionary power as to the amount of
the civil fine for a civil infraction where, at the time of the violation,
either the motor vehicle, motor vehicle and semitrailer, or trailer did
not exceed the total weight which would be lawful for each unit by a
proper distribution of the load upon the various axles supporting each
unit.
D. Bypass of scales or weighing station. A driver or owner of a vehicle,
truck or truck tractor, truck or truck tractor with other vehicles in
combination, or special mobile equipment who knowingly fails to stop
at or who knowingly bypasses any scales or weighing station or fails to
comply with the police officers direction to stop is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 157-21 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-21
1:344
§ 157-22. Special permits for nonconforming vehicles and loads.
E. Marked vehicles of officers. A police officer, agent or authorized
representative of the State Transportation Department or a county road
commission shall not stop a truck or vehicle in movement upon a road
or highway within the Township for any purpose, unless the agent or
authorized representative is driving a duly marked vehicle, clearly
showing and denoting the branch of government represented.
F. Failure to stop on request of authorized person. A driver or owner of a
vehicle who knowingly fails to stop when requested or ordered to do so
by a police officer, or a duly authorized agent of the State
Transportation Department, or a representative or agent of a county
road commission, authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to
a weighing of the vehicle and load by means of a portable scale, is guilty
of a misdemeanor.
A. The State Transportation Department with respect to highways under
its jurisdiction and the county road commissions and the Township with
respect to highways under their jurisdiction, upon application in writing
and good cause being shown, may issue a special permit in writing
authorizing the applicant to operate or remove a vehicle or combination
of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in this chapter or otherwise not in conformity with this
chapter upon a highway under the jurisdiction of the authority granting
the permit and for the maintenance of which the authority is
responsible.
B. The application for a special permit shall be on a form prescribed by the
authority and shall specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and load
to be operated or moved and the particular highways upon which
permit to operate is requested.
C. The State Transportation Department with respect to highways under
its jurisdiction and the county road commissions and the Township with
respect to highways under their jurisdiction may issue special permits
authorizing the operation upon a highway of traction engines or
tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the
periphery of those movable tracks on farm tractors or other farm
machinery, the operation of which upon a highway would otherwise be
prohibited under this chapter.
D. A permit shall specify the trip or trips and date or dates for which it is to
be valid and the authority granting the permit may restrict or prescribe
conditions of operation of the vehicle or vehicles, if necessary, to
protect the safety of the public or to insure against undue damage to
the road foundations, surfaces, structures, or installations, and may
require a reasonable inspection fee and other security as may be
considered necessary to compensate for damages caused by the
movement. A permit may be issued on an annual basis.
§ 157-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-22
1:345
§ 157-23. Use of certain commercial vehicles on posted highways by
local authorities.
§ 157-24. Authority to enforce on boundary streets and highways.
A peace officer of the Township may exercise authority and powers outside
of the Township when he is enforcing this chapter on a street or highway
which is on the boundary of the Township the same as if he were in the
Township.
E. A person may transport telephone, telegraph, or electric poles of a
greater length than otherwise authorized over the highways in the
construction, maintenance, or repair of telephone, telegraph, or
electric lines, if a permit is first secured from the State Transportation
Department, the county road commission, or the Township having
jurisdiction of the highways.
F. A person may transport concrete pipe of a greater width than otherwise
authorized over highways, if a permit for each project is first secured
from the State Transportation Department, the county road
commission, or Township having jurisdiction of the highways.
G. A permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle or
combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by a police officer of the Township or authorized agent of an
authority granting the permit. A person shall not violate any of the
terms or conditions of the special permit.
H. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
A. Township authorities and county road commissions with respect to
highways under their jurisdiction, except state trunk line highways,
may do any of the following:
(1) Prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles on
designated highways or streets.
(2) Impose limitations as to the weight of trucks or other commercial
vehicles on designated highways or streets.
(3) Provide that only certain highways or streets may be used by trucks
or other commercial vehicles.
B. Any prohibitions, limitations, or truck route designations established
under Subsection A shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on
the highways or streets. The design and placement of the sign shall be
consistent with the requirements of Section 608, MCLA § 257.608,
which is incorporated herein by reference.
C. A person who violates a prohibition, limitation, or truck route
designation established pursuant to Subsection A is responsible for a
civil infraction.
§ 157-22 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-25
1:346
§ 157-25. Stopping vehicles for potential violations; temporary
detention; arrests.
Any police officer having reason to believe that the load, weight, or height
of a vehicle or load is in violation of sections of this chapter, which violation
is a misdemeanor, may require the driver of a vehicle to stop, and the
officer may investigate, weigh, or measure the vehicle or load. If, after
personally investigating, weighing, or measuring the vehicle or load, the
officer determines that the load, weight, or height of a vehicle or load are
in violation of the requirements of this chapter, the officer may temporarily
detain the driver of the vehicle for purposes of making a record or vehicle
check, may make an arrest for the violation, and may proceed as otherwise
provided in this chapter.
§ 157-26. Provisions corresponding to Vehicle Code.
The provisions of this article correspond with the provisions of MCL
§§ 257.716 through 257.726b, Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, P.A. 300 of
1949, as amended, and intended to be enforced pursuant to that authority,
as a violation occurring in the Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 157-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-26
1:347
Chapter 161
MOTOR VEHICLES, OPERATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 12.
Emergency technical rescue — See Ch. 94.
Minors — See Ch. 155.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 261.
§ 157-26 GROSSE ILE CODE § 157-26
1:348
ARTICLE I
Recovery of Costs for DUI Incidents
[Adopted 6-10-1996 by Ord. No. 226]
§ 161-1. Purpose.
The Township finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic
accidents in the Township involve drivers who were operating a motor
vehicle or vessel while under the influence of alcoholic beverages and/
or controlled substances. In addition, the Township finds that in traffic
accidents involving drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under
the influence of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances there
is greater likelihood of personal injury and burden is placed upon the
Township's police, fire and rescue services by persons who are operating a
motor vehicle while under the influence of or while impaired by alcoholic
beverages and/or controlled substances.
§ 161-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY RESPONSE —
EXPENSE OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The direct and reasonable
costs incurred by the Township of Grosse Ile, or a private person or
corporation operating at the request or direction of the Township, when
making an emergency response to the incident, including the costs of
providing police, fire fighting and rescue services at the scene of the
incident. These costs further include all of the salaries and wages of the
Township personnel responding to the incident, all salaries and wages of
the Township personnel engaged in investigation, supervision and report
preparation, all costs connected with the administration and provision of all
chemical tests of his or her blood, breath or urine and all costs related to
any prosecution of the person causing the incident and all video taping costs
relating to the incident. Also included shall be the costs of any mutual aid
response, or those of any agency called in to assist the Township of Grosse
Ile.
The providing, sending and/or utilizing of public service, police, fire
fighting or rescue services by the Township to an accident involving
a motor vehicle or vessel where one or more of the drivers were
operating the motor vehicle or vessel while under the influence of
or impaired by an alcoholic beverage or controlled substance or the
combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and controlled substance;
or
A.
The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when the
driver was operating the motor vehicle or vessel while under the
influence of or while impaired by an alcoholic beverage or controlled
substance.
B.
§ 161-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-2
1:349
OPERATING A VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF AN
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — If analysis of
the driver's blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in
the driver' s blood, urine or breath was in excess of 0.07% or if a person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle or vessel under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or controlled substance or while visibly impaired, or if
the driver's ordinary judgment, common sense, mental state or physical
coordination are significantly or substantially affected and his or her ability
to operate the motor vehicle or vessel is significantly diminished or
decreased or weakened or reduced by the consumption of alcohol or
controlled substance. In case of an individual under the age of 21, it will be
presumed that such an individual was operating a motor vehicle or vessel
under the influence of an alcoholic beverage if the analysis of the driver's
blood, urine or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in the driver's
blood, urine or breath was not less than 0.02%. Evidence of consumption
of alcohol may be established by introduction of the preliminary breath
test results, breathalyzer results, or blood or urine test results, or by
the conduct or behavior of the person on the date when the emergency
response occurred.
VESSEL — Every description of watercraft (other than a seaplane), on the
water used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on the
water.
§ 161-3. Liability for expenses.
A. Any person who, while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or
any controlled substances, or the combined influence of an alcoholic
beverage and any controlled substances, operates a motor vehicle or
vessel, which operation results in an emergency response, shall be
responsible and/or liable for the expenses of the emergency response.
Any person convicted of OUIL, UBAL or driving while visibly impaired,
or a person less than the age of 21 who is convicted of having alcohol in
their system while driving a motor vehicle or vessel, is presumed to be
responsible for the costs set forth in this article.
B. Charge against person. The expense of an emergency response shall be
a charge against the person liable for the expenses under this article.
The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the
Township of Grosse Ile for incurring those costs in the same manner as
in the case of an obligation under a contract, express or implied.
C. Billing. The Township Treasurer's office or its designee shall, within 30
days of an emergency response, submit a bill by first class mail or
personal service to the person liable for the amount of the charge as
enumerated in this article. Said bill shall require full payment in 30
days from the date of service of the notice.
(1) Billing form. Each Township department involved in responding to
an incident involving an individual under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage or any controlled substances, or the combined
§ 161-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 161-3
1:350
§ 161-4. Interpretation of article.
The article shall be construed to be a responsibility and liability of a civil
nature on the part of the driver and shall not be construed to conflict,
contravene or enlarge or reduce any criminal liability or responsibility,
including fines imposed by a judge under the Uniform Traffic Code on
a driver for operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an
alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substances.
influence of an alcoholic beverage and any controlled substances,
will compile, on a form devised for the purpose and provided by the
Police Department, a financial account of all appropriate charges
as herein described. Completed forms shall be forwarded to the
Finance Department for billing.
(2) Failure to pay; procedure to recover costs. Any failure to pay by the
person responsible as described in this article as liable for the
expense of emergency response, within 30 days of service of notice,
shall be considered in default. In case of default, the Township may
commence a civil suit to recover the expenses and any costs
allowed by law or pursue other avenues of collection as are deemed
appropriate. The failure to pay may further be considered a
violation of probation if such payment was ordered by a court of
law at the time of sentencing.
§ 161-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-4
1:351

ARTICLE II
Bodily Alcohol Content of Minors
[Adopted 6-10-1996 by Ord. No. 227]
§ 161-5. Operation by minor prohibited.
A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether licensed or not, shall not
operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public
or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for
the parking of vehicles, within the Township of Grosse Ile if the person
has any bodily alcohol content. As used in this article, "any bodily alcohol
content" means either of the following:
§ 161-6. Penalty.
A. A blood alcohol content of not less than 0.02% or more than 0.07% by
weight of alcohol;
B. Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the
consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of
intoxicating liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service
or ceremony. The defendant shall bear the burden of proving that the
consumption of intoxicating liquor was a part of a generally recognized
religious service or ceremony by a preponderance of the evidence.
A. A person convicted of violating this article is guilty of a misdemeanor
and may be punished by one or more of the following:
(1) Service to the community for a period of not more than 45 days;
(2) A fine of not more than $250.
B. If the violation occurs within seven years of one or more prior
convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or both of the
following:
(1) Performing service to the community for a period of not more than
60 days;
(2) A fine of not more than $500.
C. A person sentenced to perform service to the community under this
article shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse the
Township of Grosse Ile for the cost of supervision incurred by the
Township as a result of the person's activities in that service.
D. The term "prior conviction" means a conviction for a violation of MCL
§ 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (6), former MCL § 257.625(1) or (2), or
former MCL § 257.625b, or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to MCL § 257.625(1)(3), or (6), former MCL § 257.625(1)
or (2), or former MCL § 257.625b, or a law of another state substantially
§ 161-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-6
1:353
§ 161-7. Preliminary chemical breath analysis.
A person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis
upon a lawful request by a peace officer is responsible for a civil infraction.
§ 161-8. Chemical tests.
A person arrested under this article shall be advised of all the rights
contained in MCL § 257.625a(6).
corresponding to MCL § 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), or (6), or former MCL
§ 257.625(1) or (2) or former MCL § 257.625b.
E. License sanctions shall be imposed pursuant to MCL § 257.625b.
F. The court may order the convicted person to pay the costs of
prosecution as allowed by MCL §§ 760.1 to 776.21, as amended.
G. Any complaint based upon the defendant having one or more prior
convictions shall include a statement listing the defendant's prior
convictions.
§ 161-6 GROSSE ILE CODE § 161-8
1:354
ARTICLE III
Forfeiture of Vehicle in DUI Cases
[Adopted 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 251]
§ 161-9. Forfeiture of vehicle.
The judgment of sentence for conviction for a violation of operating a motor
vehicle with an unlawful blood alcohol content or operating a motor vehicle
while visibly impaired may require one of the following with regard to the
vehicle used in the offense if the defendant owns the vehicle in whole or in
part or leases the vehicle:
§ 161-10. Order of seizure.
The vehicle may be seized pursuant to an order of seizure issued by the
District Court having jurisdiction upon a showing of probable cause if the
vehicle is subject to forfeiture or return to the lessor.
§ 161-11. Interest.
The forfeiture of a vehicle is subject to the interest of the holder of a
security interest who did not have prior knowledge of or consent to the
violation.
§ 161-12. Notice of forfeiture.
Within three days after the defendant's conviction for a violation described
in § 161-9, the court shall notify the defendant, his or her attorney, and the
prosecuting attorney if the court intends to consider imposing a sanction
under this section. Within three days after this notice, the prosecuting
attorney shall give notice to all owners of the vehicle and any person holding
a security interest in the vehicle that the court may require forfeiture or
return of the vehicle.
§ 161-13. Return of vehicle during criminal proceedings; lien.
If a vehicle is seized before disposition of the criminal proceedings, a
defendant who is an owner or lessee of the vehicle may move the court
having jurisdiction over the proceedings to require the Township to file a
lien against the vehicle and to return the vehicle to the owner or lessee
pending disposition of the criminal proceedings. The court shall hear the
motion within seven days after the motion is filed. If the defendant
establishes at the hearing that he or she holds the legal title of the vehicle
or that he or she has a leasehold interest and that it is necessary for him or
her or a member of his or her family to use the vehicle pending the outcome
of the forfeiture action, the court may order the seizing agency to return the
A. Forfeiture of the vehicle if the defendant owns the vehicle in whole or in
part.
B. Return of the vehicle to the lessor if the defendant leases the vehicle.
§ 161-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-13
1:355
vehicle to the owner or lessee. If the court orders the return of the vehicle
to the owner or lessee, the court shall order the seizing agency to file a lien
against the vehicle.
§ 161-14. Claim of interest.
Within 14 days after notice by the prosecuting attorney is given under
§ 161-12, an owner, lessee, or holder of a security interest may file a claim
of interest in the vehicle. Within 21 days after the expiration of the period
for filing claims, but before sentencing, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine the legitimacy of any claim, the extent of any co-owner's equity
interest, and the liability of the defendant to any co-lessee.
§ 161-15. Disposal of vehicle; proceeds.
If a vehicle is forfeited under this article, the Township shall sell the vehicle
and dispose of the proceeds in the following order of priority:
A. Pay any outstanding security interest of a secured party who did not
have prior knowledge of or consent to the commission of the violation.
B. Pay the equity interest of a co-owner who did not have prior knowledge
of or consent to the commission of the violation.
C. Satisfy any order of restitution entered in the prosecution for the
violation.
D. Pay the claim of each person who shows that he or she is a victim of the
violation to the extent that the claim is not covered by an order of
restitution.
E. Pay any outstanding lien against the property that has been imposed by
the Township.
F. Pay the proper expenses of the proceedings for forfeiture and sale,
including, but not limited to, expenses incurred during the seizure
process and expenses for maintaining custody of the property,
advertising, and court costs. If there are not sufficient funds available to
reimburse the Township for the expenses incurred, the court shall order
the defendant to reimburse the Township.
G. The balance remaining after the payment of Subsections A through F
shall be distributed by the court having jurisdiction over the forfeiture
proceedings to the Township. Seventy-five percent of the money
received by the Township under this subdivision shall be used to
enhance enforcement of the criminal laws and 25% of the money shall
be used to implement the Crime Victim's Rights Act, Act No. 87 of the
Public Acts of 1985, being §§ 780.75 1 to 780.834 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws. The Township receiving money under this subdivision
shall report annually to the Department of Management and Budget the
amount of money received under this subdivision that was used to
§ 161-13 GROSSE ILE CODE § 161-15
1:356
§ 161-16. Payment to co-lessee.
The court may order the defendant to pay to a co-lessee any liability
determined under § 161-14. The order may be enforced in the same manner
as a civil judgment.
§ 161-17. Effect on lease provisions.
The return of a vehicle to the lessor under this article does not affect or
impair the lessor's rights or the defendant's obligations under the lease.
§ 161-18. Sale or disposal of vehicle to avoid forfeiture.
A person who knowingly conceals, sells, gives away, or otherwise transfers
or disposes of a vehicle with the intent to avoid forfeiture or return of
the vehicle to the lessor under this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
both.
enhance enforcement of the criminal laws and the amount that was
used to implement the Crime Victim's Rights Act.
§ 161-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-18
1:357

ARTICLE IV
Operation While Under Influence
[Adopted 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 03-13]
§ 161-19. Adoption of standards by reference.
Public Act 61 of the 2003 Regular Session of the Michigan Legislature
which amends 1949 PA 300 (Michigan Vehicle Code) and which is to take
effect September 30, 2003, is incorporated and adopted by reference.
§ 161-20. Explanation of references.
All references in the act to "governmental unit" or "township" shall mean
the Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 161-21. Publication requirements.
The Township Clerk shall publish this article in the manner required by law
and shall publish a notice stating the purpose of the article and the fact that
a complete copy of the public act is made available to the public at the office
of the Township Clerk in compliance with state law requiring that records
of public bodies be make available to the general public.
§ 161-22. Penalty.
Any provisions for jail term in the public act shall not exceed 93 days under
the terms of this article. The provisions for fines and costs in the public act
shall apply under the terms of this article.
§ 161-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-22
1:359
Chapter 167
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings — See Ch. 44.
Littering — See Ch. 146.
Solid waste — See Ch. 226.
§ 167-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NUISANCE — Any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors
which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends
to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the
neighborhood in which such premises are located. It also includes the doing
of any act or admitting to perform a duty or the permitting of any condition
which injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others,
is offensive to the senses, or essentially interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property.
§ 167-2. Enumeration of nuisances.
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or
remain on any public or private property of any of the following terms,
conditions or actions, are hereby declared to be and constitute a nuisance;
provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be
conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
A. Junk, trash, debris, scrap metal, litter, barrels, wooden pallets, and yard
waste. Composting of yard waste is allowed in the rear yard provided
the material is turned sufficiently to eliminate all disagreeable or
obnoxious odors and stenches. The composting must be screened to
minimize visual impact to adjacent neighbors. The composting must be
done in a way that does not create unsanitary conditions that are a
menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof.
B. Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment, such as
automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, or
containers.
C. Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes, and
other vermin.
D. Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition
that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary
condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the
§ 161-22 GROSSE ILE CODE § 167-2
1:360
§ 167-3. Nuisances in rights-of-way.
The maintaining or storage of automobiles, vehicles, trailers, machinery,
implements, firewood, brush or any other personal property on any right-ofway
which abuts any highway, street or road in the Township of Grosse Ile
is declared to be a nuisance.
§ 167-4. Nuisances unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having
charge of any premises to maintain or keep any nuisance thereon.
§ 167-5. Notice to abate. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the Township or within the
Township's jurisdiction, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or some other
duly designated officer of the Township shall give written notice to the
owner, lessee, occupant, or other person who is in control of the premises
upon which such nuisance exists.
§ 167-6. Contents of notice.
The notice to abate a nuisance issued under this chapter shall contain:
vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire
hazard in the vicinity where it is located.
E. All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations.
F. All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches as well as the
conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission
or generation of such odors and stenches.
G. Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas or soot in unreasonable quantities.
H. Any partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, stripped, or otherwise
nonoperating motor vehicle.
I. A motor vehicle of any type in a residential district which is undergoing
major overhaul including body work, unless such work is performed
inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for
such purposes. Such work is allowed only on vehicles owned by the
property owner.
A. An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated
time with the Zoning Department.
B. The location of the nuisance.
C. A description of what constitutes a nuisance.
D. A statement of acts necessary to abate the nuisance.
§ 167-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-6
1:361
§ 167-7. Service of notice.
The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served by one of the following
methods:
§ 167-8. Abatement by Township. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance
was served pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to abate the same,
the Ordinance Enforcement Officer or other duly designated officer of
the Township shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a
statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof.
§ 167-9. Costs to be a lien.
Any and all costs incurred by the Township in the abatement of a nuisance
under the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a lien against the
property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed and
collected as provided for by law.
§ 167-10. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article
II, Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter. Said
imposition of penalties does not prevent the Township from abating the
nuisance itself and assessing the costs against the person responsible for
said nuisance.
Chapter 170
OBSERVATION DECK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 12. Fishing and recreational activities — See Ch.
113.
E. A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed and no
request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the Township
will abate such nuisance and assess the costs thereof against such
person.
A. Personal service upon the owner, lessee, occupant or person controlling
or maintaining the nuisance.
B. Certified mail to the owner, lessee, occupant or person maintaining the
nuisance.
§ 167-6 GROSSE ILE CODE § 170-1
1:362
§ 170-1. Regulations for use.
The following regulations shall be observed when using the Observation
Deck:
§ 170-2. Regulations to be posted.
A sign shall be posted on the premises setting forth these regulations.
§ 170-3. Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor which is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 and/or a jail
sentence not to exceed 90 days in jail.
Chapter 171
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
A. The Observation Deck may only be used between dawn and dusk.
"Dawn" shall be defined as the actual time of sunrise for that particular
day the observation deck is being used and "dusk" shall be defined as
the actual time of sunset for that particular day the observation deck is
being used.
B. No alcoholic beverages are allowed on the premises.
C. Cooking and picnicking are prohibited.
D. No pets are allowed on the premises.
E. Swimming, fishing and the docking of boats are prohibited.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:363

ARTICLE I
Medical and Dental Insurance
[Adopted 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 207]
§ 171-1. Name of plan; participation.
The plan to insure the Township employees for medical and dental expenses
and elected Township officials for medical expenses shall be known as the
"Township of Grosse Ile Employee Benefit Plan." The elected officials of the
Township may elect to participate in the medical portion of the program
provided said elected official pays his or her premium which shall consist of
the cost allocated to each Township employee.
§ 171-2. Designation of Plan Administrator and Sponsor.
The Plan Administrator and Plan Sponsor shall be the Township of Grosse
Ile.
§ 171-3. Plan Supervisor.
The Township Board of Trustees shall hire a Plan Supervisor to provide
consulting services to the Township in connection with the operation of
the Plan and performing such other functions, including processing and
payment of claims, as may be delegated to it by the Township.
§ 171-4. Duration of Plan year.
The plan year shall begin on April 1 and end on March 31.
§ 171-5. Contents of Plan.
The Township shall adopt the specific contents of the Plan by resolution
and make amendments thereto from time to time as the Township deems
necessary. The Plan and any amendments thereto that have been previously
adopted by the Township are hereby incorporated by reference as though
fully set forth herein.
§ 171-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-5
1:365
Chapter 173
ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU, MUNICIPAL
Chapter 174
PARADES
§ 174-1. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in any parade or
demonstration upon the public highways or other public places in the
Township unless a permit for such parade or demonstration shall first have
been obtained.
§ 174-2. Conduct of parade.
Such parade or demonstration shall be held only at the time and places
designated in the permit and shall be conducted subject to all reasonable
rules and regulations as may be established by the Police Department.
§ 174-3. Application for permit.
Any person who wants to conduct a parade or motorcade shall apply to the
Chief of Police for a permit at least 30 days in advance of the date of the
proposed parade or motorcade. The Chief of Police may in his discretion
consider any application for a permit to conduct a parade or motorcade
which is filed less than 30 days prior to the date such parade or motorcade
is to be conducted. The application for such permit shall be made in writing
on a form approved by the Chief of Police. In order that adequate
arrangements may be made for the proper policing of the parade or
motorcade, the application shall contain the following information:
§ 174-4. Issuance or denial of permit.
A. The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade or
motorcade chairman and the addresses and telephone numbers of each.
B. The purpose of the parade or motorcade, the date when it is proposed
to be conducted, the location of the assembly area, the location of the
disbanding area, route to be traveled and the approximate time when
the parade or motorcade will assemble, start and terminate.
C. A description of the individual floats, marching units, vehicles, bands,
including a description of any sound amplification equipment to be
used.
D. Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem reasonably
necessary.
A. Standards for issuance.
§ 171-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 174-4
1:366
§ 174-5. Contents of permit.
(1) The Chief of Police shall issue a parade or motorcade permit,
conditioned upon the applicant's written agreement to comply with
the terms of such permit, unless the Chief of Police finds that:
(a) The time, route and size of the parade or motorcade will
disrupt to an unreasonable extent the movement of other
traffic.
(b) The parade or motorcade is of a size or nature that requires the
diversion of so great a number of police officers of the
Township to properly police the line of movement and the areas
contiguous thereto that allowing the parade or motorcade
would deny reasonable police protection to the Township.
(c) Such parade or motorcade will interfere with another parade
or motorcade for which a permit has been issued.
(d) It will be held on a day when no police personnel will be
available to supervise it.
(e) It will be likely to endanger the safety of persons or property
within the Township, or tend to create a breach of the peace.
(f) It will interfere unreasonably with the ordinary public use of
the streets and highways and other public places of the
Township.
(2) The County of Wayne standards must be complied with, if any, in
addition to the above.
B. Standards for denial. The Chief of Police shall deny an application for a
parade or motorcade permit and notify the applicant of such denial
where:
(1) The Chief of Police makes any finding contrary to the findings
required to be made for the issuance of a permit.
(2) The information contained in the application is found to be false or
nonexistent in any material detail.
(3) The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all
conditions of the permit.
A. In each permit the Chief of Police shall specify:
(1) The assembly area and time therefor;
(2) The starting time;
(3) The minimum and maximum speeds;
(4) The route of the parade or motorcade;
§ 174-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-5
1:367
§ 174-6. Appeal procedure.
(5) What portions of streets to be traversed may be occupied by such
parade or motorcade;
(6) The maximum number of platoons or units and the maximum and
minimum intervals of space to be maintained between the units of
such parade or motorcade;
(7) The maximum length of such parade or motorcade in miles or
fractions thereof;
(8) The disbanding area and disbanding time;
(9) The number of persons required to monitor the parade or
motorcade;
(10) The number and type of vehicles, if any;
(11) The material and maximum size of any sign, banner, placard or
carrying device therefor;
(12) The materials used in the construction of floats used in any parade
shall be of fire-retardant materials and shall be subject to such
requirements concerning fire safety as may be determined by the
Fire Chief.
(13) That the permittee advise all participants in the parade or
motorcade, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and
conditions of the permit prior to the commencement of such parade
or motorcade;
(14) That the amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from sound
trucks, or bull horns, be fixed and not variable;
(15) That the parade or motorcade continue to move at a fixed rate of
speed and that any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade or
motorcade, except when reasonably required for the safe and
orderly conduct of the parade or motorcade, shall constitute a
violation of the permit; and
(16) Such other requirements as are found by the Chief of Police to be
reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property.
B. All conditions of the permit shall be complied with so far as reasonably
practicable.
A. Upon a denial by the Chief of Police of an application made pursuant to
§ 174-3 of this chapter, the applicant may appeal from the
determination of the Chief of Police within five days thereafter to the
Township Board by filing a written notice of appeal for hearing by the
Township Board at its next meeting. Upon such appeal, the Township
§ 174-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 174-6
1:368
§ 174-7. Officials to be notified.
Immediately upon the granting of a permit for a parade or motorcade, the
Chief of Police shall send a copy thereof to the following:
§ 174-8. Revocation of permit.
Any permit for a parade or motorcade issued pursuant to this chapter
may be summarily revoked by the Chief of Police at any time when, by
reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the Chief of
Police determines that the safety of the public or property requires such
revocation. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in
writing to the permittee by personal service or by certified mail.
§ 174-9. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3.
Chapter 183
PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 251. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 261.
Board may reverse, affirm, or modify in any regard the determination
of the Chief of Police.
B. In the event an application is not filed within the required time, as
specified in § 174-3, the applicant may request a waiver of such
requirement by the Township Board at its next regular meeting, or at a
special meeting which may be called prior thereto by said Township
Board to consider such matter, and the Township Board, if it finds
unusual circumstances and in the exercise of its sound discretion, may
waive such requirement.
A. The Supervisor.
B. The Township Manager.
C. The Fire Chief.
D. The Director of General Services.
E. The Public Works Director.
§ 174-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183-1
1:369
§ 183-1. Establishment. [Amended 7-22-2002]
A Parking Violations Bureau, to be located at the Township Treasurer's
office, is hereby established and vested with the authority to collect fine
money from parking and standing violations written on Township of Grosse
Ile parking tickets. The Township of Grosse Ile parking tickets shall be
written in accordance with the fine schedule established in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II.
§ 183-2. Collection of fines; procedure.
All fine money collected at the Parking Violations Bureau shall be turned
over to the Township Treasurer and shall be subject to all applicable audit
and accounting procedures.44
Chapter 184
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 20.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 80.
Fishing and recreational activities — See Ch.
113.
Horses — See Ch. 130.
Hunting and trapping — See Ch. 132.
44.Editor's Note: Original Section 47-3, Schedule of fines, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 7-22-2002.
§ 183-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 183-2
1:370
ARTICLE I
Airport Recreation Area
[Adopted 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 08-02]
§ 184-1. Permitted activities; reservation of facilities.
§ 184-2. Adoption of rules; enforcement.
§ 184-3. Preservation of property and natural features.
§ 184-4. Hunting, fishing and/or injuring wildlife.
A. Both active and passive recreational activities are permitted in the park
within designated areas. This includes field sports in the ball field
areas; sledding on the sled hill, hiking and other events as approved or
specifically permitted by the Grosse Ile Community Recreation
Commission.
B. Certain facilities within the park, such as the ball fields may be reserved
for use by individuals or organizations by permit from the Grosse Ile
Community Recreation Commission (Township). Such actions may be
subject to fees and other specific rules and regulations adopted by the
Township. These facilities, when reserved, are closed to the general
public.
A. The Recreation Commission may adopt rules concerning use of the
park. The Commission may designate from time to time portions of the
park for specific uses.
B. Rules adopted by the Commission and/or the Township Board are
enforceable by any Township officer, including but not limited to
employees of the Grosse Ile Public Safety Department.
A. No person shall injure, deface, disturb or pollute any part of the park
nor any building, sign, equipment or other property found therein; nor
shall any tree, shrub, rock or other mineral be removed, injured or
destroyed.
B. No person shall deposit, permit or assist in depositing in any part of the
park, any garbage, ashes, sewage, refuse, waste or other noxious
material, unless these materials are disposed of in waste receptacles
provided for such purposes; nor may any person dump or assist in
dumping any earth within the park without specific written permit from
the Township Board.
A. No person within the confines of the park, unless authorized by written
permit of the Township Board, shall hunt, pursue with dogs, trap or in
any other way assault any wild bird or wild animal found within the
confines of the park, or therein, nor take any bird nest or take the eggs
of any bird.
§ 184-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-4
1:371
§ 184-5. Possession and/or use of weapons or firearms.
§ 184-6. Conduct of park users.
§ 184-7. Animal control.
B. No person shall fish in any waters in the park in any manner.
A. No person, other than a police officer or other person specifically
authorized by law to do so, shall discharge a firearm in the park.
B. No person except a police officer, Sheriff or other person authorized by
state law, shall carry firearms of any description, or air rifle, slingshot,
arrow or similar device within the park, or discharge any firearms,
fireworks or explosive substances, air rifle or similar device therein
without specific permit from the Township Board.
A. No person shall, either by word or deed, engage in any excessively
noisy, boisterous, disorderly or indecent conduct, or act in any manner
intended to disturb the peace or good order of the community within
the park; nor shall any person gamble or play betting games, nor do any
indecent, lascivious, lewd or improper act therein.
B. No person may visit the park while intoxicated by alcohol or while
acting in a manner that appears that he or she is visibly under the
influence of alcohol, illegal narcotic drugs or opiates.
C. No person shall bring into the park any alcohol, illegal narcotic drugs or
opiates.
D. No person shall remain within the park who does not abide by the
instructions and directions of duly authorized police officers or agents
of the Township in the lawful performance of their duties. Any person
directed by a police officer or agent of the Township to leave the park
shall do so promptly and peaceably. No person shall resist or obstruct,
or be abusive of or address in a profane or obscene manner, any police
officer or agent of the Township.
E. The use of loud speakers, public address systems, or sound-amplifying
equipment is prohibited without a permit. Excessively loud radios,
televisions or similar devices are also prohibited.
F. No person shall enter a restroom set apart for the opposite sex.
G. No persons shall violate any of the rules adopted by the Recreation
Commission.
A. All dogs shall be controlled and on a chain or retractable leash not
exceeding 20 feet in length. Cats shall also be under direct control and
leash. No controlled animal shall be destructive to other birds and
animals.
B. The riding of horses or other animals is prohibited.
§ 184-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 184-7
1:372
§ 184-8. Traffic control.
§ 184-9. Certain activities prohibited.
§ 184-10. Park closings.
C. The animal owner must remove and properly dispose of all animal
waste.
A. No persons shall drive, or cause to be driven, along or over any road
within the park, any vehicle at a rate of speed greater than 15 miles per
hour; nor shall any motor vehicle be driven in a reckless manner or in a
manner so as to endanger the life, limb or property of pedestrians, or
the drivers or occupants of other vehicles, or any other person.
B. No vehicle, including off-road type vehicles, shall be driven in the park
except upon roads or trails for that purpose.
C. No person shall park or store any car, motorcycle, bicycle, wagon or
other vehicle within the park, except in places designated by the
Township for such purposes.
D. State laws relating to lights on vehicles shall apply to vehicles within
the park, including off-road vehicles.
A. Fires. No person shall start a fire or assist with starting a fire in the
park.
B. Commercial activities.
(1) No person shall sell or offer for sale any article, thing, privilege or
service within the park without a permit from the Township Board.
(2) No person shall do any begging, peddling or soliciting therein.
(3) Further, no person shall expose, distribute or place any sign,
advertisement, circular, notice or statement, or display any banner,
emblem or design, within the park, without a specific permit from
the Township Board.
C. Camping. No person shall establish or maintain any camp or temporary
lodge in the park, without specific written permit from the Township
Board.
D. Golf. The use of the park for the hitting of golf balls is prohibited.
A. The park shall close at dark, but no later than 10:00 p.m. All park users
must leave at closing time unless a written permit for later hours has
been issued by the Township. Upon the park's closing, it shall be
unlawful for anyone to enter upon or occupy the parks without a permit
to occupy the premises issued by the Township.
§ 184-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-10
1:373
§ 184-11. Penalty.
Any person in violation of the article will result in the individual being
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the fines and costs
as set forth in § 1-13 of the Code of Ordinances of Grosse Ile Township.
B. The park, or portion thereof, may be closed entirely or closed to certain
uses during any specified period of time by officers of the Township
where it is determined that the physical condition of the park or portion
thereof is such that the intended use of the park or portion thereof
would cause damage and deterioration to the park or portion thereof in
a degree greater than ordinary park wear and tear, or that the intended
use of the park or portion thereof would create a health hazard or safety
hazard to the proposed user or other citizens. During such period of
time as the park or portions thereof are closed, these closings shall be
prominently posted and it shall be unlawful for anyone to enter upon or
occupy such park or portions thereof contrary to the posted
regulations.
§ 184-10 GROSSE ILE CODE § 184-11
1:374
ARTICLE II
Gross Ile Parkway/East River Road Waterfront Area
[Adopted 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 12-03]
§ 184-12. Regulations for use.
The following regulations shall be observed when using the Grosse Ile
Parkway/East River Road End:
§ 184-13. Regulations to be posted.
A sign shall be posted on the premises setting forth these regulations.
§ 184-14. Commission responsibility.
The Community Recreation Commission (CRC) shall be responsible for the
oversight of the Grosse Ile Parkway/East River Road Waterfront Park.
§ 184-15. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article II, Municipal Civil Infractions.
A. The Grosse Ile Parkway/East River Road Waterfront Area may only be
used between dawn and dusk. "Dawn" shall be defined as the actual
time of sunrise for that particular day the Grosse Ile Parkway/East River
Road Waterfront Area is being used, and "dusk" shall be defined as the
actual time of sunset for that particular day the Grosse Ile Parkway/East
River Road Waterfront Area is being used. The site will be closed during
winter months as determined by the Township.
B. No alcoholic beverages or glass bottles are allowed on the premises.
C. Picnicking is permitted.
D. Bonfires, littering, camping, fishing, hunting, and docking of motorized
boats is prohibited on or from the shore.
E. Swimming is prohibited.
F. Kayak, canoe, and nonmotorized watercraft launching and landing will
be permitted.
G. Dogs are permitted while on a leash no longer than six feet.
§ 184-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-15
1:375
Chapter 185
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 80.
Handbills — See Ch. 126.
Trespassing — See Ch. 255.
§ 184-15 GROSSE ILE CODE § 184-15
1:376
ARTICLE I
Charitable Solicitations
[Adopted 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 204]
§ 185-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION — An organization or person which is or
holds itself out to be a benevolent, educational, voluntary health,
philanthropic, humane, or religious organization that solicits funds for
charitable purposes.
CHARITABLE PURPOSE — Benevolent, philanthropic, educational,
religious, humane, voluntary health, or other nonprofit objectives, including
the benefit of poor, needy, sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit
of any church or religious society, sect, group, or order; the benefit of
any fraternal, social or civil organization; or the benefit of any educational
institution. The term "charitable purpose" shall not be construed to include
the direct benefit of the individual making the solicitation, or be construed
to include the benefit of any political group or political organization that is
subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law.
INDIVIDUAL — Only a natural person.
PERSON — Any individual, organization, corporation, partnership,
association or other legal entity.
PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR — Any person who is compensated for his
solicitation of funds for charitable purposes in any manner whatsoever that
is based on or related to the amount of money or property collected as a
result of his solicitation of funds.
SOLICIT FUNDS and SOLICITATION OF FUNDS — Any request within the
Township for the donation of money, property or anything of value; the
pledge of a future donation of money, property or anything of value; or
the selling or offering for sale of any property, real or personal, tangible
or intangible, whether of value or not, including but not limited to goods,
books, pamphlets, tickets, publications, subscriptions or brochures upon the
representation, express or implied, that the proceeds of such sale will be
used for a charitable purpose. Expressly excluded from the meaning of the
terms "solicit funds" and "solicitation of funds" is any offer of membership
in any charitable organization. A solicitation of funds is complete when
the solicitation is communicated to any individual then located within the
corporate limits of the Township.
§ 185-2. Registration.
All persons desiring to solicit funds for charitable purposes in the Township
shall file with the Clerk a registration statement, on forms provided by the
Clerk, containing the following:
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:377
A. The name of the person registering and desiring to solicit funds for
charitable purposes.
B. Whether the person registering is an individual, partnership,
corporation or association, and:
(1) If an individual, his or her business or residence address and
telephone number.
(2) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal
business address and telephone number of each partner.
(3) If a corporation, whether it is organized under the laws of Michigan
or is a foreign corporation, the mailing address, business location,
telephone number, and name of the individual in charge of the
Michigan office of the corporation, the names of all officers and
directors or trustees of the corporation, and, if a foreign
corporation, the place of incorporation. The name and address of
the resident agent must also be provided.
(4) If an association, or other organization, the association's or
organization's principal business address and telephone number, if
any, and the names and principal business or residence addresses
and telephone numbers of all members of the association or
organization. However, if there are more than 10 members, the
person registering may alternatively list the names and principal
business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of the
officers and directors or trustees of the association or organization.
If the association or organization is part of a multistate
organization or association, the mailing address and business
location of its principal headquarters shall be given, in addition to
the mailing address and business location of its local office.
C. A brief description of the charitable purpose for which the funds are to
be solicited, and an explanation of the intended use of the funds toward
that purpose.
D. The names of all individuals authorized to incur expenses related to the
solicitation or to disburse any proceeds of the solicitation.
E. The name, mailing address and telephone number of each individual
who will have organizational responsibility with respect to the
solicitation of funds. If there are more than 20 such individuals, the
person registering may alternatively list the 20 individuals with the
principal organizational responsibility with respect to the solicitation of
funds.
F. The time period within which the solicitation of funds is to be made,
giving the date of the beginning of solicitation and its projected
conclusion.
§ 185-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 185-2
1:378
G. A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation of
funds is to be accomplished.
H. The total amount of funds proposed to be raised.
I. A projected schedule of salaries, wages, fees, commissions, expenses
and costs that the person registering reasonably believes will be
expended and paid in connection with the solicitation of funds or in
connection with the disbursement, and an estimated percentage of the
total projected collections which the costs of solicitation will comprise.
These figures shall cover the entire time period during which the
solicitation is to be made.
J. The names of any cities in Michigan in which the person registering has
solicited funds for charitable purposes within the past five years, but in
the event that the person registering has solicited funds for charitable
purposes in more than five other cities, the person registering may list
the five most populated cities in which it has solicited funds during the
previous five years.
K. A statement to the effect that if a certificate of registration is granted,
such certificate will not be used as or represented to be an endorsement
by the Township or any of its officers or employees.
L. As to each, if any, officer, director, trustee, partner, or any current agent
or employee engaging in the solicitation of funds who within the past
seven years has been convicted of (or been incarcerated for any
conviction of) a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, the
name of the individual, the nature of the offense, the name of the state
where the conviction occurred, and the year of the conviction.
M. An explanation of the reasons, if the person registering is unable to
provide any of the foregoing information, why such information is not
available.
N. The signature of an individual on behalf of the person registering. If the
person registering is an individual, this is the applicant. If the person
registering is a partnership, this is the partner charged with disbursing
the funds solicited. If the person registering is a corporation or an
association or organization, this is its officer charged with disbursing
the funds solicited. The individual signing the registration statement
shall sign the statement and swear before an officer authorized to
administer oaths that he or she has carefully read the registration
statement and that all the information contained therein is true and
correct and that upon completion of the solicitation by the person, that
the disclosure of the information required by § 185-7 shall be submitted
to the Township in a timely manner.
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-3
1:379
§ 185-3. Prohibited activities.
No charitable organization subject to the provisions of this article, and
no agent, employee, or officer or member or individual of any such
organization, shall engage in any of the following prohibited acts:
A. Willful use of any solicited funds or soliciting or retaining funds to
support or execute any conduct that is criminal or illegal under the laws
of the Township, the county, the state, or the United States.
B. Willful failure to file any statement required by this article or knowingly
making false statements or providing false information in those
statements.
C. Use of any scheme or artifice to defraud or obtain money or property by
means of any false statement or representation.
D. Willfully concealing the identity of an organization on whose behalf
solicitations are being made.
E. Knowingly misrepresenting that the proceeds of any solicitation of
funds, under current law, would entitle the donor to a federal or state
income tax deduction.
F. Promising any person that the proceeds of a solicitation of funds will be
refunded upon request, and thereafter willfully failing within 60 days to
make a refund that has been requested in writing.
G. Promising any person that refunds of the proceeds of any solicitation of
funds will be made upon request without providing such person, at the
time such representation is made, with a written statement of the terms
and conditions upon which refunds are made; provided, however, that
any statement made in good faith at the time is not prohibited by this
section.
H. Soliciting funds at private residences between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
I. Solicitation of funds by any person on behalf of a charitable
organization which has failed to obtain a certificate of registration
pursuant to this article.
J. Soliciting or attempting to solicit after the expiration of any certificate
of registration issued by the Township under this article.
K. Soliciting or attempting to solicit at any premises (including a
residence) which has posted upon or near the main entrance to the
premises a sign or card that reads "No Solicitors Allowed," or similar
language to the same effect.
L. Failure to file any closing statement that this article requires.
M. Failure to carry or display the required identification card.
§ 185-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 185-4
1:380
§ 185-4. Fees. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Every registration statement shall be accompanied by a registration fee as
set from time to time by the Township Board to compensate the Township
for the cost of administering this article. Such fee will be nonrefundable,
irrespective of whether a certificate of registration is issued.
§ 185-5. Issuance of registration certificate.
Within 10 working days of the receipt of the registration statement, the
Clerk shall either issue a certificate of registration, as provided in § 185-6,
or notify the person registering that the registration statement does not
comply with the requirements of § 185-2, and specifically point out what
information or explanation has not been furnished that is required before a
certificate of registration can be issued.
§ 185-6. Form; identification card.
The Clerk shall prescribe the form of the certificate of registration.
However, each such certificate of registration shall contain the following:
"The issuance of this certificate of registration is not an endorsement by the
Township of Grosse Ile or any of its departments, officers or employees."
Each certificate of registration shall bear a registration number, and the
same number shall be assigned by the Clerk to the file containing the
registration statement filed by the registrant. Each person or individual who
solicits must carry an identification card provided by the Clerk which shall
bear the name of the person who registered, the registration number, the
name of the individual carrying the card as solicitor, and the expiration date
of the certificate of registration. The card must be shown upon demand
of any property owner or the Police Department. The person shall provide
a separate list of the names and addresses of all agents or employees
for whom identification cards are desired. The Township shall issue up to
five identification cards without any additional charge. The registrant may
obtain additional cards by paying the Township its actual cost.
§ 185-7. Expiration of registration; closing statement.
A. Each certificate of registration issued by the Clerk shall expire at the
termination of the solicitation period specified in the registration
statement or one year from the date of issuance, whichever is less.
B. Closing statement.
(1) No later than 120 days from the expiration of its certificate of
registration, each person registering shall file a closing statement
with the Clerk. Except as provided to the contrary in this section,
the closing statement shall be a financial statement that is either:
(a) On a form provided by the Clerk for this purpose and sworn to
by the individual who would be the appropriate individual to
§ 185-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:381
§ 185-8. Public disclosure.
All registration statements and closing statements filed with the Clerk,
whether or not a certificate of registration has been issued, shall be public
records and shall be available for inspection by members of the public
during the Clerk's regular business hours. Copies may be obtained at the
fees prescribed by law for copies of Township records.
sign a registration statement on behalf of the person
registering; or
(b) Audited by a certified public accountant.
(2) The closing statement shall indicate the total funds collected or
pledged from the solicitation of funds, the purpose or purposes
(with the amount of funds for each purpose) for which such funds
have been or will be disbursed by the person registering, any
incurred but unpaid expenses resulting from the solicitation of
funds, all other anticipated disbursements of collected or pledged
funds, the actual or projected date of each disbursement, and, if
funds have been or will be kept by the person registering for over
30 days before disbursement, the name of the financial institution,
if any, with which such funds have been or will be deposited. The
requirement to show the total funds represented by any food that
has been collected or pledged may be satisfied either by estimating
the monetary value of the food to the nearest $100 or by providing
the weight of the food in the manner required by the Clerk.
C. Each person registering shall file a preliminary closing statement no
later than 30 days from the expiration of its certificate of registration.
The preliminary closing statement shall be filed with the Clerk on forms
provided for this purpose. It shall be a financial statement containing
the same information as listed on the preceding subsection of this
section, except that it need not be sworn to or audited by a certified
public accountant and that any amounts stated thereon may be
estimated based upon whatever information is reasonably available to
the person registering at the time the preliminary closing statement is
filed.
D. Any requirement in this section to submit a financial statement may
alternatively be satisfied by the submission of an information return
covering the entire time period during which the solicitation of funds
was conducted and actually filed with the United States Internal
Revenue Service to fulfill federal requirements for submission of
information returns for persons exempt from taxes in accordance with
26 USCA § 501 or any successor provision.
E. Failure to file the necessary information contained above will prohibit
the Township from issuing a certificate of registration in the future to
the person who has failed to comply with this section.
§ 185-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 185-9
1:382
§ 185-9. Exceptions.
The following are excepted from the operation of §§ 185-1 through 185-9:
§ 185-10. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
A. The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by any organization or
association from its members; and
B. The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by a person when such
solicitation occurs on premises owned or controlled by the person
soliciting funds or with the permission of the person who owns or
controls the premises.
§ 185-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-10
1:383

ARTICLE II
Peddling
[Adopted 6-12-1995 by Ord. No. 217]
§ 185-11. License required.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to engage in business as
a peddler as defined in § 185-12 without first:
§ 185-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person who goes about from place to place, traveling by
foot, wagon, automobile, or other type of conveyance, selling or offering for
sale (or soliciting orders for the sale of) any goods, wares or merchandise,
or reading materials, or any other commercial product, and said definition
includes what are commonly known as hawkers, hucksters, itinerant
merchants, or transient vendors of merchandise.
§ 185-13. Application for license; contents.
A. Obtaining a license from the Township; and
B. Having been requested or invited by the owner or owners, occupant or
occupants of any private residence for the purpose of peddling at their
residence before going to their residence.
A. Application for license shall be filed with the Township in the form and
manner required by the Township. Such application shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name and description of the applicant;
(2) The address (permanent and temporary) of the applicant;
(3) A brief description of the business and the goods to be sold;
(4) The length of time for which a license is desired;
(5) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
the license number and other information that may be required;
(6) A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the date of filing such application, which photograph shall
be two inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders
of the applicant in a clear and distinguished manner;
(7) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any Township ordinance,
and, if so, the full particulars as to the nature of the offense, the
§ 185-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-13
1:385
§ 185-14. Investigation.
The Township Clerk shall forward such application to the Chief of Police,
who shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's character
and business responsibility. After such investigation, the Chief of Police
shall endorse such application with approval or disapproval and forward
the application to the Township Clerk. If the results of the aforesaid
investigation indicate that the moral character and business responsibility
of the application justify the granting of such license and upon payment of
the license fee, the Township Clerk shall issue to the applicant a peddler's
license.
§ 185-15. Special events.
Any license issued under this article does not permit the license holder to
peddle or solicit during the Azalea Festival or any other special events as
designated by the Township Board.
§ 185-16. License fees.
The license fees for licenses to be issued under this article shall be as
established by action of the Township Board, and a schedule thereof shall
be available at the Township.
§ 185-17. Locations.
No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets or other public places nor shall be permitted a stationary location.
§ 185-18. Loud noises and speaking devices prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any person in his behalf, to shout,
cry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound device, including loud
speakers or sound amplifiers, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or
other public places of the Township, or upon any private premises, for the
court before whom the conviction was had or a plea of guilty
entered and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; and
(8) Driver's license number, social security number, date of birth, sales
tax license number.
B. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other business entity
which has more than one individual who will be soliciting, it is
necessary for each and every individual to fill out an application form
and to also sign an acknowledgment that the applicant understands he
or she may not engage in business as a peddler without having been
requested or invited by the owner or occupant of the private residence
and an acknowledgment that he or she must show the license to the
owner or occupant of the premises prior to soliciting for any sales or
orders.
§ 185-13 GROSSE ILE CODE § 185-18
1:386
purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which
the licensee proposes to sell.
§ 185-19. License denial or revocation.
§ 185-20. Appeals.
Any person deeming himself aggrieved by the Township Clerk in the
imposition, denial, or revocation of a license may, within 10 days, file a
written request for a hearing with the Township Clerk. The Township Board
shall set a time and place for a hearing and notice thereof shall be given
to the appellant. Upon such hearing, the Township Board shall determine
whether the license should be continued to be imposed, denied or revoked
and such determination shall be final and conclusive.
§ 185-21. Enforcement; exhibit of license.
A. A license may be denied any applicant and any license may be revoked
by the Township Clerk for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made when engaging
in business as a peddler;
(3) Any violation of this article or any other ordinance of the Township;
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
(5) Conducting the business of peddling in an unlawful manner or in
such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public;
(6) Peddling or soliciting at any residence without first being invited by
the owner or occupant to peddle at said residence;
(7) Failure to display the license to the owner or occupant upon arrival
to the residence.
B. Whenever the Township Clerk shall deny or revoke any license, a notice
specifying the cause of such denial or revocation shall be given to the
applicant or licensee.
A. It shall be the duty of any police officer to require any person whom he
may observe engaged in the business of peddling to exhibit his license,
and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this article. A peddler shall
display his/her license to the owner or occupant prior to attempting to
solicit or peddle their merchandise or seeking orders for their
merchandise.
§ 185-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-21
1:387
§ 185-22. Records required.
The Township Clerk shall maintain a record of each license issued
hereunder and shall indicate therein all reports of violation.
§ 185-23. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
B. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to exhibit his
license, upon request of any private citizen or police officer.
§ 185-21 GROSSE ILE CODE § 185-23
1:388
Chapter 197
PUBLIC WORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 210. Water — See Ch. 268.
§ 197-1. Establishment of Board of Public Works.
There is hereby established a Board of Public Works which shall be
responsible as agent of the Township Board for the operation and
maintenance of the water supply and sewer systems of the Township. The
Board shall consist of five members to be appointed by the Township Board.
The members of the Board shall elect a Chairman and such other officers
as they shall require. The first Board shall consist of two commissioners
appointed for a term of three years, two commissioners for a term of two
years, and one commissioner appointed for a term of one year. Subsequent
appointments shall be for three years unless to fill vacancies. Members shall
serve until their successors are appointed.
§ 197-2. Establishment of Department of Public Works.
There is hereby established a Department of Public Works of the Township
to be administered by and responsible to the Board of Public Works. The
Board shall have supervision and control of the employees of the
Department, but no employees shall be hired without the approval of the
Township Board. The wages and other terms of employment of Department
personnel shall also be subject to the approval of the Township Board.
§ 197-3. Duties of Board of Public Works.
A. The Board of Public Works shall have the power to make all necessary
rules and regulations governing the Department of Public Works and
pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the water supply and
lateral sewer systems, but all such rules and regulations shall be
subject to approval by the Township Board before they shall become
effective.
B. The Board of Public Works shall prepare and submit to the Township
Board an annual budget.
C. The Board of Public Works shall recommend from time to time to the
Township Board any changes in sewer-water rates and any extensions
or improvements in the water supply or sewer systems that they may
deem advisable.
D. The members of the Board of Public Works shall be paid reasonable
compensation for attendance at meetings of the Board and shall be
§ 185-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 197-3
1:389
§ 197-4. Water and sewer rates.
§ 197-5. Billing; delinquent payment; penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Combined bills for water and sewer rates and charges shall be rendered
at such intervals as may be from time to time determined by the Township
Board on recommendation of the Board of Public Works. All bills rendered
shall be due and payable to the Township Treasurer upon a date to be stated
on the bill. If not paid within 15 days after the due date, 5% will be added to
the bill; and if not paid within 30 days the delinquent customers' water may
be turned off and an additional charge as set from time to time by resolution
of the Township Board shall be made for turning it on again. All bills shall
be the personal liability of the owner or occupant of the premises.
§ 197-6. Allocation of funds.
The Township Treasurer shall allocate all collections on bills in such manner
and to such separate funds as may be established from time to time by
resolution or ordinance of the Township Board.
reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred in behalf of the
Township. Their compensation shall be established by the Township
Board and their expenses subject to its approval.
E. The Department of Public Works shall be operated by the Board of
Public Works on the same fiscal year basis as the Township.
A. The rates to be charged for water furnished from the Township's water
supply system shall be levied on each lot, parcel of land, building or
premises connected with the system on the basis of the quantity of
water used as measured by the Township water meter. Users of water
may be classified according to the quantity of water used, and any other
special conditions, and different rates may be charged to users in
different classes as may be deemed reasonable. Payment of charges
may be enforced by shutting off water, by action of assumpsit against
the owners or occupants, and by any other remedy that may be
provided from time to time by any statute or ordinance. Charges for
water service and sewage disposal services furnished to any premises
shall also be a lien thereon, enforceable in the manner provided in
Section 21 of the Revenue Bond Act of 1933, as amended. The water
rates, connection charges and other charges shall be those established
from time to time by the Township Board upon recommendation of the
Board of Public Works.
B. In addition to the water rates and charges, there shall be charged to
each user of the water supply system the applicable sewer rates and
charges established by the Sewer Finance Ordinance adopted by the
Township Board on the 27th day of June 1966, as from time to time
amended by resolution of the Township Board. All such sewer rates and
charges shall be levied and enforced in the same manner as the water
rates and charges as provided hereinbefore.
§ 197-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 197-6
1:390
Chapter 202
RETAIL FRAUD
§ 202-1. Unlawful activities; penalty.
Any person who does any of the following in a store or in its immediate
vicinity is guilty of retail fraud, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500 or three
times the value of the difference in price, property stolen, or money or
property stolen, or money or property obtained or attempted to be obtained,
whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine:
Chapter 205
ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Condominium projects — See Ch. 71.
Environmental assessment — See Ch. 98.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Utilities — See Ch. 258.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
A. While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes and
replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which
property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or
to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the
resulting difference in price is less than $200.
B. While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is
offered for sale at a price of less than $200.
C. With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property
from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid
for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the
property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.
§ 197-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-1
1:391

ARTICLE I
Purpose, Scope and Definitions
§ 205-1. Purpose.
The purposes of these regulations are to:
§ 205-2. Scope of regulations.
No person shall construct or maintain a public road, private road or
driveway in the Township, except in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and the standards of the Wayne County Department of Public
Services. Where any conflicts arise, the more stringent standard shall apply,
as determined by Grosse Ile Township. Construction within the public rightof-
way is under the jurisdiction of Wayne County and must also meet the
permit requirements of the county. Approval shall not be granted for any
subdivision plat, condominium project, site plan, land use permit, building
permit or land division, except in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 205-3. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning ascribed to them herein, and any terms not defined herein shall
have the meaning customarily assigned to them:
A. Promote a vehicular circulation system to complement the orderly
development and access to land, as indicated by the Township's Master
Plan;
B. Promote safe and efficient travel within the Township;
C. Minimize disruptive and potentially hazardous traffic conflicts;
D. Separate traffic conflict areas by regulating the number and location of
driveways along major streets;
E. Provide for street design commensurate with expected volumes;
F. Protect the substantial public investment in the street system, and
ensure reasonable access to properties;
G. Contribute to the overall health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
Grosse Ile Township;
H. Provide regulations and minimum standards necessary to insure that
roads remain passable in all weather conditions and are adequate to
provide safe, year-round access by fire, police and other public and
emergency vehicles; and
I. Promote road design and use of land in a manner which protects
natural ecosystem functions.
§ 205-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:393
APPLICANT — Any person who holds ownership interest in land on which
approval is sought for a building permit, driveway permit or approval from
the Township to construct a road.
CUL-DE-SAC LENGTH — The length of a cul-de-sac shall be measured along
the center line of the road from the near edge of the pavement of the
intersection that is the single point of access, to the center of the cul-de-sac
turnaround. For blunt end roads that do not have a cul-de-sac turnaround,
such distance shall be measured to the far edge of the pavement at the road
end.
CURRENT WAYNE COUNTY STANDARDS — Standards in place and used
administratively by the Wayne County Department of Public Services at
time of application.
DRIVEWAY — The following definitions apply to the types of driveways
regulated under this chapter:
FRONT LOT LINE — The line which separates a lot from the street. In the
case of a lot located on a private road, the front lot line is the line which
separates the lot from the private road easement.
LOT — A piece of land, the dimensions and configuration of which are
shown on a subdivision plat recorded in the offices of the Wayne County
Register of Deeds.
PARCEL — A measured portion of land which is described by virtue of a
request to divide or partition it. A parcel may be a subdivision lot or an
acreage tract or acreage of land.
PAVED/HARD SURFACED — Being constructed with asphalt or concrete
and meeting Wayne County public road standards for paved streets.
PERSON — An individual, trustee, executor, or other fiduciary; corporation;
firm; partnership; association; or other similar legal entity acting as a unit.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Township of Grosse Ile Planning
Commission.
PLAT — A map or chart of a subdivision of land which has been approved in
accordance with the Land Division Act, as amended.[Amended 7-22-2002]
PROPER FRONTAGE — A lot shall be deemed to have "proper frontage" if
in compliance with the minimum street frontage requirements contained in
Article 19 of Chapter 285, Zoning.
ROAD — Any public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way, other than a
public or private alley, dedicated to or designed for travel and access to any
COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY — - Any vehicular access except those
serving single-family dwelling units, or serving only an essential public
service structure.
A.
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY — - A residential driveway that provides
vehicular access to one dwelling unit.
B.
§ 205-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 205-3
1:394
land, lot or parcel, whether designated as a road, avenue, boulevard, drive,
land, place, court, or any similar designation.
ROAD COMMITTEE — The Township of Grosse Ile Road Committee.
SINGLE MEANS OF ACCESS — A roadway intersection that provides the
only vehicular access point, by way of a public or private road, to parcels
of land or dwelling units along a roadway way that extends from said
intersection.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Grosse Ile.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Grosse Ile Township Board.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS — The Grosse Ile Township Zoning Board of
Appeals.
MAJOR ROAD — A road classified as an arterial or a collector road in
the Grosse Ile Township Master Plan; or classified as a county primary
road by Wayne County.
A.
PRIVATE ROAD — A road owned and maintained by the owners of the
property that serves and provides access to two or more dwelling units
or parcels, or two or more nonresidential principal buildings. Private
roads include roads within condominium projects, roads serving twofamily
dwelling units and roads within office or industrial complexes.
A private road may be used to provide public services such as utility
easements, waste collection and emergency services. The definition of
"private road" does not include drives serving multiple-family buildings,
parking lot aisles or drives connecting parking lots to service roads.
B.
PUBLIC ROAD — Any road or portion of a road which has been
dedicated to and accepted by Wayne County.
IMPROVED — A public road that has been constructed to Wayne
County public road standards, paved with asphalt or concrete,
certified for public passage and accepted by the county for
maintenance.
(1)
NONCONFORMING GRAVEL — A public road that has been
constructed to Wayne County public road standards for gravel
roads, certified for public passage and accepted by the county for
maintenance prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(2)
UNIMPROVED — - A public road right-of-way that has been
dedicated to Wayne County through plat or quit claim, but has not
been improved and certified for public passage.
(3)
C.
§ 205-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-3
1:395

ARTICLE II
General Requirements
§ 205-4. Dividing, partitioning or assembling land and road
frontage.
§ 205-5. Building permits and road frontage.
A building permit shall not be issued by the Township or any department or
official of the Township, unless the following requirements are met:
A. In order to divide, partition or assemble any land in the Township, such
land, parcel or lot shall have proper frontage on one of the following:
[Amended 7-22-2002]
(1) An improved public road;
(2) A private road approved by the Township and constructed to Wayne
County standards for paved streets, that meets the requirements of
this chapter; or
(3) A nonconforming gravel road, as defined in Article I above.
B. In determination of compliance with lot area standards, land located
within a public street right-of-way or a private road easement shall not
be counted. Dividing, partitioning or assembling land must be in
compliance with the lot split regulations contained in Chapter 285,
Zoning.
A. The structure, building or improvement for which such building permit
is required shall be on a lot or parcel of land which meets the
requirements of this chapter and the entire lot provides frontage
required by Chapter 285, Zoning, along one of the following:
(1) An improved public road that meets the requirements of
Subsection B below;
(2) An approved private road constructed to Wayne County standards
for paved streets, that meets the requirements of this chapter is
approved by the Township and meets the requirements of
Subsection B below; or
(3) A nonconforming gravel road, as defined in Article I above.
B. An improved public street or approved private roadway must be
constructed to current Wayne County standards for paved streets and
meet the road standards contained in this chapter. Concrete curb and
gutter shall be provided for the entire length of the lot's frontage. If the
roadway upon which said lot fronts does not meet the requirements
contained herein, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
improve the road for the entire length of the lot's frontage to Wayne
County standards for paved streets, and also meet the road standards
contained in this chapter. If all adjacent segments of the road lack curb
§ 205-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-5
1:397
§ 205-6. Access across residential district land.
No land outside of a public street right-of-way within a residential district
shall be used for vehicular access to any nonresidential land use located in
a nonresidential district, except for an access to an essential service.
§ 205-7. Maintenance.
and gutter, then the Township Department of Community Development
can allow a gravel shoulder with open ditches.
C. A copy of an approved Wayne County Department of Public Services
driveway permit for access to a public road, or evidence that the parcel
has recorded right to access an easement for a private road shall be
submitted prior to issuance of a land use permit. The Township Building
Inspector shall not issue a certificate of occupancy unless the driveway
and any required drainage culvert are installed to the standards
required by the driveway permit and this chapter.
D. Driveways that access a hard surface roadway shall be surfaced within
the right-of-way with a type of material which is equal to or better than
the surface of the roadway which it joins. The slope for any portion of
the driveway within the road right-of-way shall meet Wayne County
standards.
A. All driveways shall maintain compliance with the corner clearance
requirements of Article 19 of Chapter 285, Zoning.
B. Roadside drainage shall not be altered, except as approved under a
permit from the Wayne County Department of Public Services.
C. Continued maintenance of commercial driveways shall be the
responsibility of the property owner(s) served by the driveway. Any
repairs and maintenance to driveway approaches within the public road
right-of-way shall be performed under an approved permit from the
Wayne County Department of Public Services.
D. Any damage to roads as a result of constructing driveway or utility
improvements within the road right-of-way shall be restored to original
condition, meeting Wayne County standards, prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
§ 205-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 205-7
1:398
ARTICLE III
Access Point Standards
§ 205-8. Applicability of standards.
The following standards apply to all public and private road intersections,
and commercial driveways.
§ 205-9. Number of access points.
Only one access point shall be permitted unless the Planning Commission
determines additional access points are necessary to provide reasonable
access to motorists, delivery vehicles and emergency vehicles, and that
the additional access points will not compromise traffic operations and
safety along the public roadway. A second access point may be required
for residential developments with over 20 units, commercial uses that are
expected to generate over 100 peak hour directional trips or to be used as
a truck-only access point.
§ 205-10. Commercial access.
Where practical, commercial access shall be from a shared driveway.
§ 205-11. Driveways.
Two one-way driveways may be permitted along a frontage of at least
125 feet, provided the driveways do not interfere with operations at other
driveways or along the street.
§ 205-12. Distance from intersections.
Access points shall be spaced a minimum 80 feet from an intersection of two
major roads, measured from near edge to near edge of pavement. Access
points shall be a minimum 60 feet from other street or commercial driveway
intersections, measured from center line to center line.
§ 205-13. Alignment along major streets.
Access points along major streets shall be aligned with, or have center lines
offset at least 100 feet from, access points on the opposite side of the street.
§ 205-14. Modification of requirements.
The Planning Commission, based upon a recommendation by the Road
Committee, planner or engineer, may reduce the spacing requirements
above or allow additional driveways upon finding that there is no reasonable
opportunity to achieve a shared access design, that compliance has been
attained to the greatest degree practical and the access design will not
significantly compromise public safety or traffic operations along the public
street, based upon a traffic impact study prepared by the applicant.
§ 205-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-14
1:399

ARTICLE IV
Road Standards
§ 205-15. Road location.
The Planning Commission, based upon a recommendation from the Road
Committee, shall adopt a plan that provides future locations for roads and
thoroughfares as part of the Township Master Plan. Where the Township
Master Plan designates continuation of a roadway through an undivided
or otherwise undeveloped parcel of land, any site plan or subdivision plat
submitted for said parcel of land shall provide roadways that comply with
the Township Master Plan.
§ 205-16. Road names.
Any proposed roadway which is an extension of, or in a direct line with,
an existing street shall carry the name of the street that is in existence at
the time the proposal is made. Other roads shall be given a name of the
applicant's choice, subject to approval by the Planning Commission, based
upon a recommendation by the Road Committee, and Wayne County if the
road is proposed as public or will intersect with a public road. Proposed
names will be checked against other existing roads within the Township
for potential conflicts that may be confusing to emergency services. Road
names that reflect the heritage of Grosse Ile, such as French, Native
American, natural water bodies and historic persons, are preferred.
§ 205-17. Road standards
All public and private road construction, including new road construction,
extensions to existing roads or improvements to existing roads shall comply
with the standards of this section.
A. Right-of-way/easement. All roads shall have the minimum widths of
right-of-way as required by Wayne County. All private road easements
shall have the minimum widths of right-of-way as required by Wayne
County, provided that no private road easement shall be less than 60
feet in width. The road surface and turnaround shall be centered in the
right-of-way, except where otherwise deemed appropriate by the
Planning Commission because of unusual site features or conditions.
Rights-of-way and easements shall be drawn parallel to, and follow the
same shape as the edge of the road (i.e., the distance between the edge
of the road and the right-of-way or easement line shall remain constant
along the road). Any greater right-of-way or easement width above the
minimum standard must demonstrate need due to topography or other
natural features. Irregular manipulations of road right-of-way or
easement width or shape for the purpose of increasing lot frontage is
prohibited.
B. Construction standards. All roads shall comply with the design and
construction standards of the Wayne County Department of Public
Services for public streets. Such design and construction shall be
§ 205-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-17
1:401
certified by the applicant's engineer. All proposed roads shall be paved
with asphalt meeting the Standard RS-24 or concrete meeting the
Standards RS-14 and RS-18 contained in the Wayne County Subdivision
Rules and Regulations, or subsequent amendments to those
administrative construction standards.
C. Gates and speed bumps. All roads shall remain unobstructed. Closable
gates shall not be permitted within any public road right-of-way or
private road easement. Speed bumps/humps shall not be permitted on
any public road or private road.
D. Drainage. The right-of-way and road shall be adequately drained so as
to prevent flooding or erosion of the roadway or adjacent property.
Ditches or underground storm sewers shall be located within the road
right-of-way and road drainage shall be conveyed to existing
watercourses and water bodies. The discharged water shall not be cast
onto the land of another property owner unless the water follows an
established watercourse. Underground crossroad drainage shall be
provided where the proposed right-of-way crosses a stream or other
drainage course.
E. Utilities. In order to make more efficient use of land and preserve
woodlands, utilities along a roadway shall be installed within the road
right-of-way or private road easement. The Planning Commission may
allow utilities to be placed within an easement outside of the road rightof-
way where the applicant provides a letter from Wayne County
Department of Public Services denying a permit to construct utilities
within the road right-of-way. All utilities within the road right-of-way or
a private road easement must be installed below ground. This
paragraph shall not apply to utilities that do not run parallel and
adjacent to roadways.
F. Tree clearing. Tree removal shall be minimized to the extent practical
on road projects. The extent of tree clearing shall be clearly indicated
on all site plans and subdivision plats submitted to the Township for
approval. Following Planning Commission approval of a site plan,
preliminary plat tentative or a preliminary tentative condominium site
plan, any modification to the extent of tree clearing shall be
resubmitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval.
G. Permits. Construction permits from the Wayne County Department of
Public Services are required for any work or site preparation within the
county right-of-way, including connection to county roads. The
applicant shall obtain all necessary permits from the Wayne County
Department of Environment, Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and other state, county, or local
agencies. Evidence of required permits shall be submitted to the
Township Zoning Administrator prior to any work or site preparation,
including tree removal.
§ 205-17 GROSSE ILE CODE § 205-17
1:402
§ 205-18. Requirements for public roads.
Where land is to be platted, otherwise divided or a condominium is created,
roads constructed to serve such land shall be public roads dedicated to
H. Construction. During preliminary plat tentative, preliminary tentative
condominium or final site plan review, the Planning Commission may
designate one or more access routes to be utilized by construction
vehicles entering the site. The developer is responsible for repairing
any off-site damage to public or private property as a result of
construction. The Grosse Ile Township Department of Public Works
shall monitor construction and notify the Wayne County Department of
Public Services of any off-site damage to public roads or private
property. Temporary construction roads and driveways need to be
removed and the site fully restored upon completion of development, as
determined by the Township.
I. Culs-de-sac. All culs-de-sac and dead-end roads, including roads that
terminate within a dedicated road right-of-way or private road
easement, shall meet the following standards:
(1) A road may not serve more than 20 single-family units or 30
multiple-family units from a single point of access.
(2) Culs-de-sac or other dead-end roads longer than 750 feet are
prohibited.
(3) All dead-end roads that serve more than two dwelling units or have
frontage on more than two lots shall terminate with a cul-de-sac
turnaround that meets minimum Wayne County Department of
Public Services standards.
J. Road systems and connections. All roads shall be designed to form a
safe and efficient road network. Accordingly, roads shall connect to
existing public roads to continue the system of interconnected roads.
Roads should also be designed to connect to planned or anticipated
future roads.
(1) Roads longer than 750 feet shall provide one or more road stubs
that extend perpendicularly from the primary road to the adjoining
parcels on either side.
(2) Roads shall extend the full length of the parcel to the rear property
line to allow for future connection.
(3) Any future road stub shall be constructed to the far property line
abutting the adjacent parcel.
(4) Any future road stub shall terminate with a sign that reads "Future
Road Extension," erected by the applicant.
K. Emergency vehicle access. All roads shall be accessible by emergency
vehicles, as determined by the Township Fire Marshal.
§ 205-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-18
1:403
Wayne County. The Township Board, based upon a recommendation by the
Planning Commission and the Road Committee, may waive this requirement
and allow development of a private road where all of the following apply:
§ 205-18.1. Bridges and causeways. [Added 6-9-2003 by Ord. No.
03-08]
Construction of a bridge or causeway within the Township shall require
Township Board approval based upon a Planning Commission public
hearing and a recommendation. The following requirements shall be met:
A. There is no indication of a need for the roadway to be dedicated as a
public road in the future.
B. Dedication of the road as a public street would not result in continuity
in the public street system at the present time or in the future.
C. Dedication of the road as a public street would not offer access to
adjacent undeveloped parcels or lots that currently do not have road
access or would require development with culs-de-sac in excess of
Wayne County Department of Public Services standards.
D. The expected traffic volumes along the roadway are not expected to
exceed 250 vehicles per average weekday, based an accepted trip
generation figures.
E. Documentation is provided from Wayne County Department of Public
Services indicating that the county will not accept the road into the
public road system.
F. A private road is being proposed that meets the requirements of this
chapter.
A. Design of the bridge or causeway shall be compatible with surrounding
land uses and will minimize impact on views along the waterfront.
Bridges shall have a low-profile design to ensure vehicle and pedestrian
safety and minimal impact on aesthetics. Bridges and causeways shall
be designed in accordance with Wayne County standards. The design of
the bridge shall incorporate measures to ensure pedestrian safety. The
design of the bridge shall be approved by the Township Board.
B. The bridge or causeway shall be located and designed to minimize
impact to natural features, including natural shorelines, wetlands, fish
and wildlife habitat and waterways.
C. The bridge or causeway shall be constructed so as not to obstruct the
navigability of the waterway. Where a bridge crosses a navigable
waterway, a swing, drawbridge or other opening mechanism shall be
provided to allow passage of watercraft.
D. A traffic impact study shall be prepared that demonstrates the
following:
§ 205-18 GROSSE ILE CODE § 205-18.1
1:404
(1) The proposed bridge or causeway will not generate a significant
additional amount of traffic in such a way that represents a burden
to existing bridges or roads.
(2) The proposed bridge or causeway's capacity will hold estimated
traffic and any projected traffic increases within 30 years of
completion of the structure.
E. The applicant shall obtain all necessary permits from the U.S. Army
Crops of Engineers, the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality, the U.S. Coast Guard and Wayne County.
F. Any directional sign to the bridge or causeway shall be subject to
Planning Commission approval.
G. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission that there are no existing bridges or causeways that can
accommodate the need for the proposed bridge or causeway.
H. The bridge or causeway shall provide for unimpeded emergency vehicle
access meeting the requirements of the Township Fire Marshal. A ferry
shall not serve as the means of access to residential dwellings. All
residential dwellings shall be accessible by roadways and bridges, and
building permits for dwellings shall not be issued until completion of
the bridge and road access.
I. Bridges and causeways shall comply with the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.45
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 285, Zoning.
§ 205-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-18.1
1:405

ARTICLE V
Private Roads
§ 205-19. Application and approval procedures.
The private road application and review procedure shall follow the same
procedure for site plan or subdivision plats, as outlined below. The
information required in this chapter shall be submitted with an application
for preliminary plat tentative, preliminary tentative condominium or final
site plan approval. For a subdivision or condominium, the general layout of
the road shall also be reviewed at the pre-preliminary plat stage.
A. Road Committee review and recommendation. The Road Committee
shall review all private road plans and other required materials. For a
subdivision or condominium, the Road Committee shall review the
general layout of the road at the pre-preliminary plat stage and provide
comment to the Planning Commission. The Road Committee shall
consider compliance with this chapter, sound planning and engineering
principles, and compliance with any other applicable ordinances. The
Road Committee may table any application which does not contain all
the information required by this chapter. If the required information is
included, the Road Committee shall make a recommendation to the
Planning Commission to either deny, approve, or approve subject to
conditions, any site plan, preliminary plat tentative or preliminary
tentative condominium application.
B. Planning Commission. Following technical review by Township staff,
consultants and the Road Committee, and compliance with
administrative procedures, the private road shall be reviewed by the
Planning Commission.
(1) Subdivision plats. Private roads that are proposed to be
constructed as part of a subdivision plat shall be reviewed as part
of the subdivision plat review process outlined in Chapter 283 of
the Municipal Code, Subdivision Control. The general layout of the
road will be reviewed at the pre-preliminary plat stage. All of the
information required under this chapter shall be included in the
preliminary plat tentative.
(2) Condominiums. Private roads that are proposed to be constructed
as part of a condominium or a site condominium shall be reviewed
as part of the condominium review process outlined in Chapter 71
of the Municipal Code, Condominium Projects. The general layout
of the road will be reviewed at the pre-preliminary condominium
stage. All of the information required under this chapter shall be
included in the preliminary tentative condominium plan.
(3) Site plans. Private roads that are not proposed to be constructed as
part of a subdivision plat, condominium or a site condominium shall
be reviewed following the site plan review process outlined in
Article 21, Site Plan Review, of Chapter 285, Zoning. Following the
§ 205-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-19
1:407
§ 205-20. Fees.
The Township Board shall determine a fee schedule for private road
applications which are being constructed independent of an application for
a subdivision plat or condominium. The amount of such fee shall take into
account the cost of the review, including any consultant reviews, required
herein.
§ 205-21. Application requirements.
standards contained in Article 21, the Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation to the Township Board on approval of the
private road.
C. Township Board. For subdivisions and condominium projects, the
Township Board shall review the private road at the final preliminary
stage. Final preliminary approval from the Township Board shall
constitute private road approval. For private roads that are not
proposed to be constructed as part of a subdivision plat, condominium
or a site condominium, the Township Board shall to either deny,
approve, or approve subject to conditions the private road based upon
the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
D. Engineering review. Following Township Board approval of a private
road, the Township Engineer shall make a full review of the engineering
plans. A land use permit shall not be issued until the Township Engineer
issues final approval of the engineering plans.
E. Performance guarantee. To assure completion and/or maintenance of a
private road in accordance with the requirements set forth herein, the
Township may require the applicant to provide a performance
guarantee. The amount and form of the performance guarantee shall be
determined in accordance with guidelines for fees provided in Chapter
285, Zoning.
F. As-built plans and inspection. Upon completion of the private road, the
applicant shall submit a complete set of as-built drawings, certified by
the applicant's engineer, to the Township. The Township Engineer shall
review the as-built drawings and conduct a final inspection to assure
that all visible construction, including cleanup, has been satisfactorily
completed.
A. Plans. The plans for a private road may be included as part of a
subdivision preliminary tentative plat, a condominium preliminary
tentative site plan, or a site plan. The private road plan shall be drawn
by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor. In addition to
the material required for these submittals, a proposal which includes a
private road shall include the following information:
(1) The exact location of the proposed private road easement in
relation to intersecting streets and adjacent properties.
§ 205-19 GROSSE ILE CODE § 205-21
1:408
(2) Road access point and intersection information including: all
adjacent or opposing road and driveways within 200 feet, offset
dimensions to nearest driveways and intersections, and sight
distance at all internal and external intersections.
(3) Road cross-section, showing type and depth of base and surface
materials, roadway dimensions, and curbing or ditches.
(4) Road dimensions including: width, segment lengths, and curve,
curb and cul-de-sac radii.
(5) Road and driveway approach profiles showing proposed road
grades.
(6) Road names.
(7) Locations of traffic regulatory signs.
(8) Outline of the extent of grading and tree removal.
(9) Other information necessary to demonstrate compliance with all
other applicable Township ordinances.
B. Road easement. A private road easement shall be submitted in
recordable form which meets the minimum standards set forth in
§ 205-22 of this chapter.
C. Road easement maintenance agreement. A private road easement
maintenance agreement shall be submitted in recordable form which
meets the minimum standards set forth in § 205-23 of this chapter.
D. Road name. Upon construction of the road, appropriate signs shall be
erected to identify the road name.
E. Permit. Any private road that intersects a public street shall provide the
Township with a copy of an approved Wayne County Department of
Public Services permit for access prior to private road site plan
approval.
§ 205-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-21
1:409

ARTICLE VI
Private Road Easements
§ 205-22. Easement agreement.
A private road easement agreement in recordable form shall be required. It
shall meet the following minimum requirements:
§ 205-23. Maintenance.
Continued maintenance of private roads shall be the responsibility of the
property owner(s) served by the roads. Private roads shall be maintained
in a condition suitable for travel at the design speed, as determined by the
Township Engineer, and passable for emergency vehicles, as determined
by the Township Fire Chief. Prior to issuance of construction permits, said
property owner(s) shall enter into a legally binding easement maintenance
agreement, which shall be subject to review and approval by the Township
Attorney.
A. Legal description. A detailed legal description of the private road
easement shall be submitted with its application.
B. Emergency and public vehicle access. The easement shall provide for
unrestricted access for emergency and public vehicles used in the
performance of necessary public services.
C. Future connections. The terms of the easement shall provide that the
Township Board may require that future abutting private roads or
public roads shall be connected to the existing private road.
D. Utilities. Below-ground utilities may be located within the private road
easement.
A. The easement maintenance agreement shall acknowledge that the road
surface and easement area are privately owned and therefore all
construction and improvements within the easement will be contracted
and paid for by the signatories to the agreement.
B. The agreement shall describe the method by which maintenance costs
and costs of improvements will be apportioned among the original
users.
C. The agreement shall describe the method for apportioning new users
for a proportionate share of the maintenance costs and costs of
improvements. The agreement shall indicate that the method of
apportioning costs applies whether the new users are a result of:
(1) Extension of the private road or driveway beyond its initial length;
or
(2) Connection to another private road; or
§ 205-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-23
1:411
§ 205-24. Special assessment provision.
The easement maintenance agreement shall contain a provision to permit
the Township Board to authorize the repair of any private road which
is not being maintained adequately to permit safe access by users and
emergency vehicles, and to assess the cost of such repair, including the
costs of engineering and administration, to the signatories to the agreement
on an equitable basis. The decision to authorize repair of a private road shall
be at the Township Board's sole discretion in accordance with its legislative
powers.
§ 205-25. Recording of easement and maintenance agreement.
All road easements and road easement maintenance agreements shall be
recorded by the applicant at the office of the Wayne County Register of
Deeds and proof of their recording shall be submitted to the Township prior
to any construction work on the private road.
(3) Division of property that is served by the private road or shared
driveway.
D. The agreement shall outline a maintenance schedule indicating
intervals for road inspection. Such inspection shall be accomplished by
a licensed civil engineer and be the responsibility of the signatories to
the agreement. The results of the road inspection shall be submitted to
the Township for review. The Township may require maintenance as
described above.
§ 205-23 GROSSE ILE CODE § 205-25
1:412
ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Private Roads and Driveways
§ 205-26. Declaration of nonconformity and intent.
The Township recognizes there exist private drives, service roads and
access easements which were lawful prior to the adoption of this chapter
which are inconsistent with the standards herein. Such roads are declared
by this article to be legal nonconforming private roads or easements. The
intent of this article is to permit legal nonconforming private roads and
easements to continue and undergo routine maintenance for safety
purposes, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. This article is also
intended to allow new construction to occur on existing lots which front
along such a road on the adoption date of this article, if the roads are
reasonably capable of providing sufficient access for the uses permitted in
the zoning district and for provision of emergency service vehicles.
§ 205-27. Reconstruction, widening or extension of nonconforming
roads.
This article is also intended to discourage the extension of nonconforming
private roads or increase the number of lots or building sites served by
such a road, unless provisions are made to upgrade such road to comply
with the standards herein. Any reconstruction, widening or extension of
a nonconforming private road or access easement shall be in conformity
with this chapter, provided, if the extension or land division results in no
more than two new lots or dwelling units, the road can be upgraded to
the extent considered necessary by the Planning Commission, based upon a
recommendation of the Road Committee and the Fire Department to bring
the road up to reasonable condition in consideration of the cost.
§ 205-28. Existing lots.
For purposes of determining whether a lot along a private road or access
easement qualifies as an "existing lot" as used in this article, at least one
of the following conditions must have existed at the time this article was
adopted:
A. The lot consists of a "condominium unit" for which a master deed had
been recorded with the Wayne County Register of Deeds in accordance
with the requirements of the Michigan Condominium Act and other
applicable laws and ordinances.
B. The lot consists of a parcel that was described by metes and bounds as
recorded by a deed or as a land contract, and registered with the Wayne
County Register of Deeds.
C. The lot had been assigned a unique parcel number by the Wayne County
Register of Deeds and was individually assessed and taxed on that
basis.
§ 205-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-28
1:413

ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 205-29. Appeal procedures.
§ 205-30. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements,
adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to
repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing
provision of law or ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings
or premises; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or
permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
A. An applicant who is aggrieved by a decision of the Township in
enforcing the provisions of this chapter may appeal such decision to the
Zoning Board of Appeals. In reviewing the appeal, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall determine whether the standards for variances and
appeals contained in Chapter 285, Zoning, have been met.
B. When considering an appeal for a variance to allow construction of a
gravel road within an unimproved public road right-of-way or private
road easement instead of a paved road as required in Article II of this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the following
criteria instead of the standards for variances and appeals contained in
Chapter 285, Zoning:
(1) The potential that the road can be extended to connect with other
paved streets.
(2) The number of lots that may be served by additional extensions of
the road.
(3) Whether the road can serve to access currently unsubdivided land.
(4) The relative isolation of the lot in comparison to the surrounding
road network.
(5) Comments from the Police Department and Fire Department
regarding the adequacy of construction for emergency vehicle
access.
C. All appeals must be filed, in writing, within seven days following the
decision.
D. Adjacent property owners within 300 feet of the subject site shall be
notified of the appeal and the date, time and place at which the appeal
will be considered.
§ 205-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-31
1:415
§ 205-31. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
§ 205-31 GROSSE ILE CODE § 205-31
1:416
Chapter 209
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Sewer use — See Ch. 210.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Water district — See Ch. 271.
§ 209-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ASSESSMENTS — The payment required to be made by the Township
of Grosse Ile to Wayne County for the retirement of the bonds issued
pursuant to Act 40 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956, as amended.
AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE CONNECTION CHARGE — The basic
connection charge of $390 for the sewer connection from the bond
sewer project or a lateral Township sewer in the public right-of-way to
the building sewer paid by each premises, user or users of the sewage
disposal system plus the additional charges established by this chapter
where special conditions exist.
BOND SEWER PROJECT — The bond sewer project constructed at a
cost of $4,650,000 by the County of Wayne, State of Michigan, Grosse
Ile Sanitary Interceptor Drain and Treatment Plant Drainage District
Board.
BUILDING PERMIT — That permit required by the Basic Building Code
of the Township for the construction of a complete building or structure
and shall not mean permits for the mechanical, electrical or plumbing
trades or so-called "footing permits."
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain on private
property to the public sewer connection better known as the availability
of service connection or other place of disposal.
CLUB MEMBER — Any individual, person, firm, or corporation who
form and are part of an association of persons for the promotion of
some common object.
CONTRACT — The contractual arrangement heretofore made, and
agreed to between the Grosse Ile Sanitary Interceptor Drain and
Treatment Plant Drainage Board and the Township of Grosse Ile.
DIRECT BENEFIT CONNECTION CHARGE — A connection charge of
$700 paid by each premises, user or users connected directly to the
bond sewer project.
§ 205-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-1
1:417
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
PREMISES — Any property from which emanates that quantity of
sewage ordinarily arising from an occupancy of a residential building
by a single family of ordinary size.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any septic tank, cesspool or
other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sanitary sewage, not
under Township jurisdiction.
READINESS-TO-SERVE CHARGE — A charge as set in § 209-5 paid
by each premises connecting directly to a bond sewer project or each
premises connecting directly to any lateral sewer system of the
Township.[Amended 7-22-2002]
SANITARY SEWAGE — The liquid or water-carried waste discharged
from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including houses and
hotels), office buildings, factories and any other institution.
SANITARY SEWERS — Those sewers of the sewage disposal system
designed for the purpose of carrying sanitary flow only.
SEWAGE — Any combination of sanitary sewage, stormwater, industrial
wastes and uncontaminated industrial wastes.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Includes all sanitary sewers, combined
sanitary and storm sewers, plants, works, instrumentalities and
properties used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment
and/or disposal of sewage and/or industrial wastes, now in existence
and owned by the Township of Grosse Ile or hereafter acquired or
constructed within the corporate limits of the Township of Grosse Ile by
the Township of Grosse Ile.
SHOPPING CENTER — Includes any lot or parcel of land or contiguous
lots or parcels of land comprising a total of three or more acres upon
which there is located one or more buildings serviced by a central
parking area or areas and where there is more than one building
arranged so that customers can travel from one retail business or
building to another without use of public sidewalks or streets. Gasoline
service stations shall not, in any case, be considered a part of or within
a shopping center but shall be considered as a separate business for
which a separate connection charge shall be required.
STORM SEWERS — Shall be construed and limited to mean only those
sewers carrying only stormwaters.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Grosse Ile.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Township Board of the Township of Grosse
Ile.
UNIT — Any property which uses that quantity of water ordinarily
arising from the occupancy of a residence building by a single family of
ordinary size as set forth in the following Schedule of Factors.
§ 209-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 209-1
1:418
§ 209-2. Management of sewage disposal system.
§ 209-3. Sewer connection rates. [Amended 5-26-1981 by Ord. No.
139]
USER or USERS — Any premise or premises, building or buildings,
connected either directly or indirectly with and using any of the sewage
disposal system for the disposition and removal of sewage or wastes.
For the purpose of determining sewer connection charges, in the case
of shopping centers and in other instances where more than one
building is located on one parcel of land, each separate building shall be
construed as a separate user notwithstanding the manner of connection
to the sewage disposal system, whether directly to a bond sewer project
or by connection to a private lateral sewer or Township lateral sewer.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
A. The sewage disposal system as defined in this chapter shall be and
remain under the general management, supervision and control of the
Township Board of the Township of Grosse Ile, and be administered by
the Township's Department of Public Works, subject to the contractual
arrangements made with the Grosse Ile Sanitary Interceptor Drain and
Treatment Plant Drainage District Board and the Township of Grosse
Ile.
B. The sewage disposal system shall have an operating or fiscal year
commencing on December 1 and ending on the last day of November of
each year.
A. The connection rates and charges for the services and benefits provided
by the sewage disposal system shall be as prescribed from time to time
by the Township Board. Before any connection shall be made to any
bond sewer project or a lateral Township sewer, application for same
shall be made in writing to the Township by the owner of the premises
to be served, or by his or her authorized agent. Such application shall
be made on forms provided by the Township. The owner, user and/or
applicant for a sewer connection permit by such application impliedly
agrees to abide by all rules and regulations of the Township in all due
respects, but more especially with those respecting the responsibility
for the payment for sewer charges. The following shall be the
connection rates and charges for connecting to the sewer disposal
system. In addition to the consumption charge, or any other lawful
charge or fee, and notwithstanding any ordinance or resolution of the
Township, each premises connecting directly to the bond sewer project
and all types of commercial and industrial buildings or parcels of
property used for other than a single-family purpose, and each user or
users benefit connection charge of $1,400. In addition to the direct
benefit connection charge of $1,400 each premises connecting directly
to the bond sewer project shall pay a readiness-to-serve charge of $600.
This total amount of $2,000 shall be paid in full prior to a connection
§ 209-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-3
1:419
§ 209-4. Rates for premises connecting to lateral sewers. [Amended
5-26-1981 by Ord. No. 139; 11-26-1990 by Ord. No. 180]
Each premises connecting directly to any lateral sewer system of the
Township shall pay a readiness-to-serve charge of $600. The total amount of
$600 readiness-to-serve charge may be paid over a period not exceeding 10
years. In the event that the owner of such premises elects to make payment
over a period of 10 years, he shall give the Township a lien to such premises
for the amount of said charges and pay 1/10 of said charge plus the fee
required for recording the lien to the Treasurer of the Township. On the
being made to the sewage disposal system, provided, that the owner of
the premises may elect to pay said charges over a period not exceeding
10 years. In the event that the owner of such premises elects to make
payment over a period of 10 years he shall give the Township a lien
on such premises for the amount of said charge and pay 1/10 of said
charge plus the fee required for recording the lien to the Treasurer
of the Township. On the next successive December 1 and annually
thereafter, the Treasurer shall bill the owner 1/10 of the said charge
plus interest of 8% on the unpaid balance. [Amended 11-26-1990 by
Ord. No. 180]
B. If such annual billings are unpaid by the following January 20 of any
year, the yearly charge shall be subject to a penalty as provided by law
for unpaid taxes and if said charges remain unpaid as of the following
February 28, they shall be returned delinquent, with interest and
penalty added to the County Treasurer for collection in the same
manner in which the Township, county and school taxes are returned
delinquent. Any owner of premises may elect to prepay said amount
with interest of 8% per annum on the unpaid balance at any time so
long as he is not delinquent hereunder. The total amount of $700 direct
benefit connection charge to be paid by the user or users of property
used for other than a single-family purpose connecting directly to the
bond sewer project may be paid by the owner of the properties in full
prior to a connection being made to the sewage disposal system or over
a period not exceeding seven years, he shall give the Township a lien on
such premises for the amount of said charge and pay 1/7 of said charge
plus the fee required for recording the lien to the Treasurer of the
Township. On the next successive December 1 and annually thereafter,
the Treasurer shall bill the owner 1/7 of the said charge plus interest at
8% on the unpaid balance. If such annual billings are unpaid by the
following January 20 of any year, the yearly charge shall be subject to a
penalty as provided by law for unpaid taxes, and if said charge remains
unpaid as of the following February 28, they shall be returned
delinquent, with interest and penalty added to the County Treasurer for
collection in the same manner in which the Township, county and
school taxes are returned delinquent. Any owner of said building or
buildings may elect to prepay said $700 direct benefit connection
charge with interest at 8% per annum on the unpaid balance at any time
so long as he is not delinquent hereunder.
§ 209-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 209-4
1:420
next successive December 1 and annually thereafter, the Treasurer shall bill
the owner 1/10 of the said charge plus interest at 8% on the unpaid balance.
If such annual billings are unpaid by the following January 20 of any year,
the yearly charge shall be subject to a penalty as provided by law for unpaid
taxes, and if said charges remain unpaid as of the following February 28,
they shall be returned delinquent, with interest and penalty added to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner in which the Township,
county and school taxes are returned delinquent. Any owner of premises
may elect to prepay said amount with interest at 8% per annum on the
unpaid balance at any time so long as he is not delinquent hereunder.46
§ 209-5. Rates for various users of commercial and industrial
buildings. [Amended 5-26-1981 by Ord. No. 139]
A. Readiness to serve. [Added 11-26-1990 by Ord. No. 180]
(1) Users of multifamily residential buildings connecting directly to
lateral sewers of the Township system or the bond sewer project
shall pay a readiness-to-serve charge of $600 per residential unit.
Commercial and industrial buildings or parcels of property
connecting directly to lateral sewers of the Township system or the
bond sewer project shall pay a readiness-to-serve charge of $600
per 1,000 square feet of building (or any lesser portion of 1,000
square feet); $600 for each 1,000 additional square feet (or any
lesser portion of 1,000 additional square feet).
(2) In cases of expansion of existing buildings, additional readiness-toserve
charge shall be levied in the amounts set forth in this
paragraph based upon the additional square footage.
B. The unit factor shall be applicable only to the readiness-to-serve charge
of $300 to all types of users of commercial and industrial buildings used
for other than a single-family purpose. All users of types of commercial
and industrial buildings or parcels of property used for other than a
single-family purpose connecting directly to lateral sewers of the
Township system or the bond sewer project shall pay a unit readinessto-
serve charge of $300 at the time of application for the sewer permit
according to the following schedule:
Usage Schedule of Factors
Auto dealers 0.304 per stall
Barbershops 0.14 per chair
Bars 0.044 per seat
Beauty salons 0.223 per booth
Board houses 0.16 per person
46.Editor's Note: Original Section 38.3, Subsection 3, regarding Potawatomie Woods
premises, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-26-1990 by Ord.
No. 180.
§ 209-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-5
1:421
Usage Schedule of Factors
Boarding schools 0.27 per person
Bowling alleys 0.16 per alley
Car wash 10.00 single production line
Churches 0.008 per seat
Cleaners (pickup only) 0.048 per employee
Cleaners (pressing facilities) 1.25 per press
Clinics 0.50 per doctor
Convalescent homes 0.22 per bed
Convents 0.20 per person
Country clubs, yacht clubs and
boat clubs
0.08 per member
Drug stores (with fountain
services)
0.08 per seat
Factories (exclusive of industrial
waste)
0.08 per person, per shift
Fraternal organization (member
only)
1.0 per hall
Fraternal organizations
(members and rentals)
2.10 per hall
Grocery stores and
supermarkets
0.48 per employee
Hotels (private baths, 2 persons
per room)
0.25 per bed
Laundry (self-service) 0.54 per washer
Multiple-family residence 0.56 per unit
Office building 0.048 per employee
Restaurants (dinner and/or
drinks)
0.13 per seat
Rooming house (no seals) 0.13 per person
Schools (without showers and/or
pool)
0.010 per student
Schools (showers and/or pool) 0.052 per student
Service station (automobile) 0.24 per pump
Single-family residence 2.0 per dwelling
Snack bars, drive-ins, etc. 0.08 per seat and/or stall
Store (other than specifically
listed)
0.16 per employee
Swimming pool 2.85 per 1,000 square feet
§ 209-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 209-5
1:422
§ 209-6. Service charge and existing or new lateral systems.
Usage Schedule of Factors
Theaters (drive-ins) 0.008 per car space
Theaters (inside with air
conditioning)
0.000093 x weekly hours of
operations x seats
Tourist courts (individual bath
units)
0.27 per cubicle
Trailer parks (central bath
houses)
0.35 per trailer
C. In no case shall the readiness-to-serve unit charge be less than for one
unit. In addition thereto, the cost of such connection, as determined by
the Township Board, shall be paid by the person, firm or corporation to
whom the permit is issued in such manner and upon such terms as the
Township Board may from time to time provide by duly adopted rules
and regulations, the total amount of the unit connection readiness-toserve
charge may be paid by the owner on June 27, 1966, or over a
period not exceeding 10 years. In the event that the owner of such
premises elects to make payment over a period of 10 years he shall give
the Township a lien on such premises for the amount of said charges
and pay 1/10 of said charge plus the fee required for recording the lien
to the Treasurer of the Township. On the next successive December 1
and annually thereafter, the Treasurer shall bill the owner 1/10 of the
said charge plus interest of 8% on the unpaid balance. If such annual
billings are unpaid by the following January 20 of any year, the yearly
charge shall be subject to penalty as provided by law for unpaid taxes,
and if said charges remain unpaid as of the following February 28, they
shall be returned delinquent, with interest and penalty added to the
County Treasurer for collection in the same manner in which the
Township, county and school taxes are returned delinquent. Any owner
of premises may elect to prepay said amount with interest at 8% per
annum on the unpaid balance at any time so long as he is not delinquent
hereunder. For any connections to schools and churches, public
buildings and public nonprofit organizations and yacht, boat and
country clubs, such connection charge and the method of payment
thereof, shall be fixed and not covered by the unit factor and readinessto-
serve charge of $300 shall be fixed and determined by resolution of
the Township Board at the time of application for any such sewer
connection.47
A. On any premises and all types of commercial and industrial buildings
now connected or hereafter connected to any of the sewers of the
system, there shall be a service charge of $44.09 per quarter.
[Amended 7-22-2002]
47.Editor's Note: Original Section 38.3, Subsections 5 and 6, regarding commercial and
industrial properties, which immediately followed this subsection, were repealed
11-26-1990 by Ord. No. 180.
§ 209-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-6
1:423
§ 209-7. Minimum sewer bills. [Amended 7-22-2002]
The minimum sewage disposal bill per quarter shall be as determined by
resolution of the Township Board, plus applicable service charge; provided
that on any premises connected to the sewer system of the Township but
not connected to available mains of the water system of the Township the
minimum sewage disposal bill per quarter shall also be as determined by
resolution of the Township Board, plus applicable service charge.
§ 209-8. Special rates.
For miscellaneous services for which a special rate should be established,
such rates shall be fixed by resolution of the Township Board. Where a user
uses a large amount of water which is not discharged into the sewers of
the system, a special rate for sewage disposal service to such user may be
established.
§ 209-9. Change of rates; water rates. [Amended 7-22-2002]
B. Any existing lateral sewer system or installation may be accepted and
merged into the present Township sewer system if accepted by the
Township. Such acceptance of the existing lateral system shall be
evidenced by a certificate of acceptance to the system issued under a
resolution of acceptance by the Township Board. Any new lateral
system or trunk system to be added to the present system shall also
require a certificate of acceptance to the system issued under a
resolution of acceptance by the Township Board.
A. The sewage and water rates to be established are to be sufficient to
provide at least for the payment of the annual assessment required to
be made to Wayne County in connection with the Grosse Ile Sanitary
Interceptor Drain and Treatment Plant Drainage District Board, and for
the payment of operation and maintenance costs of the sewage disposal
system. The Township Board may classify the users of water according
to the quantity of water used, and other special conditions, and charge
such rates to users in each class as it may deem reasonable. Payment of
such charges may be enforced by shutting off water, by action of
assumpsit against the owners or occupants, and by any other remedy
that may be provided by statute, charter or ordinance. The rates are to
be as determined by resolution of the Township Board.
B. If a meter larger than three inches is desired, or if any premises shall be
served without a meter, the Township Board may by resolution fix a
reasonable special rate.
C. Bills shall be rendered quarterly by the Township, and shall be due and
payable to the Township Treasurer on the 15th day of each month
following the end of each quarter. If not paid within 15 days after they
become due, 10% will be added to the bill; and if not paid within 30
days, water will be turned off, and an additional charge as determined
by resolution of the Township Board shall be made for turning the water
§ 209-6 GROSSE ILE CODE § 209-9
1:424
§ 209-10. Books and records.
The Township shall cause to be maintained and kept proper books of record
and account, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all
transactions relating to the sewer system, in conformity with the uniform
system of accounts as prescribed by the Michigan Public Service
Commission or the Auditor General of Michigan. Not later than two months
after the close of each fiscal year, the Township shall cause to be prepared a
statement in reasonable detail, showing the cash income and disbursements
of the sewer system at the beginning and close of the fiscal year, and
such other information as may be necessary to enable any taxpayer of the
Township, user or beneficiary of the services furnished, to be fully informed
as to all matters pertaining to the fiscal operation of the system during such
year. Such annual statement shall be filed in the office of the Township Clerk
where it will be open to public inspection. Such books of record and account
shall be audited annually by a Certified Public Accountant to be designated
by the Township Board and a certified copy of such audit shall be filed with
the Township Clerk.
§ 209-11. Connections to system.
No connection shall be made or permitted to be made to any of the sewer
system or sewer of the sewer system without obtaining the permit specified
in this chapter, nor shall any connection be made or permitted to be made to
any of the sanitary sewers of the sewer system which will in any way cause
stormwater or surface drainage to be carried into said sanitary sewers,
except those combined systems presently connected. Application for permit
on again. Bills shall also be a personal liability of the owner or occupant
of the premises.
D. Rates to be established for water and sewage service shall be sufficient
to provide for the full and prompt payment of interest on and the
principal of all bonded indebtedness with respect to the Township's
water supply and sewage disposal systems; to create and fund a bond
and interest redemption fund therefor; to provide for the payment of
the expenses of administration, operation and maintenance of such
systems in good repair and working order; to build up a capital
expansion fund for the systems or a reserve for depreciation of such
systems; and to build up a reserve for improvements, betterments and
extensions thereto other than those necessary to maintain the same in
good repair and working order.
E. Such rates shall be revised and fixed from time to time, as may be
necessary to produce these required amounts; and the Township and its
Township Board hereby convenient and agree to maintain such rates as
shall be sufficient to provide therefor. The Township shall pay out of the
appropriate general funds the reasonable value of water furnished to
the Township by said system, and the charges for public hydrants, on
the basis of the foregoing schedule of rates.
§ 209-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-11
1:425
to connect to any of the sewer mains of the sewer system shall be made
simultaneously with application for building permit. Any person, firm or
corporation making an unauthorized connection to the sewer system, or
violating any of the rules and regulations lawfully established pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 209-12. Penalty.
Chapter 210
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 209.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Wetlands and drainageways — See Ch. 275.
§ 210-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
served written notice stating the nature of such violation and providing
a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, comply
with the requirement thereof.
B. Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1,
Article II, Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this
chapter. [Added 7-22-2002]
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the
following terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ASTM — American Society for Testing Materials current specifications
and standards.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in parts
per million by weight.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drain pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning approximately five feet outside the inner face
of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
§ 209-11 GROSSE ILE CODE § 210-1
1:426
CHLORINE DEMAND — The difference between the amount of chlorine
added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine
remaining at the end of a specified contact period.
COD (denoting "chemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test.
COMBINATION SEWER OR COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving
both surface runoff and sewage.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — A substance amenable to treatment in a
sewage treatment plant such as BOD, suspended solids, pH and fecal
coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES
permit of the sewage treatment plant which is designed to treat such
pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to an acceptable
degree. These additional pollutants may include COD, total organic
carbon, phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen and nitrogen
compounds, fats, oils, and greases of animal or vegetable origin.
CRITICAL MATERIALS — The organic and inorganic substances,
elements or compounds listed in the register compiled by the MDNR.
DAILY AVERAGE — Shall be based upon a minimum of eight grab
samples at one-hour intervals.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, processing and sale
of perishable produce.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which is not a
compatible pollutant as defined above.
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY — A charge imposed on an industrial
user to reflect its share of the amount of grant funds received to
construct wastewater treatment works as provided under United States
Public Law 92 to 500 and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY PERIOD — A period of time equal to
30 years or the useful life of the treatment works as indicated under
"industrial cost recovery."
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any nongovernmental or nonresidential user of
the wastewater treatment system, identified in the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual" (1972 Edition) under Division A, B, D, E or I.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes, solids, or semisolids from
industrial processes as distinct from domestic sanitary sewage.
MDNR — The Michigan Department of Natural Resources or any of
its affiliates, including the State Health Department, of the State of
Michigan.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, canal, waterway,
pond, ditch, lake, or other body of water, either surface or ground
water.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-1
1:427
NONINDUSTRIAL USER — All users not defined under "industrial
user" in this chapter.
NPDES PERMIT — The National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System permit.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS — The expenditures
required for operating, maintaining and replacement of the sewage
disposal system.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company association society,
corporation or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PRETREATMENT — Treatment given to sewage prior to its discharge,
directly or indirectly, to the WCDC by the user in order to remove illegal
and/or undesirable constituents or to reduce the strength of the waste.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the cooking,
preparation and dispensing of food that has been cut or shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting property
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
REPLACEMENT COSTS — The expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances during the useful
life of the sewage treatment plant or pumping station necessary to
maintain the capacity and performance for which such works are
designed and constructed.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any liquid wastes discharged from residences,
business buildings and institutions, as distinct from industrial wastes
with strengths not exceeding the following limits: suspended solids: 250
ppm; BOD: 200 ppm; and Phosphorus: 10 ppm.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface and ground waters (including roof drains and
downspouts) are not admitted.
SEWAGE — Any combination of water-carried wastes (including
laundry wastes) from residences, business buildings, institutions and
industrial establishments together with such ground, surface and storm
waters as may be present.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Includes all sanitary sewers, combined
sanitary and storm sewers, plants, works, instrumentalities and
properties used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment
and/or disposal of sewage and/or industrial wastes, now in existence
or hereafter acquired or constructed within the corporate limits of the
Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 210-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 210-1
1:428
§ 210-2. Use of public sewers required.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — The arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage. The sewage treatment plant
serving Grosse Ile Township is owned, operated, and maintained by the
Grosse Ile Sanitary Interceptor Drain and Treatment Plant Drainage
District acting through the Wayne County Drain Commissioner on
behalf of Grosse Ile Township.
SEWER — Any pipe, tile, tube or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGES — The charges for sewer system
operation, maintenance and replacement (OM&R), any local capital
costs if included, and the industrial cost recovery charge (ICR).
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period
of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but which excludes sewage and polluted
industrial wastes.
SURCHARGE — The additional treatment charges made for the
treatment of wastewater containing pollutants in excessive amounts of
those listed for sanitary sewage.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The solids that either float on the surface of,
or are suspended in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The duly elected governing body of the
Township of Grosse Ile, Wayne County, Michigan.
USER CHARGES — The charges to recover operation, maintenance and
replacement (OM&R) costs only of the sewage disposal system passed
on to the system users.
WATERCOURSE — A channel, canal or waterway in which a flow of
water occurs, either continuously or intermittently, including the
Detroit River, Lake Erie and the Thorofare Canal.
WCDC — The office of the Wayne County Drain Commissioner acting
through the Drain Commissioner.
WCRC — The office of the Wayne County Road Commission.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon any public or private property
within the Township of Grosse Ile or in any area under the jurisdiction
of the said Township of Grosse Ile any human or animal excrement,
garbage, or other objectionable waste.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:429
§ 210-3. Installation and connection of sewers; permits required.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural watercourse or storm
drain under jurisdiction of WCDC and within the Township of Grosse Ile
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the said Township of Gross Ile
any sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
standards established by the MDNR.
C. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated upon
property within the Township which abuts on any street, alley, right-ofway
or easement in which there is now, or may be in the future, located
a public sanitary sewer of the Township, is hereby required at his own
expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such
facilities directly to the public sanitary sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within a period not later than one year from
the time that such public sanitary sewer is lawfully available to him for
connection.
D. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facilities
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
A. No person without authorization of the WCDC and the Township shall
uncover, make any connections with or open into, use, alter or disturb
any public sewer or any appurtenance thereof without first obtaining
two written permits, one from WCDC and one from the Township Clerk
or other official designated by the Township Board. The fees for such
permits shall be in the amounts established form time to time by the
WCDC and the Township Board, respectively.
B. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of said property. The
owner shall indemnify the WCDC and Township for all loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by any and all construction
of sewers.
C. All connections to a public sanitary sewer shall be made only on written
authorization and permits issued by the WCDC and Township on such
forms as shall be established from time to time by the WCDC and
Township and on payment of fees according to the schedule of fees
posted.
D. All applicants for sanitary sewer permits shall first submit plans and
specifications for the proposed construction to WCDC, which plans and
specifications shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer
in accordance with standards as provided by the WCDC. When such
plans and specifications have been approved by the WCDC a temporary
construction permit may be issued subject to a final inspection and
§ 210-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 210-3
1:430
§ 210-4. Discharge to public sanitary sewer.
approval when construction is completed and ready for connection with
the public sanitary sewer system.
E. The applicant for a sewer permit shall notify the WCDC and Township
Board when the sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. WCDC may and the Township Board or its authorized
representatives shall then inspect the said building and plumbing
construction therein and, if such construction meets previous
requirements as approved in the construction permit, WCDC may and
the Township Board shall issue a sewer connection permit subject to the
provisions of any other sections of this chapter.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer,
except as hereinafter provided.
B. No footing drain tile of any building may be connected to the separate
sanitary system. Footing drain tile from existing buildings shall be
disconnected from the sanitary sewer system.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to a
public sewer, sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
(1) Sewage discharges shall conform in all respects to the criteria set
forth in this section, unless specifically excepted by the WCDC.
Future conditions imposed by federal or state agencies may require
subsequent reappraisal and modifications to these criteria by the
WCDC. Where federal or state regulations, including but not
limited to the NPDES permit, require limits on parameters not
covered in this section or limits more stringent than those specified
in this section, the federal or state limits shall take precedence.
(a) Any liquor or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
(b) Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
(c) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(d) Any garbage which has not been properly shredded.
(e) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, wood pulp, manure, or any
other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction
to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works.
§ 210-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:431
(f) Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than
10.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazards to the structures, equipment or personnel
of the sewage disposal system.
(g) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous
substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, fish or aquatic life or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(h) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage disposal plant.
(i) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance.
(j) Must not contain any explosive substance. In the case of gas or
vapors, the concentrations shall not exceed 20% of lower
explosive limits.
(k) Shall contain no substance with a viscosity greater than 100%
of water.
(l) Shall contain no material causing coloration or light
absorbency, to interfere with plant processes or analytical
determination, such as (but not limited to) dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(m) Shall contain no radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration as may exceed limits established by
applicable state or federal regulations.
(n) May contain sludge which results from a treatment process,
either potable water, municipal or industrial wastes, but only if
it is completely amenable to conventional wastewater
treatment without application of unusual means or expense.
Septic tank sludge will be accepted from licensed operators
when delivered to a designated disposal site upon compliance
with the conditions imposed by the Township Board and the
WCDC and after payment to the Township of a fee assessed by
the Township Board.
(o) Shall not contain unusual volume of flow or concentration of
wastes constituting "slugs."
(p) Shall not contain concentrations of certain "special wastewater
constituents" in amounts greater than set forth in § 210-11 of
this chapter.
(q) Exceed the hydraulic capacity of any downstream part of the
sewage disposal system.
§ 210-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 210-4
1:432
(2) Sampling shall be carried out by appropriate methods.
D. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
E. Pretreatment and prohibited discharge.
(1) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances, possess the characteristics, or exceed the limitations
enumerated in Subsection C of this section, or which in the
judgment of WCDC may have a deleterious effect on the sewage
disposal system, the Township Board shall prohibit the discharge of
the wastes to a public sewer, or may:
(a) Temporarily permit the discharge of the wastes to a public
sewer subject to any conditions that the WCDC may
recommend based on their review of such factors as quantity of
the waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment works,
degree of treatability of the waste, NPDES permit limitations,
and any other pertinent factor; or
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to a public sewer, including but not limited to the standards set
forth in 40 CFR Part 403 entitled "Pretreatment Standards";
and/or
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge to
public sewers.
(2) In all cases, the Township Board shall require payment to cover any
additional costs it or the WCDC may incur in connection with the
inspecting, sampling, testing, handling and treating the wastes, not
covered by existing sewage charges.
(3) When the pretreatment or equalization of sewage flows is
permitted, the design and installation of the plants and equipment
shall be subject to the review and approval of the WCDC and
subject to the requirement of all applicable codes, ordinances, and
laws.
F. When pretreatment standards are adopted by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency for any given class of industries, then
any industry within that class must conform to the United States
Environmental Protection Agency timetable for adherence to
pretreatment requirements as well as all other applicable requirements
promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency in
accordance with the provisions of the law. Additionally, such industries
§ 210-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-4
1:433
§ 210-5. Protection from damage.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage disposal system.
§ 210-6. Power and authority of inspectors.
The Township Board and other duly authorized employees of the said
Township, and agents of the SWRC and WCDC bearing proper credentials
and identification, may be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing of
wastewater in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at any time
during reasonable or usual business hours.
§ 210-7. Penalty.
shall comply with such more stringent standards necessitated by local
conditions as determined from time to time by the WCDC.
G. Where pretreatment of flow equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
H. When required by the WCDC, Township or the MDNR, the owner of any
property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurements of wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans prepared by a registered
professional engineer and approved by the WCDC. The manhole shall
be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by
him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
I. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm
sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the WCDC, Township Board,
WCDC, where appropriate, and/or the MDNR. Industrial cooling water
or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the
WCDC, Township Board and the MDNR, to a storm sewer, combined
sewer or natural outlet.
J. The WCDC and the Township shall reserve the right to establish a
specific contract with each industrial user for the purpose of regulating
discharges into the sewage disposal system. The establishment of the
contract shall be at the initiative of WCDC or the Township and shall be
binding upon an industry before it is allowed to discharge into the
sewage disposal system.
A. Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1,
§ 210-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 210-7
1:434
§ 210-8. Private sewage disposal.
§ 210-9. User charges.
Article II, Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this
chapter. [Amended 7-22-2002]
B. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable
to the Township for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned to the
Township by reason of such violation.
A. Where a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer is not available under
the provisions of § 210-2C above, the building sewer shall be connected
with a private disposal system complying with the provisions and
requirements of the MDNR, the County Board of Health or any health
officer having jurisdiction over the same as outlined in the Compiled
Laws of the State of Michigan for 1948 and all amendments thereto.
B. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property serviced
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 210-2C, a direct
connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this
chapter, and any septic tanks, privy, privy vault, cesspool or similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with
suitable material.
C. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the WCDC or
Township.
D. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the MDNR or
the County Board of Health or other health officers that have proper
jurisdiction.
A. User charges shall be established and charged to users of the sewage
disposal system. The user charges consist of two parts. The first part
shall be established by the WCDC based on a rate for volume and/or
strength of discharge, and in an amount which shall provide for the
payment of operation, maintenance and replacement costs of WCDC's
sewage disposal system. The second part shall be established by the
Township based on a rate to provide for use of operation and
administrative costs of the Township. The user charges shall be
established as are necessary to preserve the sewage disposal system in
good repair and working order, and to provide for the payment of other
unanticipated expenses as may be incurred in the operation of the
system.
B. The WCDC shall assess the Township the sewer user charges in
advance for operation, maintenance and replacement costs of the
sewage disposal system. Thereafter, WCDC shall assess the Township
on a semiannual basis. The first semiannual assessment will be on an
§ 210-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-9
1:435
estimated basis for sewer user charges for six months of the upcoming
year. The second semiannual assessment will include both the estimate
for the second half of the current year and an adjustment for the prior
six months based upon actual rates and actual usage.
C. The Township shall be responsible for billing and collecting the sewer
user charges of WCDC from the sewage disposal system users. These
bills shall be rendered to sewer users as frequently as necessary to pay
the sewer user charges as assessed by WCDC but no less frequently
than quarterly.
D. The Township of Grosse Ile shall bill the users for the total cost of the
operation, maintenance and replacement annual budget, as billed to
them by WCDC, on the basis of a unit rate for volume and/or strength of
discharge. The user classes shall be billed the user charges based upon
their proportionate contribution of wastewater parameters to the
treatment system. Initially, for the first year's operation, the user
charges shall be based on estimated cost and estimated usage.
Thereafter, the Township of Grosse Ile, acting through its Board of
Trustees, shall review annually the user charges in order to adequately
maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance
costs among users and user classes, and to generate sufficient revenue
to pay the total operation and maintenance (including replacement) of
the treatment works. Excess revenues collected from a class of users
shall be applied to the costs of operation and maintenance attributable
to that class for the next year and adjust the rates accordingly.
(1) Such review shall be done by the Township of Grosse Ile, acting
through its Board of Trustees, using generally accepted accounting
principles. A written report shall be prepared and submitted to the
Board of Trustees, to the Drainage Board for Grosse Ile Sanitary
Interceptor Drain and Treatment Plant Improvements, and to the
WCDC. The annual date for review shall be June 1 of each year.
(2) The annual review shall be further documented by the annual
report of the Township of Grosse Ile being placed into the minutes
of the Board of Trustees of the Township of Grosse Ile, and of the
Drainage Board at regularly scheduled meetings. Appropriate
legislation, if necessary, should be enacted by the Board of Trustees
to adjust the user charges.
(3) Following the annual review, in conjunction with a regular bill, each
user shall be notified of the rate adjustments and that portion of the
sewer service charge which is attributable to OM&R costs of
wastewater treatment services.
E. Payment of the sewer user charges shall be made to WCDC within 30
days from the date of the invoice of WCDC to the Township. Failure to
pay within this period shall result in a penalty equal to the current
prevailing interest rate plus costs incurred by WCDC in recovery
moneys rightfully owed to WCDC.
§ 210-9 GROSSE ILE CODE § 210-9
1:436
§ 210-10. Accounting.
§ 210-11. Industrial cost recovery.
F. No free service shall be furnished to any person, firm or corporation,
public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality.
A. The Township shall establish the necessary accounting procedures and
internal controls to insure that the sewer user charges are
appropriately accounted for. These accounting procedures shall adhere
to generally accepted accounting principles consistently applied as
established for governmental accounting and financial reporting
purposes.
B. The Township shall establish a separate fund entitled "Sewer User
Charge Operation, Maintenance, and Replacement Fund." This fund
shall be established consistent with generally accepted accounting
principles and governmental accounting and financial reporting
practices. The purpose of this fund shall be to account for operation,
maintenance and replacement expenses of the sewage disposal system.
Revenues collected from sewer user charges shall be accounted for in
this fund and shall be used to pay in the following order: first, all
invoiced amounts of WCDC to the Township for operation, maintenance
and replacement costs of the sewage disposal system; second, current
expenses incurred by the Township for the administration and
operation of the system; and third, such current expenses for
maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the system in
good repair and working order. The WCDC shall be responsible and
accountable for the administration of any funds received from the
Township for replacement of the sewage disposal system. These funds
shall be a part of the sewer user charge and shall provide for, as
needed, the replacement of equipment in the sewage disposal system as
said equipment's useful life ends.
C. The Township Board shall, prior to the commencement of each
operating year, adopt a budget covering the anticipated expenses for
the system for the ensuing year. In addition a review of the system per
CFR 35.929-2 shall be completed biannually by WCDC.
D. Surcharges. All industrial and commercial users discharging an extra
strength industrial wastewater to the sewage disposal system shall be
monitored and surcharged in accordance with the schedule of charges
to be set forth by resolution. The surcharge funds collected shall be
deposited into the Sewer User Charge Operation, Maintenance and
Replacement Fund.
A. Industrial cost recovery. All industrial users discharging industrial
wastewater into the system and meeting the following conditions shall
be assessed an annual industrial cost recovery charge in addition to the
sewer user charges described in § 210-9. In order to qualify for the
industrial cost recovery charge, an industrial user is defined as any
§ 210-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-11
1:437
nongovernmental, nonresidential user which discharges more than
25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary waste and which is identified in
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual under one of the divisions
(A, B, D, E, or I); or which discharges a volume of process waste,
or combined process and sanitary waste, equivalent to 25,000 gpd of
sanitary waste. For the purpose of equivalency, the weight of BOD, SS,
or P equivalent to that weight found in 25,000 gpd of sanitary waste
will be used. Additionally, any user which discharges a wastewater
containing pollutants which interfere with the normal wastewater
treatment process, are toxic or incompatible or contaminate or
otherwise reduce the utility of the sludge is considered an industrial
user. Employee waste may be deducted from an industry's discharge
in calculating charges and determine whether its discharges the
equivalent of 25,000 gpd. All industrial users being assessed an
industrial cost recovery charge shall annually furnish to the Township a
factual number of employees employed by said user and the industry's
maximum daily water consumption, in thousands of gallons, throughout
the year. The Township shall forward such information within 30 days
to the WCDC.
B. An industrial user that discontinues its use of the treatment works
during the industrial cost recovery period shall not be required to
continue ICR charge payment beyond the point of discontinued use. An
industrial user beginning use of the treatment works during the ICR
period shall be obligated to pay ICR charges only for the remainder of
the ICR period. If further upgrading or expansion of the treatment
works occurs, the ICR charges shall be adjusted proportionately to
include the additional costs involved.
C. Industrial cost recovery fund.
(1) The industrial cost recovery charges shall be annually billed by the
Township to each qualified industrial user and the proceeds kept in
a separate depository account entitled "Industrial Cost Recovery
Fund." Said industrial cost recovery charges shall be in effect for a
period beginning with the completion of the applicable project and
extending 30 years thereafter.
(2) The proceeds of the industrial cost recovery fund shall be
transferred annually within 30 days of the end of the fiscal year to
the WCDC, who shall be responsible and accountable for the
administration of the industrial cost recovery fund. Said fund shall
be kept in an interest bearing account which is fully collateralized
by obligations of the United States of America or by obligations
fully guaranteed as to the principal and interest by the United
States of America or any agency thereof.
(3) Within 120 days following the end of each fiscal year that the
industrial cost recovery charges are in effect, the WCDC shall
forward a check to the Environmental Protection Agency Regional
Administrator's Financial Management Office. Said check shall be
§ 210-11 GROSSE ILE CODE § 210-11
1:438
an amount equal to 50% of all ICR charges received by the
Township during the preceding fiscal year, together with any
interest earned thereon during this period. Said check shall be
payable to the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(4) The remaining funds from said industrial cost recovery charges
together with any interest thereon shall be used as follows. A
minimum of 80% shall be used by the WCDC solely for expansion or
reconstruction of the sewage treatment plant and pump stations.
Prior to committing the funds for such use the WCDC shall obtain
the written approval of the Regional Administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency. The remaining 20% shall
be used by the WCDC to offset administrative expenses associated
with the operation of the industrial cost recovery system.
D. An industrial user that discontinues its use of the treatment works
during the industrial cost recovery period shall not be required to
continue ICR charge payment beyond the point of discontinued use. An
industrial user beginning use of the treatment works during the ICR
period shall be obligated to pay ICR charges only for the remainder of
the ICR period. If further upgrading or expansion of the treatment
works occur, the ICR charges shall be adjusted proportionately to
include the additional costs involved.
E. Industrial cost recovery fund. The industrial cost recovery charges shall
be annually billed by the Township to each qualified industrial user and
the proceeds kept in a separate depository account entitled "Industrial
Cost Recovery Fund." Said industrial cost recovery charges shall be in
effect for a period beginning with the completion of the applicable
project and extending 30 years thereafter.
(1) The proceeds of the industrial cost recovery fund shall be
transferred annually within 30 days of the end of the fiscal year to
the WCDC, who shall be responsible and accountable for the
administration of the industrial cost recovery fund. Said fund shall
be kept in an interest bearing account which is fully collateralized
by obligations of the United States of America or by obligations
fully guaranteed as to the principal and interest by the United
States of America or any agency thereof.
(2) Within 120 days following the end of each fiscal year that the
industrial cost recovery charges are in effect, the WCDC shall
forward a check to the Environmental Protection Agency Regional
Administrator's Financial Management Office. Said check shall be
an amount equal to 50% of all ICR charges received by the
Township during the preceding fiscal year, together with any
interest earned thereon during this period. Said check shall be
payable to the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(3) The remaining funds from said industrial cost recovery charges
together with any interest thereon shall be used as follows. A
§ 210-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-11
1:439
§ 210-12. Sampling.
§ 210-13. Appeals.
Any industrial user being assessed an ICR charge and desiring to appeal
the strength of its industrial wastewater, as determined by the sampling
program, or assigned pollutant parameters shall submit to the Township
a written report outlining the reasons for said disagreement. If, in the
judgment of the Township, the appeal is valid, the Township may, by a
majority vote, call for an additional sampling by the WCDC or sampling, if
pollutant parameters were used, of said industrial user for purpose of ICR
charge calculation.
§ 210-14. Special wastewater constituents.
Limitations on special wastewater constituents, such as heavy metals, shall
be as required under the EPA pretreatment regulations for existing and new
sources of pollution.
§ 210-15. Compliance with charges, rules and regulations.
minimum of 80% shall be used by the WCDC solely for expansion or
reconstruction of the sewage treatment plant and pump stations.
Prior to committing the funds for such use the WCDC shall obtain
the written approval of the Regional Administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency. The remaining 20% shall
be used by the WCDC to offset administrative expenses associated
with the operation of the industrial cost recovery system.
A. The WCDC may institute an industrial sampling program to establish
wastewater strengths for calculation of user charge and industrial cost
recovery calculations ICR charges. Each industrial user paying a UC/
ICR user charge and/or industrial cost recovery charge may be sampled
annually, as a minimum. All industrial users not required to pay an ICR
charge may be sampled as required to ensure their continued
ineligibility for ICR charges. The costs of the sampling program shall
become a part of the ICR charge. The WCDC shall forward to the
Township the results of a sampling program and calculation to support
the user charge and industrial cost recovery charge.
B. Each industrial user shall construct or otherwise have available a
sampling paint for sampling waste water before it enters the sewage
disposal system. Industrial users may be required to conduct such
sampling paints, if ordered so to do by the WCDC or the Township.
A. All users shall be required to comply with the requirement of user
charges regulations to be adopted by the WCDC in accordance with the
requirement of the USEPA. The effective date for the implementation of
user costs regulations and industrial cost recovery system regulations
shall be established by resolution of the WCDC. The effective date shall
§ 210-11 GROSSE ILE CODE § 210-15
1:440
Chapter 220
SMOKE DETECTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 8.
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 110.
§ 220-1. Detectors required; design standards.
Smoke detectors capable of sensing visible or invisible products of
combustion shall be installed in all commercial and industrial buildings,
and in all public buildings, and buildings open to the public. The smoke
detectors shall be 110 volt hardwire with a battery backup and shall be of
a type approved by a recognized independent testing laboratory, and, when
activated, shall provide an alarm suitable to warn occupants of the building
in which the alarm is installed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, battery
operated smoke detectors currently operable in existing structures covered
by this chapter will be permitted provided they are maintained in proper
working order pursuant to the applicable Fire Department requirements.
§ 220-2. Number and location.
All floors, including the basement, of each building covered by this chapter
shall have at least one smoke detector of the type described in this chapter.
§ 220-3. Inspection.
Any smoke detector installed pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be
inspected by the Township Electrical Inspector at the time of installation.
The smoke detectors are subject to periodic inspections by the Grosse Ile
Fire Chief or his designee.
§ 220-4. Responsibility of owner or occupant; penalty.
be certified by the WCDC and the said written certification shall be filed
in the office of the Township Clerk.
B. All users of the wastewater facilities shall comply with the requirement
of the written rules and regulations of the WCDC which have been
adopted and which from time to time shall have been adopted, which
regulations shall become effective upon filing of certified copies in the
office of the Township Clerk after the effective dates of the within
chapter.
A. The owner or occupant of the building in which the installation of a
smoke detector is required pursuant to this chapter is responsible for
the proper installation and maintenance of the required detector(s).
§ 210-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:441
§ 220-5. Conflict with building code.
If the provisions of this chapter are in conflict in any particular factual
situation with the provisions of the BOCA National Building Code (as
adopted by Grosse Ile Township48) concerning smoke detectors, then the
provisions of the BOCA National Building Code shall prevail.
Chapter 226
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 53.
Littering — See Ch. 146.
Nuisances — See Ch. 167.
B. Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1,
Article II, Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this
chapter. [Amended 7-22-2002]
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
§ 220-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 220-5
1:442
ARTICLE I
Construction Site Debris
[Adopted 8-14-1989 by Ord. No. 168]
§ 226-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Debris Ordinance for the Township of
Grosse Ile."
§ 226-2. Intent.
It is recognized that the proper handling and prompt removal of litter,
garbage, debris, waste material, dust, sand, mud and dirt from construction
sites, buildings under construction, and areas, streets, roads, and highways
abutting or adjacent thereto, is essential to the preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare. The failure to properly handle and promptly
remove said matter has severe adverse effects on the Township by tending
to create a nuisance and creating hazardous conditions which may result in
injury to persons or property and also detracts from the aesthetics of the
neighborhood. The purpose of this article is to provide regulations for the
prevention of such adverse effects and to provide for procedures to remove
objectionable matter and charge the cost of said removal to the owner or
party in interest in whose name the subject property appeared upon the last
local tax assessment records.
§ 226-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall, for the
purpose of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL — Any material used for the purpose of the
erection, alteration, repair, reconstruction, conversion, demolition, moving,
or equipping of any building or structure, or the excavation, filling, grading
or regulation of a lot in connection therewith.
CONSTRUCTION SITE — A lot on which the erection, alteration, repair,
reconstruction, conversion, demolition, moving, or equipping of any
building or structure, or the excavation, filling, grading or regulation of a lot
in connection therewith, is taking place, has taken place, or will take place.
DEBRIS — Any accumulation of broken or detached matter, including but
not limited to pieces of stone, brick, cement, plaster, lumber, pipe,
wallboard, and shingles.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable matter.
LITTER — Garbage and debris, as defined herein, and all other matter
which, if thrown, dumped, placed, left or deposited as herein prohibited,
may tend to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
OWNER — The person or party whose name appears upon the last tax
assessment records of the Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 226-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-3
1:443
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, association or corporation and
their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court whatsoever.
PRIMARY CONTRACTOR — The person, firm or corporation that has
obtained the building permit for building on the construction site or the
person, firm or corporation that is in control of construction on the
construction site.
WASTE MATERIAL — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except
body wastes), including but not limited to garbage, debris, uprooted
vegetation and herbage, tree limbs and stumps and any other matter which,
if thrown, dumped, placed, left or deposited as herein prohibited, may tend
to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 226-4. Required acts.
A person who owns, controls, or is in possession of a construction site or
building under construction shall:
§ 226-5. Prohibited acts.
A. Provide a receptacle or receptacles at each construction site and
building under construction which shall be of sufficient size and
dimensions to adequately contain such litter, garbage, debris and waste
material as may be found at the construction site or building under
construction.
B. Place all litter, garbage, debris and waste material within said
receptacle or receptacles.
C. Place all construction materials within the confines of the lot lines of a
construction site or building under construction.
D. Sweep the streets, roads or highways adjacent to or abutting the
construction site or building under construction at least once per week,
or more frequently if litter shall be dumped, deposited, placed or
thrown on said streets, roads or highways.
A. No person shall dump, deposit, place, throw, leave, bury or cause or
permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, leaving or burying
of litter, garbage, debris or waste material at any construction site or
building under construction.
B. No person shall transfer litter, garbage, debris, or waste material from
one construction site or building under construction to another.
C. No person shall dump, deposit, place, throw, leave, or cause or permit
the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving, of dust, sand,
mud, dirt, litter, garbage, debris or waste material on any street, road,
or highway.
D. Construction materials shall not be placed on any street, road, highway
or right-of-way.
§ 226-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 226-5
1:444
§ 226-6. Notice to remove.
§ 226-7. Removal by Township.
If a primary contractor or owner of a construction site or building under
construction, notified pursuant to § 226-6 herein, shall fail, neglect or refuse
to remove litter, garbage, debris, waste material, dust, sand, mud or dirt
from a construction site, building under construction, area adjacent thereto,
or a street, road or highway adjacent to or abutting the construction site
or building under construction within five days after the effective date
of written notice as provided in § 226-6C, the Building Inspector or his
designated representative is hereby authorized and empowered to remove
such matter or to order its removal by agents or employees of the Township
of Grosse Ile.
§ 226-8. Cost of removal.
E. No person shall fail to remove litter, garbage, debris or waste material
from a construction site, building under construction, or area adjacent
thereto, within 48 hours after notice to remove same is effectuated
pursuant to § 226-6 herein.
F. No person shall fail to remove dust, sand, mud, dirt, litter, garbage,
debris or waste material from a street, road or highway adjacent to or
abutting a construction site, building under construction or area
adjacent thereto within 48 hours after notice to remove is effectuated
pursuant to § 226-6 herein.
A. The Building Inspector, or his designated representative, is hereby
authorized and empowered to notify the primary contractor or owner of
a construction site or building under construction to remove litter,
garbage, rubbish, debris or waste material from the construction site,
and to remove rubbish, debris or waste material from the construction
site, and to remove dust, sand, mud, dirt, litter, garbage, debris or
waste material from any street, road or highway adjacent to or abutting
the construction site or building under construction.
B. Said notice shall be given by first class mail addressed to said primary
contractor or owner at his/her last known address or by any other
means reasonably calculated to give notice to the primary contractor or
owner.
C. Said notice is deemed effectuated on the second regular day for
delivery of mail after the day the notice to remove is mailed.
A. The cost of removal of litter, garbage, debris, waste material, dust,
sand, mud or dirt by the Township of Grosse Ile as provided in § 226-7
shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported by the
Building Inspector, or his designated representative, to the assessing
officer of the Township of Grosse Ile who shall assess the cost against
the property.
§ 226-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-8
1:445
§ 226-9. Presumption of ownership.
In a proceeding for a violation of §§ 226-4, 226-5 and 226-7, proof that a
building permit was issued to a person for the subject construction site
or building under construction shall constitute in evidence a presumption
that the building permit holder owns or controls that construction site or
building under construction.
§ 226-10. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
B. The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appeared
upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the
amount of such cost by first class mail at the address shown on the
records. If he/she fails to pay the same within 30 days after mailing by
the Assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the Assessor shall add
the same to the next tax roll of the Township of Grosse Ile and the same
shall be collected in the same manner in all respects as provided by law
for the collection of taxes.
§ 226-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 226-10
1:446
ARTICLE II
Garbage and Refuse
[Adopted 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 214]
§ 226-11. Conformance required.
No person shall deposit or place any solid waste, as defined in this article,
in any alley, roadway, waterway or other public place within the Township,
nor shall any person deposit, place or store any solid waste upon private
property or upon property open to the public, whether owned by such
person or not, within the Township, unless the same shall be deposited,
placed and stored in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 226-12. Definitions and word usage.
A. Whenever used in this article, except when otherwise indicated by the
context, the words shall have meanings as follows:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Department of Public Works of the Township
of Grosse Ile which shall administer and enforce the provisions of this
article.
ASHES — The residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal, coke,
paper, or other combustible material.
BOARD — The Township Board of said Township.
COMMERCIAL RUBBISH — The miscellaneous waste materials
resulting from the operation of mercantile enterprises and also trade
and manufacturing wastes. It includes small packing boxes, cartons,
excelsior, paper and rubbish from offices and stores.
CONSTRUCTION RUBBISH — All rubbish resulting from excavation,
construction, remodeling, altering or demolishing.
DOMESTIC RUBBISH — The waste material resulting from the usual
routine of housekeeping, including ashes from homes and multiple
dwellings.
GARBAGE — All waste, animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter
incident to the use and storage of food for human consumption, and
includes spoiled food and dead animals found within the Township
limits, and excludes food containers.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
REFUSE — Includes all forms of rubbish and ashes as defined in this
section.
RUBBISH — The miscellaneous waste material resulting from
housekeeping and ordinary mercantile enterprises, trades,
manufactures, offices, and stores.
§ 226-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-12
1:447
§ 226-13. Preparation and storage.
SOLID WASTE — The inclusive term for all refuse, garbage,
construction rubbish, commercial rubbish, etc., unless otherwise
stated.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Grosse Ile, Wayne County, Michigan.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves, branches, or any plant
material or tree material from outside of the home.
B. Words. The single words shall include the plural and masculine words
shall include the feminine and neuter.
A. Preparation.
(1) All solid waste shall be drained free of liquids before disposal.
Undrained solid waste of a liquid or semiliquid nature will not be
collected, and is hereby declared to be a nuisance when placed on
public or private property, whether in containers or not.
(2) Garbage shall be wrapped in paper or other material.
(3) Rubbish shall be:
(a) Placed in approved containers; or
(b) Bundled, stacked or packaged so as not to exceed 36 inches in
length and 50 pounds in weight.
B. Containers.
(1) Garbage containers shall be of sufficient size and number to hold
one week's accumulation and shall have a capacity of not less than
10 nor more than 20 gallons. Each container shall be of substantial
construction, or Township approved equal, provided with handles
or bails, and tight-fitting cover and shall not weigh more than 50
pounds when filled. Garbage bags will be considered as containers.
(2) Refuse containers shall be of sufficient size and number to hold one
week's accumulation and shall be of substantial construction, shall
have handles or bails, and shall not weigh more than 50 pounds.
Refuse containers that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet
the approved requirements shall be classed as rubbish and shall be
collected as rubbish.
(3) Containers for ashes must be fireproof.
(4) Trees, limbs and other plant material too large in size or weight to
meet the requirements of Subsection A(3) are noncollectible. These
items cannot be commingled with or included in solid waste load to
the landfill and will be considered yard waste.
§ 226-12 GROSSE ILE CODE § 226-13
1:448
§ 226-14. Collection and disposal.
(5) Bulk refuse that is not reducible to a size and weight to meet the
requirements of Subsection A(3), such as tubs, water heaters, etc.,
is collectible only through a special pickup.
(6) Disposal of any hazardous refuse shall be the responsibility of the
producer or owner thereof and shall not be disposed of within the
limits of the Township or allowed to be stored or transported within
the Township without the written approval of the Township
Supervisor or his authorized agent, and then only under the
supervision of someone appointed by him who has knowledge of
the safety measures necessary to protect the public health and
safety during the storing, transporting or disposing of hazardous
refuse. Refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, dehumidifiers or
other freon-containing appliances must have the freon removed by
licensed contractor and tagged before it will be accepted. Doors
shall be removed from appliances before being placed at curbside.
(7) The owners of solid waste containers shall provide suitable places
for the storage of such containers and their contents between
collection periods and shall store them in such a manner as to be
inaccessible to vermin, domestic animals, insects, and so as not to
create a nuisance. If collection of garbage and/or refuse is to be
made from locations other than the curb, containers and their
contents shall be made accessible to the collectors.
A. The Township Board may contract with any person, firm or corporation
to collect and transport garbage and refuse within the Township.
B. No provision of this article or any regulations thereunder shall be
construed as requiring the Township to collect or provide for the
collection of the garbage or refuse within the Township.
C. The Township Board may, when practicable, provide for the collection
and disposal of refuse and garbage by the Township itself, or by a
person, firm or corporation under contract with the Township, the
expense thereof to be charged to persons receiving such service and
the charge for each type of service to be determined from time to time
by the Township Board. Charges for such services to premises within
the Township shall be billed to owners or occupants on their water bill.
D. Collection routines and schedules shall be such as are from time to time
approved by the Administrator. Variances will be allowed only
according to the administrative rules which shall be established and
approved from time to time by the Administrator. Collections from
commercial establishments shall be of a frequency to keep the premises
free of rubbish and shall be at the direction of the Administrator
according to the administrative rules.
§ 226-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-14
1:449
§ 226-15. Unlawful acts.
§ 226-16. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
E. No person shall collect, remove, haul, or convey any refuse through or
upon any of the streets or alleys of the Township except under contract
with the Township of Grosse Ile.
A. It shall be unlawful to place, deposit, store or otherwise dispose of
garbage or refuse within the Township except in conformity with this
article.
B. No person shall burn or bury any refuse or garbage or allow the same to
accumulate on his premises beyond proper collection days.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or destroy garbage or
refuse containers owned by another.
D. No person shall allow a domestic animal owned or under his control to
disturb or upset garbage or refuse containers owned by others.
E. It shall be unlawful to transport refuse or garbage in any vehicle within
the Township unless such vehicle shall be of such construction and so
operated that the contents shall not spill upon the public streets or
alleys or otherwise create a nuisance.
F. No person shall violate any rule or regulation adopted by the
Administrator under authority of this article.
§ 226-14 GROSSE ILE CODE § 226-16
1:450
Chapter 230
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
§ 226-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-16
1:451

ARTICLE I
Deferment or Partial Payment Procedure
[Adopted 10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 223]
§ 230-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIMITED INCOME — When the total gross household income on the State
of Michigan tax return is below the amount as established by the Township
Board.[Amended 7-22-2002]
§ 230-2. Application for limited income determination.
An owner of real property who believes he or she is unable to contribute
to the cost of an assessment for an improvement authorized in MCL
§ 41.722(1)(a), (b), (c), (g), or (h) may apply to the assessing officer to have
a special assessment on the owner's real property deferred or to permit the
real property owner to make a partial payment.
§ 230-3. Evidence of limited income.
Any real property owner who claims a limited income shall provide the
assessing officer with all records and documents requested by the Assessor
including, but not limited to, federal and state tax returns, bank records, all
financial records with brokers, and a listing of all assets including stocks,
bonds, or annuities. Any assets that may be jointly owned with another shall
also be included.
§ 230-4. Determination of limited income.
Upon receipt of the necessary information the Assessor shall make a finding
as to whether or not a limited income situation exists and report such
finding to the Township Board. The Township Board shall decide in its
discretion whether a limited income situation exists and, if so, whether the
Township will defer partial or total payment of the assessment and under
what terms and conditions.
§ 230-5. Deferred assessment constitutes a lien.
As a condition of granting the deferred or partial payment of an assessment,
the Township Board shall require that any deferred assessment will
constitute a recorded lien against the property that must be paid upon
transfer of title.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:453

ARTICLE II
Special Assessment Procedure
[Adopted 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 241]
§ 230-6. Necessity of petitions.
Upon receipt of petitions of the record owners of land constituting not less
than 60% of the total frontage upon the road, the Township may construct
and maintain the improvement described in the petitions, and establish a
special assessment district pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 188 of
1954, as amended. Only petitions that are issued by the Clerk's office will
be considered in order to place such a requested improvement before the
Township Board.
§ 230-7. Preparation of maps, plans and estimates.
Upon receipt of the required petition as set forth above and if the Township
Board determines that it desires to proceed with the proposed
improvement, the Township Board shall cause to be prepared plans
describing the improvement and the location of the improvements with an
estimate of the cost of the improvement. The plans and estimate of cost
shall be filed with the Township Clerk. The Township Board shall tentatively
declare by resolution its intention to make the improvement and tentatively
designate the special assessment district against which the cost of the
improvement is to be assessed.
§ 230-8. Objections to petition, improvement and district.
Upon receipt of the maps, plans and estimates of cost, a hearing (public
hearing No. 1) shall be held at the Township Hall to hear any objections to
the petitions, to the proposed improvements, and to the special assessment
district. Notice shall be provided to the record owner of, or party in interest
in, property to be assessed whose name appears upon the last Township
tax assessment records by first class mail addressed to the record owner or
party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least 10 days
before the date of hearing. Notice shall also be published twice before the
hearing and the first publication shall be at least 10 days before the date of
the hearing.
§ 230-9. Approval of project.
If the Township Board desires to proceed with the improvement after the
hearing provided for, the Township Board shall approve or determine by
resolution all of the following:
A. Completion of the improvement.
B. Plans and estimates of cost as originally presented or revised,
corrected, amended or changed.
§ 230-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-9
1:455
§ 230-10. Filing of counterpetitions.
The record owners of land constituting not less than 51% of the total
frontage upon the road may file counterpetitions after the hearing as
described in § 230-8 of this article (public hearing No. 1) if said
counterpetitions are filed within 10 days of the aforementioned hearing with
the Township Clerk's office. Upon receipt of the required counterpetitions,
the Township Board may do any of the following:
§ 230-11. Hearing on special assessment roll.
The complete roll shall be filed with the Township Clerk. A hearing shall
be set to meet, review and hear any objections to the assessment roll
(public hearing No. 2). Notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to the
provisions of § 230-8 of this article.
C. The sufficiency of the petition for the improvement. After this
determination, the sufficiency of the petition is not subject to attack
except in an action brought in a court of competent jurisdiction within
30 days after the adoption of the resolution determining such
sufficiency.
D. The special assessment district including the term of the special
assessment district's existence. If the nature of the improvement to be
made is such that a periodic redetermination of cost will be necessary
without a change in the district boundaries, the Township Board shall
so state in the resolution.
E. Direct that a special assessment roll be prepared in which are entered
and described all the parcels of land to be assessed, with the names of
the respective record owners of each parcel, if known, and the total
amount to be assessed against each parcel of land, which shall be the
relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all parcels of land
in the special assessment district as the benefit to the parcel of land
bears to the total benefit to all parcels of land in the special assessment
district.
A. Schedule another hearing and send out notice to the record owner of, or
party in interest in, property to be assessed whose name appears upon
the last Township tax assessment records by first class mail addressed
to the record owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax
records, at least 10 days before the date of hearing and also notice shall
be published twice before the hearing and the first publication shall be
at least 10 days before the date of the hearing; or
B. The Township Board may decide to continue with the project as
described in § 230-9.
C. The Township Board may cancel the project. If counterpetitions are not
filed, or not filed timely, the Township may proceed with the project.
§ 230-9 GROSSE ILE CODE § 230-12
1:456
§ 230-12. Objections to assessment roll.
A person objecting to the roll shall file such objection in writing with
the Township Clerk before the close of the hearing or by attendance at
the hearing and placing such objection verbally on the record. After the
hearing the Township Board, at the same or at a subsequent meeting, may
confirm the special assessment roll as reported or as amended or corrected
by the Township Board and may refer the roll back for revision. After
the confirmation of the roll, all assessments shall be final and conclusive
unless an action contesting an assessment is filed in a court or tribunal of
competent jurisdiction within 30 days after the date of the confirmation.
§ 230-13. Payment schedule and issuance of bonds.
A. The Township Board may provide that special assessments are payable
in one or more installments, but the amount of an installment shall not
be less than 1/2 of any subsequent installment. The amount of
installments for improvements subject to periodic cost revision may be
extended upon the special assessment roll by the Township Board
without additional public hearings or public notices provided that
additional property is not added to the special assessment roll.
B. The first installment shall be due on or before the time after
confirmation as the Township Board shall fix, and subsequent
installments shall be due at intervals of 12 months from the due date of
the first installment or from the date the Township Board shall fix.
C. All unpaid installments prior to their transfer to the Township tax roll
shall bear interest, payable annually on each installment due date, at a
rate not exceeding 1% above the average rate of interest borne by
special assessment bonds issued by the Township in anticipation of the
unpaid installments.
D. If any installment is not paid when due, then the installment shall be
considered to be delinquent, and there shall be collected, in addition to
the interest as provided by this section, a penalty of not more than 1%
for each month that the installment remains unpaid.
E. All special assessments shall constitute a lien upon the respective
parcels of land assessed from the date of confirmation.
F. The Township Treasurer shall collect the assessments. The assessment
bonds shall not be issued before the final confirmation of the
assessment roll by the Township Board.
G. Should the assessments in any special assessment roll prove
insufficient for any reason, including the noncollection thereof, to pay
for the improvement for which they were made or to pay the principal
and interest on the bonds issued in anticipation of the collection
thereof, then the Township Board shall make additional pro rata
assessments to supply the deficiency, but the total amount assessed
against any parcel of land shall not exceed the value of the benefits
§ 230-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-13
1:457
§ 230-14. Incorporation of statutory provisions.
Any proceedings that are not covered by this particular article, the
Township will refer and incorporate the provisions under Public Act 188 of
1954 as set forth in MCL § 41.721 et seq.
received from the improvement. Should the total amount collected
on assessments prove larger than necessary by 5% more than the
original roll, then the surplus shall be prorated among the properties
assessed in accordance with the amount assessed against each and
applied toward the payment of the next Township tax levied against
such properties, respectively, or if there be no such tax then it shall be
refunded to the persons who are the respective record owners of the
properties on the date of the passage of the resolution ordering such
refund. Any such surplus less than 5% may be paid into the Township
general funds disposed of as above provided.
§ 230-13 GROSSE ILE CODE § 230-14
1:458
Chapter 233
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood control — See Ch. 116.
Grading — See Ch. 124.
Illicit discharges — See Ch. 133.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Wetlands and drainageways — See Ch. 275.
§ 230-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-14
1:459

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 233-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., as amended; Part 31 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act of 1994 (Part 31), MCLA
§ 324.3101 et seq., as amended; the general permit Storm Water Discharges
from Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Subject to
Watershed Plan Requirements (General Permit No. MIG619000) issued by
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality pursuant to Part 31;
Act 288 of 1967 (Subdivision Control Act), MCLA § 560.101 et seq., as
amended by the Land Division Act, MCLA § 560.101 et seq.; Act 283 of 1909
(County Road Law), MCLA § 224.1 et seq., as amended; Act 40 of 1956
(Drain Code, MCLA § 280.1 et seq., as amended; and Act 96 of 1987 (Mobile
Home Commission Act), MCLA § 125.2301 et seq., as amended; the Charter
County Law, MCLA § 45.515 et seq., and the Home Rule Charter of Wayne
County, Michigan (1981), as amended.
§ 233-2. Purpose.
Prevention of pollution from stormwater runoff and the protection of the
quality of the waters of the State of Michigan is of utmost importance to the
people of the Township of Grosse Ile. It is the purpose of this chapter and
any rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter to:
A. Protect the environment against pollution and other effects from
stormwater runoff, and to protect the public health and safety;
B. Provide for the implementation of a stormwater management program
in the Township of Grosse Ile to manage and prevent flooding,
streambank erosion, pollution, and other effects from stormwater
runoff;
C. Establish standards and criteria for the design and construction of
stormwater management systems subject to the requirements of this
chapter;
D. Establish best management practices for the design, construction,
maintenance, and operation of stormwater management systems
subject to the requirements of this chapter;
E. Provide for the issuance of stormwater construction approvals for
construction activities subject to the requirements of this chapter;
F. Provide for the long-term preservation and maintenance of stormwater
management systems subject to the requirements of the chapter;
G. Authorize the inspection of stormwater management systems subject to
the requirements of this chapter; and
§ 233-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-2
1:461
§ 233-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Grosse
Ile Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 233-4. Administration.
This chapter shall be administered jointly by the Township of Grosse Ile
Department of Public Services and the Township Engineer.
§ 233-5. Effect on state rules.
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions of this
chapter shall control over less stringent rules of the Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality, unless contrary to law.
§ 233-6. Effect on other obligations.
Nothing in this chapter or any rule promulgated pursuant to this chapter
shall be construed to reduce, abate, alter, modify, amend, or affect any
duty or obligation to preserve and protect the environment, including the
combined downriver watershed or other waters of the state; to control soil
erosion and sedimentation; to protect wetlands; or to prevent air, water, or
other pollution.
§ 233-7. Provisions incorporation by reference.
Rules, regulations, other regulatory standards or statutory provisions
incorporated or adopted by reference in this chapter or any rules
promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall have the same force and effect
given to any provision of this chapter. The Administrative Rules adopted
with this chapter are deemed part of this chapter.49
H. Provide for the administration, implementation, and enforcement of this
chapter.
49.Editor's Note: The Administrative Rules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 233-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 233-7
1:462
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 233-8. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
APPLICANT — A person responsible for regulated construction activity
on a development site who is seeking to obtain stormwater construction
approval.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — A human-made activity, including without
limitation, clearing, grading, excavating, construction and paving, that
results in an earth change or disturbance in the existing cover or
topography of land, including any modification or alteration of a site or the
footprint of a building that results in an earth change or disturbance in the
existing cover or topography of land.
CONVEYANCE — Any structure or other means of safely conveying
stormwater and stormwater runoff within a stormwater management
system, including, without limitation, a watercourse, closed conduit,
culvert, or a bridge.
COUNTY DRAINS — Open or closed drains within the jurisdiction of Wayne
County established pursuant to the Michigan Drain Code of 1956, MCLA
§ 280.1 et seq., as amended.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The property on which regulated construction
activity will occur or is occurring or has occurred.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Township of Grosse Ile Department of
Public Services.
PERMIT SECTION — The Permit Section of the Township of Grosse Ile
Department of Public Services, and the Township Engineer.
PERSON — A natural person, trustee, court-appointed representative,
syndicate, association, partnership, limited liability company, firm, club,
company, corporation, business trust, institution, agency, government
corporation, municipal corporation, city, county, municipality, district, or
other political subdivision, department, bureau, agency or instrumentality
of federal, state, or local government, or other entity recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
REGULATED CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Construction activity that is
subject to the provisions of this chapter or a rule promulgated pursuant to
this chapter.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation, including, without
limitation, rain, snow, and snowmelt.
STORMWATER CONSTRUCTION APPROVAL — An approval issued
pursuant to this chapter and rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — Consists of ordinances,
orders, rules, regulations, and other mechanisms that provide for the
§ 233-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-8
1:463
management of stormwater and stormwater runoff to prevent flooding and
to ensure the restoration and/or protection of surface waters in the
Township of Grosse Ile. The stormwater management program consists of
the requirements of this chapter and any rules or regulations promulgated
under this chapter, and activities mandated by the certificate of coverage
issued by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality to the
Township pursuant to the general permit Stormwater Discharges from
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Subject to Watershed
Plan Requirements (General Permit No. MIG619000).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — Any structure, feature or
appurtenance subject to this chapter or a rule promulgated pursuant to
this chapter that is designed to collect, detain, retain, treat, or convey
stormwater or stormwater runoff, including without limitation buffer strips,
swales, gutters, catch basins, closed conduits, detention systems,
pretreatment systems, wetlands, pavement, unpaved surfaces, structures,
watercourses, or surface waters.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The excess portion of precipitation that does
not infiltrate the ground, but runs off and reaches a conveyance, surface
water, or watercourse.
SURFACE WATER — A body of water, including, without limitation, seasonal
and intermittent waters, in which the surface of the water is exposed to
the atmosphere, including, without limitation, lakes, open detention basins,
forebays, watercourses, bioretention areas, retention basins, wetlands, and
impoundments.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Grosse Ile.
WATERCOURSE — An open conduit, either naturally or artificially created,
that periodically or continuously conveys water, including without
limitation, rivers, streams, vegetated swales, open channels, and open
drains.
§ 233-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 233-8
1:464
ARTICLE III
Applicability
§ 233-9. Construction activity.
This chapter and rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall apply to
all of the following:
§ 233-10. Additional local requirements.
A. Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff into or around
new or existing road rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the
Township;
B. Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff into or around
Township drains;
C. Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff in projects that
are subject to the requirements of Act 288 of 1967 (Subdivision Control
Act), MCLA § 560.101 et seq., as amended;
D. Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff from projects that
are subject to Act 96 of 1987 (Mobile Home Commission Act), MCLA
§ 125.2301 et seq., as amended;
E. Construction activity that impacts stormwater runoff into, on or
through property owned by the Township;
F. Construction activity that impacts new or existing storm sewer systems
owned, operated, or controlled by the Township; and
G. Construction activity that occurs within and impacts or may impact
water quality or water resources in watersheds or sub-watersheds
included in the certificate of coverage issued by the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality to the Township pursuant to the
general permit Storm Water Discharges from Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) Subject to Watershed Plan Requirements
(General Permit No. MIG619000).
A. Nothing in this chapter, or in any rule promulgated pursuant to this
chapter, invalidates any rule, regulation, or ordinance enacted by the
Township prior to the effective date of this chapter, or prevents the local
unit of government from adopting or enacting a stormwater
management program applicable to activities within its jurisdiction.
B. Nothing in this chapter or in any rule promulgated pursuant to this
chapter shall apply to construction activity that is subject to a
stormwater management program enacted by the Township that
imposes requirements equal to or more stringent than the minimum
applicable requirements of this chapter.
C. The Township, in its sole discretion, and to the extent permitted by law,
may enter into an agreement with the Township for the purpose of
§ 233-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-10
1:465
implementing, in whole or in part, this chapter and/or any rule
promulgate pursuant to this chapter, with respect to construction
activity within the jurisdiction of the local unit of government.
§ 233-10 GROSSE ILE CODE § 233-10
1:466
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Construction Approvals
§ 233-11. Approval required.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to engage in regulated construction
activity except in accordance with this chapter and rules promulgated
pursuant to this chapter, and pursuant to a valid stormwater construction
approval issued by the Township. A stormwater construction approval shall
be issued in a form and manner approved by the Township, and may be
incorporated into a construction permit or other approval issued under or
required by another ordinance, statute or regulation.
§ 233-12. Application for approval.
§ 233-13. Financial assurance required.
A. Applicants shall submit a written application for a stormwater
construction approval to the Township. The application shall be made in
a form and manner approved by the Township, and shall include all
information and documentation required by the Township pursuant to
this chapter or rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
B. All proposed modifications to a stormwater management system that
has received a stormwater construction approval issued by the
Township shall be submitted to the Township in writing, together with
all information and all supporting documentation required by the
Township pursuant to this chapter or rules promulgated pursuant to
this chapter to support the proposed modification. A person shall not
commence regulated construction activity associated with a proposed
modification without the approval of the Township.
A. The Township may require an applicant to provide financial assurance
for regulated construction activity.
B. Financial assurance provided pursuant to this section shall be in the
form of a performance bond, cash deposit, or unconditional irrevocable
letter of credit. The Township may accept, with prior approval, an
equivalent instrument as financial assurance for regulated construction
activity.
C. The Township may establish the form and amount of financial assurance
to be provided; the events, circumstances, or occurrences that will
cause the Township to release the financial assurance mechanism; and
other requirements for financial assurance to satisfy the purposes of
this chapter.
§ 233-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-13
1:467

ARTICLE V
Design and Construction Requirements
§ 233-14. General standards for management systems.
§ 233-15. Responsibility for design; considerations.
A. Except as provided below, stormwater management systems shall be
designed in accordance with the minimum requirements for
performance and design that are set forth in this chapter and in rules
promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
B. The Township encourages the development and use of innovative
stormwater management system designs and construction techniques,
including, without limitation, the use of nonstructural practices to
reduce stormwater runoff and/or its water quality impacts, to achieve
the flood control and water quality objectives of the chapter and the
rules promulgated hereunder.
C. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter or a rule promulgated
pursuant to this chapter, the Township may require stormwater
management systems to satisfy performance and/or design standards
more stringent than the minimum requirements for performance and
design set forth in this chapter and in rules promulgated pursuant to
this chapter when necessary to address unique flood control or water
resources protection issues at a development site, on adjacent
properties, or downstream of a development site.
A. Selecting and designing stormwater management systems to meet the
requirements of this chapter and the rules promulgated pursuant to this
chapter shall be the responsibility of the applicant or its designee,
subject to the approval of the Township pursuant to this chapter and
rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter. The Township may deny a
stormwater construction approval for a system design that is not in
compliance with these requirements.
B. In designing a stormwater management system, the applicant shall
consider all relevant and appropriate factors, including without
limitation the following:
(1) The public health, safety, welfare, and the environment;
(2) The inconvenience caused by stormwater runoff on the subject
property;
(3) The long-term impact of regulated construction activity on
stormwater runoff on, from and beyond the property;
(4) The natural drainage pattern of the land;
(5) The impact of the regulated construction activity on the affected
watershed(s); and
§ 233-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-15
1:469
(6) The effect of complete upstream development on the subject
property as determined by applicable master plans and/or
stormwater plans; and
(7) The extent of downstream improvements necessary for proper
stormwater drainage.
§ 233-15 GROSSE ILE CODE § 233-15
1:470
ARTICLE VI
Fees
§ 233-16. Adoption of fee system.
The Township Board shall adopt by resolution a fee system for
administering and implementing the stormwater management program.
The fee system may include fees for application submittal and review,
project overview, compliance inspections, and any other task or service
performed by the Township to administer or implement the requirements
of this chapter or rules promulgated hereunder. Fees may be refundable
or nonrefundable, as determined appropriate by the Township, and may
include charges for time and materials utilized by the Township in
implementing and administering the requirements of this chapter or rules
promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
§ 233-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-16
1:471

ARTICLE VII
Long-Term Maintenance
§ 233-17. Demonstration of long-term maintenance.
The applicant for a stormwater construction approval shall demonstrate to
the Township in the application or during the application review process, as
determined appropriate by the Township, that the stormwater management
system shall be maintained in perpetuity. This demonstration shall be made
in the manner specified in rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter.
§ 233-18. Scope.
For purposes of this chapter and rules promulgated pursuant to this
chapter, long-term maintenance shall include site monitoring and
preventative maintenance activities necessary to ensure that a stormwater
management system functions properly as designed; remedial actions
necessary to repair, modify, or reconstruct the system in the event the
system does not function properly as designed at any time; notification to
subsequent owners of limitations or restrictions on the property; actions
necessary to enforce the terms of restrictive covenants or other instruments
applicable to the property pursuant to this chapter and rules promulgated
pursuant to this chapter and such other actions as may be set forth in rules
promulgated hereto.
§ 233-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-18
1:473

ARTICLE VIII
Authority and Duties of Inspectors
§ 233-19. Authority.
Upon presentation of proper credentials and identification, and after stating
the authority and purpose of the inspection, Township inspectors shall be
promptly permitted to enter and inspect a development site. The inspection
shall be for the purpose of investigating the development site, stormwater
management systems, or components of stormwater management systems,
to determine compliance or noncompliance with this chapter, rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, and/or stormwater
construction approvals issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 233-20. Duties.
While entering and performing an inspection on private property pursuant
to § 233-19 above, a Township inspector shall observe and comply with all
safety rules applicable to the premises.
§ 233-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-20
1:475

ARTICLE IX
Compliance and Enforcement
§ 233-21. Cooperation to ensure compliance.
All persons are encouraged to cooperate with the Township to ensure
that the requirements of this chapter, rules promulgated pursuant to this
chapter, and stormwater construction approvals issued hereunder are
satisfied. Whenever possible, the Township shall attempt to enter into
voluntary agreements to resolve violations of this chapter, rules
promulgated pursuant to this chapter, and stormwater construction
approvals issued hereunder.
§ 233-22. Investigations; informal conferences; voluntary
agreements.
§ 233-23. Notification of violation.
A. If the Township believes that a violation of this chapter, a rule
promulgated pursuant to this chapter, or a stormwater construction
approval issued hereunder may have occurred or exists, the Township
shall make a prompt investigation. If, after this investigation, the
Township determines that a violation has occurred or exists, the
Township shall attempt to enter into a voluntary agreement to resolve
or correct the violation. An informal conference may be requested by
the Township or by any other person to facilitate a voluntary
agreement.
B. If a voluntary agreement cannot be reached, the Township shall take
appropriate enforcement action pursuant to this chapter and other
applicable provisions of law.
A. If a voluntary agreement pursuant to § 233-22 cannot be reached, the
Township shall issue written notice of a violation to the person or
persons alleged to have caused or contributed to a violation of this
chapter, a rule promulgated pursuant to this chapter, and/or an
approval issued hereunder. A written notice of violation shall include a
statement of facts upon which the violation is based.
B. Within 14 days of the receipt of a written notice of violation, the alleged
violator shall submit to the Township an explanation of the violation and
a plan for correcting the violation to comply with this chapter, rules
promulgated pursuant to this chapter, and/or stormwater construction
approvals issued hereunder. Submission of this plan in no way relieves
the alleged violator of liability for any previous violation not addressed
by the plan or future violation.
C. Within 14 days of the receipt of a written response to a notice of
violation, the Township shall determine whether the response resolves
and/or corrects the alleged violation. If the Township determines that
the response resolves and/or corrects the violation, then the plan for
§ 233-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-23
1:477
§ 233-24. Consent agreement.
§ 233-25. Administrative compliance orders.
correcting the violation shall be incorporated into a consent agreement
pursuant to § 233-24.
A. A consent agreement may be entered into at any time by and between
the Township and the person or persons alleged to have caused or
contributed to the violation. The consent agreement shall be mutually
acceptable to both the Township and the recipient(s) and shall reflect
the recipient's agreement to assume responsibility for and correct
violations of this chapter, rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter,
and approvals issued hereunder.
B. The consent agreement shall contain a short statement of facts,
describe the actions necessary to correct the noncompliance, contain a
compliance schedule, and be signed by all parties. The agreement may
contain a monetary or other relief as agreed to by the parties for the
noncompliance, including without limitation, amounts necessary to
compensate the Township for costs and attorney fees incurred
investigating, administering and/or enforcing this chapter or rules
promulgated hereto.
A. If the Township determines that violation of this chapter, a rule
promulgated pursuant to this chapter, or a stormwater construction
approval issued hereunder has occurred or exists, the Township may
issue an administrative compliance order pursuant to this § 233-25.
B. Except as provided in § 233-26, the Township may issue an
administrative compliance order in the following circumstances:
(1) The Township determines that a person has violated a consent
agreement entered into with the Township; or
(2) The Township determines that a person has violated or continues to
violate this chapter, a rule promulgated pursuant to this chapter, or
a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder, and the
Township has attempted to resolve the violation pursuant to
§§ 233-22 and 233-23, but no voluntary agreement or consent
agreement has been entered into.
C. The administrative compliance order shall contain a statement of facts
upon which the order is based, a description of the actions that must be
taken to correct the noncompliance, a compliance schedule, and other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary to address the
noncompliance. Administrative compliance orders also may contain
administrative fines and penalties and such other monetary relief for
the noncompliance, including, without limitation, amounts necessary to
compensate the Township for costs incurred investigating,
administering, and enforcing this chapter or rules promulgated hereto.
§ 233-23 GROSSE ILE CODE § 233-25
1:478
§ 233-26. Imminent and substantial injury orders.
§ 233-27. Municipal civil infractions.
D. Within 28 days of being issued an administrative compliance order, the
person or persons receiving the order may appeal the issuance of the
order pursuant to Article X of this chapter.
A. The Township may issue an administrative order without attempting to
resolve a violation by using the enforcement procedures described in
§§ 233-22 and 233-23 if the Township finds that a violation of this
chapter, a rule promulgated pursuant to this chapter, or a stormwater
construction approval issued hereunder constitutes or causes, or will
constitute or cause, a substantial injury to the public health, safety,
welfare, or the environment, and it is prejudicial to the interests of the
people of the Township to delay action.
B. Administrative orders issued pursuant to this § 233-26 shall contain a
statement of facts upon which the order is based, and notification to the
person that it must immediately take action to discontinue, abate,
correct, or otherwise address the imminent and substantial injury
caused or likely to be caused by the noncompliance.
C. Within seven days, the Township shall provide the person an
opportunity to be heard and to present any proof that the
noncompliance does not or will not constitute imminent and substantial
injury to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
D. An order issued pursuant to this § 233-26 is effective on issuance and
shall remain in effect for a period of not more than seven days, unless
the Township brings an action to restrain the alleged noncompliance
pursuant to § 233-28 or 233-29 before the expiration of that period. If
the Township brings such an action within the seven-day period, the
order issued by the Township shall remain in effect for an additional
seven days or such other period as is authorized by the court in which
the action is brought.
A. Violation; municipal civil infraction. Except as provided by § 233-28, a
person who violates any provision of this chapter or rules promulgated
hereunder, including, without limitation, any notice, order, stormwater
construction approval, agreement, decision, or determination
promulgated, issued, made, or entered by the Township under this
chapter or rules promulgated hereunder, is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of no less than $200
per violation per day and not more than $500 per violation per day for
each infraction, plus costs and other sanctions.
B. Repeat offenses; increased costs.
(1) Increased costs may be imposed for repeat offenses as determined
by the court. As used in this section, "repeat offenses" means a
§ 233-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-27
1:479
second (or any subsequent) municipal or civil infraction violation
of the same requirement or provision of this chapter or rule
promulgated hereunder that is committed by a person within any
twelve-month period and for which the person admits responsibility
or is determined to be responsible.
(2) The increased cost for a repeat offense under this section shall be
determined by the court.
C. Amount of fines.
(1) Municipal civil infraction citations.
(a) Subject to the minimum fine amounts specified in Subsection
A, the following factors shall be considered in determining the
amount of a municipal civil infraction fine following the
issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation for a violation of
this chapter or rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter:
[1] The type, nature, gravity, magnitude, severity, frequency,
duration, preventability, potential and actual effect, cause
(including whether negligent or intentional) and economic
benefit to the violator (such as delayed or avoided costs or
competitive advantage) of the violation;
[2] The violator's recalcitrance, cooperation or efforts to
comply;
[3] The violator's compliance history (regardless of whether
prior enforcement proceedings were commenced);
[4] The economic impacts of the fine on the violator; and
[5] Such other factors as justice may require.
(b) A violator shall bear the burden of demonstrating the presence
and degree of any mitigating factors to be considered in
determining the amount of a fine. However, mitigating factors
shall not be considered unless it is determined that the violator
has made all good faith efforts to correct and terminate all
violations.
(2) Municipal civil infraction notices; schedule of fines.
(a) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary,
the amount of a municipal civil infraction fine due in response
to the issuance of a municipal civil infraction notice for a
violation as provided by Subsection A shall be according to the
following schedule:
[1] First offense: no less than $200.
[2] Second offense: $500.
§ 233-27 GROSSE ILE CODE § 233-27
1:480
§ 233-28. Civil actions.
The Township, by and through the Township's Attorney, may bring a civil
action in the name of the Township to enforce the provisions of this chapter
and rules promulgated pursuant to this chapter. Nothing in this chapter
shall preclude the Township from instituting an action for appropriate legal
and/or equitable relief in Wayne County Circuit Court to restrain, correct, or
abate a violation of this chapter, a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant
to this chapter, or a stormwater construction approval issued hereunder;
or to stop an illegal act; or to abate a nuisance; or to prevent pollution or
flooding.
§ 233-29. Criminal penalties; imprisonment.
Any person who at the time of violation knew or should have known that
a violation of this chapter, or any notice, order, stormwater construction
approval, or decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by
the Township under this chapter; or intentionally makes a false statement,
representation, or certification in any application for, or form pertaining
to, a stormwater construction approval, or any other correspondence or
communication, written or oral, with the Township regarding matters
regulated by this chapter; or commits any other act that is punishable under
state law by imprisonment for more than 90 days; shall, upon conviction, be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500 per violation, per day,
or imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both in the discretion of the court.
§ 233-30. Separate offenses.
Each act of violation, and each day or portion of a day that a violation
of this chapter, rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter,
stormwater construction approval, order, notice, or determination issued,
made or entered into under this chapter is permitted to exist or occur
(b) For any fine not paid in full within 30 days of the time specified
for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation
notice, the fine amount due shall automatically be double the
amounts listed immediately above.
D. Authorized Township officials. The following persons are authorized
Township officials for purposes of issuing municipal civil infraction
citations (directing alleged violators to appear in district court) or
municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to
appear at the Wayne County Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau)
for violations under this chapter: the Director of the Department of
Public Services; the Township Engineer, and their respective designees
and authorized representatives.
E. Procedures. Except as otherwise provided by this section, the
procedures for municipal civil infraction actions shall be as set forth in
Chapter 1, Article II (Municipal Civil Infractions), of the Code of
Ordinances of the Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 233-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-30
1:481
constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided by this
chapter.
§ 233-30 GROSSE ILE CODE § 233-30
1:482
ARTICLE X
Appeals
§ 233-31. Stormwater Appeals Board.
§ 233-32. Appeal procedure.
A. Any person whose legal rights, duties, or privileges are determined by
the Township pursuant to this chapter or a rule promulgated pursuant
to this chapter, and who is aggrieved by the Township's determination,
may appeal to the Stormwater Appeals Board for relief of that
grievance. An appeal shall be made according to the procedure set
forth in this chapter.
B. The Stormwater Appeals Board shall consist of the Director of the
Department of Public Services; the Township Administrator; and the
Township Engineer; or their designees. Meetings of the Stormwater
Appeals Board shall be in person and shall be open to all interested
parties.
A. An appeal shall be in writing, shall be addressed to the Stormwater
Appeals Board, care of the Department of Public Services, and shall be
received within 20 days of the determination that is the subject of the
appeal. The appeal shall be made in triplicate, shall set forth the
specific act or matter complained of and in dispute, and shall include all
documentation that supports the appellant's position. The appellant
may be required to post a deposit at the time of filing to cover the costs
of processing the appeal.
B. Within 30 days of receipt of written appeal, the Department of Public
Services shall acknowledge such recipient in writing, and shall set a
day and time for an appellant hearing to be conducted in accordance
with Subsection D. If appropriate, the Department of Public Services
may schedule a conciliation meeting with the appellant in accordance
with Subsection C.
C. Conciliation meeting.
(1) The purpose of a conciliation meeting is to attempt to resolve the
matter before an appeal is forwarded to the Stormwater Appeals
Board. If a conciliation meeting is held, it shall occur as soon as
practicable, at the mutual convenience of the parties. Conciliation
meetings shall be open to all interested parties and their
representatives.
(2) After a conciliation meeting, if the appellant or the Department of
Public Services determines that an appeal cannot be resolved
through a conciliation meeting, the parties shall so inform the
Stormwater Appeals Board in writing, and the appellate hearing
scheduled pursuant to Subsection B shall be conducted in
§ 233-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-32
1:483
accordance with Subsection D. Additional conciliation meetings
shall not be necessary.
(3) If the Department of Public Services and the appellant agree that
the subject of the appeal has been satisfactorily resolved through
the conciliation meeting process or otherwise, the agreement shall
be incorporated into a consent agreement pursuant to § 233-24.
D. Hearing procedure.
(1) A notice shall be sent to the appellant at least 10 days prior to the
hearing. The notice shall include a statement of the date, time,
place, and nature of the hearing; a statement of the legal authority
and jurisdiction under which the hearing will be held; a reference
to the particular sections of this chapter involved in the appeal;
brief summary of the specific act or matter complained of and in
dispute.
(2) At the hearing, the Stormwater Appeals Board shall receive
testimony and evidence provided by the appellant, the Township,
and/or others as the Stormwater Appeals Board deems necessary.
During the hearing, the Stormwater Appeals Board shall not be
bound strictly by the rules of evidence that would apply in a court,
but shall have the authority to receive such evidence as deemed
relevant and material. The Stormwater Appeals Board may give the
evidence as is received such weight and probative value as, in the
Board's discretion, is deemed proper.
(3) Within 30 days after the hearing, the Stormwater Appeals Board
shall render a decision in writing. This thirty-day period may be
extended for good cause. The decision shall include a brief
summary of the specific act or matter complained of, the nature of
the testimony and evidence received, and a decision as to whether
the Board affirmed, rescinded, or modified the decision or action at
issue.
(4) The decision of the Stormwater Appeals Board shall be final and
enforceable at law. A person aggrieved by a final decision of the
Stormwater Appeals Board may seek judicial review of the decision
by the Wayne County Circuit Court. A petition for judicial review
shall be filed not later than 60 days following the receipt of the final
decision of the Stormwater Appeals Board. An aggrieved person
shall exhaust all administrative remedies provided in this chapter
before seeking judicial review.
§ 233-32 GROSSE ILE CODE § 233-32
1:484
Chapter 235
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 167. Roads and driveways — See Ch. 205.
§ 233-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 233-32
1:485

ARTICLE I
Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 8-24-1998 by Ord. No. 249]
§ 235-1. Declaration of necessity.
It is hereby declared necessary for the protection of the health and safety of
the residents of the Township of Grosse Ile to adopt an ordinance to provide
for maintenance of sidewalks. No person shall allow or permit any sidewalk
which adjoins his/her property to fall into a state of disrepair or become
"unsafe" for pedestrian travel.
§ 235-2. Maintenance and replacement standards.
No person shall construct or replace any sidewalk except in accordance
with the lines, grade, slope and specification established by the Township
Department of Community Development. No person shall construct or
replace any sidewalk without a permit from the Township Department of
Community Development.
§ 235-3. Sidewalks to be maintained in good repair.
Sidewalks must be maintained in reasonable repair so that it is reasonably
safe and convenient for public travel. No person shall permit any sidewalk
which adjoins or abuts property owned by him to fall into a state of disrepair
or be unsafe for pedestrian travel. This requirement applies to any adjoining
driveway approach too. Any existing sidewalk in the Township must be
continued and maintained by the abutting property owner and may not be
abandoned or removed.
§ 235-4. Replacement of sidewalks at expense of abutting property
owner.
Upon written notice from the Township of Grosse Ile that a sidewalk is
unsafe for pedestrian travel, the abutting owner shall replace such sidewalk
within 60 days of the date of the notice. The Township may at its discretion
extend the time for replacement for good reason such as weather conditions
or other extenuating circumstances which may interfere with such
replacement.
§ 235-5. Notice.
The notice referred to in § 235-4 shall be sent by the Township Department
of Community Development or other department or person as the Township
Manager may authorize to send such notice. The notice shall be mailed to
the owner of the abutting premises to the last known address of said owner
or, if the owner or his or her address is unknown, by delivery of said notice
to a person of suitable age and discretion at the premises or, if such person
cannot be located, by posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-5
1:487
premises. The notice shall specify the replacement of sidewalks that are
required.
§ 235-6. Failure to replace; work to be done by Township;
assessment of costs.
If the owner fails to replace the sidewalk as directed by the notice, the
Department of Community Development shall report same to the Township
Board with the request that the Township be authorized to replace the
same. The Township Board may determine to replace the sidewalk by
resolution and order the Department of Community Development to have
the work completed by an authorized contractor. The cost of replacement
incurred by the Township shall be assessed against the premises abutting
such sidewalk and the owner thereof.
§ 235-7. Damage to sidewalks.
No person shall use any equipment which will cause damage to the
sidewalk.
§ 235-8. Public meeting to order sidewalk replacement.
Upon receipt of the report from the Department of Community Development
as set forth in § 235-6, the Township Board may order the replacement of,
or may replace, a sidewalk in a designated area within the Township for the
benefit of the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the Township.
The Township Board shall hold a public meeting relative to the ordering
of the sidewalk replacement and shall notify the property owners involved
of the time and place of the hearing by mailing a notice to the last known
address of the property owner by first class mail at least 10 days prior
to the public meeting and such notice shall be published at least once in
the newspaper not less than 10 days prior to such hearing. If the Board
determines that the replacement of the sidewalk is necessary, it may replace
the sidewalk and assess the cost to the property involved and the owner
thereof, payable over a five-year period, or it may permit the owners of
the property involved to have the sidewalk replaced according to Township
specifications at their own expenses. However, if the property owner has
failed to replace the sidewalk within 60 days of the Board determination
that the replacement of the sidewalk is necessary, then the Township shall
proceed with the replacement and assess the cost to the property owner.
If required, sidewalks replaced on the right-of-way of county roads must
have the approval of the county highway authority having jurisdiction over
the road. All unpaid installments shall bear interest payable annually on
each installment due date, at a rate to be set by the Township Board, not
exceeding one percent above the average rate of interest borne by any
special assessment bonds issued by the Township in anticipation in all or
part of the unpaid installments.
§ 235-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 235-9
1:488
§ 235-9. Assessment procedure.
If the Township Board directs that the replacement of the sidewalk should
be done, then the Township Department of Community Development shall
report the costs incurred by the Township for the said replacement of the
sidewalk to the Township Board. The Township Board upon receipt of this
information shall appoint a time and place when it will meet and hear
any objections to the report of cost to be assessed against the property.
Notice of the hearing shall be given by first class mail at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing to the property owner and by publishing at least
once in the newspaper at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Failure to
give notice shall not invalidate the assessment and after the hearing the
Township Board intends to have the property assessed for the work done by
the Township, then the Board shall confirm the cost to be assessed and this
confirmation shall be delivered to the Township Treasurer for collection of
the assessments in accordance with the directions of the Township Board.
§ 235-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-9
1:489
Chapter 238
SUBDIVISION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Condominium projects — See Ch. 71.
Environmental assessment — See Ch. 98.
Fences and walls — See Ch. 103.
Flood control — See Ch. 116.
Grading — See Ch. 124.
Land use hearing notices — See Ch. 139.
Macomb Street landscaping — See Ch. 150.
Roads and driveways — See Ch. 205.
Utilities — See Ch. 258.
Wetlands and drainageways — See Ch. 275.
Woodland and tree preservation — See Ch.
282.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 238-1. Definitions.
A. The definitions contained in Section 102 of the Land Division Act of
1967 of the State of Michigan, as amended, are hereby adopted by
reference and shall be controlling in the interpretation of this chapter
to the same extent as if such definitions were restated herein in full. In
addition, the definitions contained in Chapter 285, Zoning, as amended,
shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABUTTING — Having a common border with, or being separated from
such common border by, an easement.
BLOCK — That property abutting one side of the street and lying
between the two nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest
such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or
live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to
the continuity of development.
BLOCK LENGTH — The distance between intersections of through
streets; such distance being measured along the longest street
bounding the block, and from right-of-way line to right-of-way line of
the two intersection streets.
BUILDABLE PORTION OF A LOT — Generally includes that portion
of the lot on which the principal building may be constructed in
compliance with all ordinances and laws.
DATE OF FILING —
DATE OF FILING FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF THE
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The date of the initial Planning Commission
(1)
§ 235-9 GROSSE ILE CODE § 238-1
1:490
DEDICATION — A conveyance of land by the owner in the nature of
a gift or grant and an acceptance of that land by or on behalf of the
public.
DETENTION POND — A man-made or natural water collector facility
designed to collect surface and subsurface water in order to impede
its flow and to release the same gradually at a rate not greater than
that prior to the development of the property, into natural or man-made
outlets.
LOT — A parcel of land separated from other parcels on a preliminary
or recorded plat for the purpose of sale, lease, or separate use.
LOT AREA — Has the same meaning prescribed in Chapter 285, Zoning.
LOT, CORNER — A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides
at the intersection of two streets is less than 135°. A lot abutting upon
a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the
purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and
the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the
curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less
than 135°.
LOT DEPTH — The arithmetic mean of the shortest and longest
distances from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Has the same meaning prescribed in Chapter 285, Zoning.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot abutting a collector thoroughfare
and/or a minor street(s) with vehicular access only to the minor street.
LOT, THROUGH — Any interior lot having frontage on two more or less
parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row
of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall
be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as
required.
LOT WIDTH — Has the same meaning prescribed in Chapter 285,
Zoning.
OPEN SPACE — A parcel of land which is open, unoccupied and
unobstructed by structures from the ground to the sky and which
contains lawn, trees, or other natural vegetation.
meeting that the proprietor presents the preliminary plat for
consideration.
DATE OF FILING FOR FINAL APPROVAL OF THE PRELIMINARY
PLAT — The date the proprietor files the tentatively approved
preliminary plat and a certified list of all authorities required for
approval with the Clerk.
(2)
DATE OF FILING FOR FINAL PLAT APPROVAL — The date the
proprietor files the necessary prints of the final plat with the Clerk.
(3)
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-1
1:491
PEDESTRIAN THROUGH-BLOCK CONNECTOR — A pedestrian
pathway located at street level, but perpendicular to the street, to
provide shortcuts through development blocks.
PLAT — A map or chart of a subdivision of land.
SIDEWALK — A concrete path that provides for pedestrian use and is
usually located at the side of a road within the right-of-way.
SITE CONDOMINIUM — A system of separate ownership of individual
units of land in multi-unit projects designed to function in a similar
manner, or as an alternative to a platted subdivision created according
to the Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended and
Chapter 71, Condominium Projects. In addition to the interest acquired
in a particular unit of land, each unit owner is also a tenant in common
in the underlying fee and in the land area used in common by all the
unit owners. Each site condominium unit (i.e., site condominium lot)
shall include an area defined by setbacks designating the perimeter
within which the condominium unit must be built and the balance of
the condominium unit site shall become a limited common element.
General common element shall not be considered part of the site
condominium lot. The term "condominium unit site" shall be equivalent
to the term "lot," for purposes of determining compliance of a site
condominium subdivision with the provisions of this chapter and
Chapter 285, Zoning.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal
roadway; or a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way on
a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Register
of Deeds. A street includes the land between the street right-of-way
lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, and lawns.
SUBDIVISION — The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of
land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the
purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year that results in lots that
are not exempted from the platting requirements of the Michigan Land
Division Act.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A map showing all requisite details of
a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for
purposes of preliminary consideration, prepared in conformance
with the Land Division Act. [Amended 7-22-2002]
(1)
FINAL PLAT — A map of all or part of a subdivision providing
substantial conformance to the preliminary plat of the subdivision
prepared in conformance with the requirements of the Land
Division Act and this chapter and suitable for recording by the
County Register of Deeds. [Amended 7-22-2002]
(2)
§ 238-1 GROSSE ILE CODE § 238-2
1:492
§ 238-2. Scope of regulations and vested rights.
A. No land may be divided, subdivided or combined through the use of any
legal description unless approved by the Township in accordance with
this chapter and the Michigan Land Division Act, PA 288 of 1967, as
amended, with the exception of land divisions exempt from subdivision
under § 238-3 of this chapter and the land division regulations of Article
19 of Chapter 285, Zoning.
B. Land divisions that do not require subdivision plat approval shall be
reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedure and
requirements of Article 19 of Chapter 285, Zoning.
C. A site condominium or condominium subdivision developed under
Chapter 71, Condominium Projects, shall be required to meet the
standards of §§ 238-7 through 238-14 of this chapter.
D. These regulations apply to all subdivisions created after the effective
date of this chapter that are located within Grosse Ile Township,
including those that have not yet received tentative approval of the
preliminary plat.
E. A subdivision that has received tentative approval of the preliminary
plat from the Township Board prior to the effective date of this chapter
shall be processed in accordance with the standards and procedures
established in the previous subdivision regulations, provided a final
preliminary plat, meeting all requirements of the prior subdivision
control ordinance and the Michigan Land Division Act is filed with the
Township within one year of receiving such tentative approval of the
preliminary plat. The Township may require compliance with the
standards established herein upon a determination that compliance is
necessary for the preservation or protection of health, safety and
welfare.
F. A subdivision that has received final approval of the preliminary plat
from the Township Board prior to the effective date of this chapter shall
be processed in accordance with the standards and procedures
established in the previous subdivision regulations, provided a final
plat, meeting all requirements of the prior subdivision control
ordinance and the Michigan Land Division Act, is filed with the
Township within two years of receiving such final preliminary plat
approval. The Township may require compliance with the standards
established herein upon a determination that compliance is necessary
for the preservation or protection of health, safety and welfare.
G. A subdivision that has received final plat approval from the Township
Board prior to the effective date of this chapter and has been recorded
with the County Register of Deeds shall be considered in conformance
with this chapter, provided such subdivision shall continue to meet all
requirements of the subdivision control ordinance in effect on the date
of final approval of the plat, all conditions placed upon approval of the
plat, and all applicable provision of the Michigan Land Division Act. Any
§ 238-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-2
1:493
§ 238-3. Partition of parcels in recorded plats.
The Township Board, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission,
may partition or divide lots, outlots, or other parcels of land in a recorded
plat into not more than four parcels of land, each of which shall with respect
to its width, depth, area and other characteristics conform to the provisions
and terms of Chapter 285, Zoning, and other applicable provisions of this
Code. The standards and procedures for such approval shall be in
accordance with the land division regulations of Article 19 of Chapter 285,
Zoning. A division to a subdivision lot that creates more than four parts
or buildable lots shall require approval as a subdivision under the current
provisions of this chapter.
§ 238-4. Pre-preliminary plats.
The proprietor of any land desiring to have a plat approved and recorded
shall first submit to the Planning Commission 15 copies of a survey (at
a minimum one inch equals 50 feet), prepared by a registered surveyor,
indicating property boundaries, easements, topography, tree locations (see
Chapter 282), wetland buffers and boundaries (see Chapter 275), and
existing utilities. The survey should indicate adjacent streets and plats, and
significant physical characteristics of the neighborhood. Using the survey
drawing as a base map, the proposed subdivision improvements should
be shown including dimensional and numbered lots, lot areas identified in
square footage and any other significant features proposed. Fifteen copies
of the environmental assessment/impact report (see Chapter 98) and the
tree replacement plan written statement (see Chapter 282) shall also be
further divisions of lots within such recorded subdivision shall comply
with § 238-3 of this chapter. All lots within such approved subdivision
shall be subject to compliance with all other applicable current
Township ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to
Chapter 285, Zoning; Chapter 282, Woodland and Tree Preservation;
Chapter 275, Wetlands and Drainageways; Chapter 205, Roads and
Driveways; and the Building Code.50
H. This chapter shall not abrogate or annul any easement, bylaw, master
deed, deed restriction, covenant, private agreement or dedicated public
right-of-way, except where the regulations or standards of this chapter
are more restrictive or impose a higher standard.
I. The regulations established herein are considered to be the minimum
necessary to achieve the purposes listed above. Any conflicting
ordinances, regulations, or laws of a more restrictive nature shall
supersede the appropriate provisions of this chapter.
J. Except as otherwise provided above, no vested rights shall accrue to
the owner or developer of any subdivision until the actual signing of the
final plat by the Township Clerk.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
§ 238-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 238-4
1:494
submitted. The Planning Commission shall either give its pre-preliminary
tentative approval to the project or set forth in writing its reasons for
rejection and its requirements for tentative approval. Such action shall not
be taken unless the proprietor has delivered the materials listed above and
paid the applicable fees to the Township Treasurer.
§ 238-5. Preliminary plats.
A. Preliminary plat tentative approval. Following pre-preliminary tentative
approval by the Planning Commission, the proprietor shall make a
preliminary plat and submit 15 copies to authorities as provided in
Sections 111 to 119 of the Land Division Act of 1967, as amended. The
preliminary plat should indicate all detailed schematic plans for
proposed roads and all proposed utilities. The proprietor shall also
submit materials required by Chapter 282, a detailed tree survey and
replacement plan, and Chapter 275, wetland mitigation plans. The
Planning Commission shall not give tentative approval until it has
received necessary permits from the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality and United States Corps of Engineers. The
tentative preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission for a recommendation to the Township Board. The
Township Board of Trustees shall not give tentative approval to a
preliminary plat until it has been reviewed by the Planning Commission
after public hearing and its recommendations received. Tentative
approval under this section shall confer upon the proprietor, for a
period of one year from approval date, the rights granted under Section
112 of the Land Division Act, including approval of lot sizes, lot
orientation and street layout.
B. Preliminary plat final approval.
(1) Following the receipt of all necessary permits from the Wayne
County Department of Public Service, or any other applicable
agencies, the preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission for a recommendation to the Township Board. Any
changes to the preliminary plat required by Wayne County
Department of Public Service shall be subject to approval by the
Planning Commission. The Township Board of Trustees shall not
give final approval to a preliminary plat until it has been reviewed
by the Planning Commission after public hearing, its
recommendations received and the following detailed plans have
been submitted and approved:
(a) Detailed plans for installing sanitary sewers shall be submitted
to the Township Engineer for approval. Upon approval by the
Township Engineer, plans shall be forwarded to the Michigan
Department of Health for its approval and construction permit.
The sanitary sewer plans shall provide for six-inch wyes and for
the installation of service connections from the street sewers
to the property line.
§ 238-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-5
1:495
(b) Detailed plans for installing water mains shall be submitted to
the Township Engineer for approval. Upon approval by the
Township Engineer, plans shall be forwarded to the Board of
Public Works of the Township of Grosse Ile for its approval, to
the Detroit Water Board and the Michigan Department of
Health for their approval and construction permit. The plans
shall provide for the installation of not less than an eight-inch
cast iron water main unless otherwise approved by the
Township Engineer, together with the necessary hydrants,
valves, gatewells and fittings to be installed as required by the
Township Engineer and the Board of Public Works of the
Township of Grosse Ile.
(c) Detailed plans for installing all public streets, highways and
street lighting shown on the plat shall be submitted to the
Roads Division of the Wayne County Department of Public
Services for approval. Upon approval by that agency, the
proprietor will forward the plans to the Township Engineer for
approval. All streets and highways shall be paved with
concrete of a minimum width as set forth in § 238-7 below with
thickness and design in accordance with current specifications
of the Roads Division of the Wayne County Department of
Public Services and the Township Engineer. Such paved
surfaces shall include all necessary excavation, grading, storm
sewers drainage structures and be of such a character as to
meet with the current specifications of the Wayne County
Department of Public Services.
(d) Plans for concrete sidewalks meeting the requirements of
§ 238-7 shall be submitted for approval.
(e) A detailed landscape plan meeting the requirements of § 238-7
shall be submitted for approval.
(f) Streets signs bearing the names of streets of a design
approved by the Wayne County Department of Public Services
shall be located at every street intersection.
(g) Detailed plans for grading shall be submitted in conformity
with Chapter 124, Grading, of this code.
(h) Detailed plans shall be submitted for any required covered
drain.
(2) After preliminary plat final approval is given by the Board of
Trustees, the proprietor must then obtain necessary Township
permits prior to commencing any land clearing (including brushing
and grubbing) or construction of utilities and roads. Final approval
of the preliminary plat under this section shall confer upon the
proprietor, for a period of two years from the date of approval, the
rights granted under Section 120 of the Land Division Act that the
§ 238-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 238-5
1:496
§ 238-6. Final plats.
Following final approval of the preliminary plat by all authorities the
proprietor shall make a final plat in compliance with Sections 131 to 151 of
the Land Division Act of 1967, as amended. The final plat shall be submitted
in accordance with the procedure prescribed in Sections 162 to 173 of the
Land Division Act of 1967, as amended.
§ 238-7. Design standards.
general terms and conditions under which preliminary approval
was granted will not be changed.
A. The final plat shall have been processed and approved by state and
county agencies in accordance with Sections 162 to 165 of the Land
Division Act of 1967, as amended, prior to submission to the Township
for its review.
B. The final plat shall be reviewed by the Community Development
Director, Township Engineer and Township Planner and other Township
officials identified by the Community Development Director for
compliance with the approved preliminary plat, all conditions attached
to preliminary approval, easements and plans for utilities, and other
improvements. Copies of all deed restrictions, covenants and
documents showing the manner in which common areas are to be
maintained shall be submitted for review by the Township Attorney.
C. The Township Board shall review all recommendations and take action
on the final plat at its next regular meeting or, within 20 days of its date
of filing in accordance with the procedures of Sections 166 to 167 of the
Land Division Act of 1967, as amended. The final plat shall conform in
all manners to the preliminary plat, as approved, and all conditions
attached to preliminary approval.
D. Upon the approval of the final plat by the Township Board, the
subsequent state and county approvals shall follow the procedure set
forth in Sections 168 to 173 of the Land Division Act of 1967, as
amended. The three prints of the final plat shall be forwarded to the
Township: one to the Clerk, one to the Planning Commission, and one to
the Community Development Department. A copy of the final plat CADD
file shall be submitted to the Community Development Department on a
suitable disk format, as determined by the Township Engineer. Copies
of all deed restrictions shall be filed with the Community Development
Department, along with evidence of their recording with the Wayne
County Register of Deeds.
A. Streets. Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements set
forth in this chapter;205, Roads and Driveways; and the Wayne County
Department of Public Services.
§ 238-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-7
1:497
(1) The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of
the Master Plan and shall be considered in relation to the existing
and planned major thoroughfares and secondary streets, and such
part shall be platted in the location and the width indicated on such
plan.
(2) The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of
existing streets from adjoining areas into new subdivisions, unless
otherwise approved by the Township Board, following a
recommendation by the Planning Commission, due to documented
environmentally sensitive features, unusual lot configuration or
unique site conditions. Where adjoining vacant areas are zoned or
planned for development similar to the proposed subdivision,
streets shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract to make
provision for the future street connections. The proprietor shall
demonstrate that the proposed stub street is in a reasonable
location for extension into the adjacent lands, in consideration of
such factors as grades, water bodies, wetlands and lot
configuration.
(3) Streets shall be aligned to maximize the preservation of natural
features and existing grades to the extent feasible. Streets should
follow natural topography to minimize grading.
(4) The proposed subdivision street layout shall discourage use by
through traffic, except where a continuation of streets to adjoining
properties is deemed desirable by the Township.
(5) Where a subdivision incorporates existing public streets or private
roads that are not in conformance with current standards, the
applicant shall reconstruct such facilities as necessary to improve
the road to the extent required by Chapter 205, Roads and
Driveways.
(6) Road right-of-way, roadway widths, design and construction shall
conform to the standards herein and all standards adopted by the
Wayne County Department of Public Services and Chapter 205,
Roads and Driveways. All roads shall have a minimum right-of-way
width of 60 feet. All roads shall be paved with concrete and with
concrete curbs and have a minimum pavement width of 27 feet,
measured back to back of curbs. All culs-de-sac shall terminate in a
turning circle of at least 80 feet diameter of paving within a rightof-
way of at least 100 feet diameter.
(7) All newly platted streets which intersect with existing streets, or
with proposed platted streets, will do so at ninety-degree angles
with a minimum straightaway of 150 feet, as measured from center
line of the existing roadway. The grade in the one-hundred-fifty-foot
straightaway shall not exceed 3%. The maximum number of
intersecting streets shall be two.
§ 238-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 238-7
1:498
(8) Private roads shall be prohibited. All roads shall connect to the
public road system and be dedicated to the Wayne County
Department of Public Services.
(9) Each phase of the plat shall be designed to meet the street
requirements above, regardless of whether future phases are
constructed.
(10) Street names shall not duplicate any existing street name in Grosse
Ile Township, except where a new street is a continuation of an
existing street.
(11) Culs-de-sac shall be designed with a center landscape island.
B. Blocks. Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following
standards:
(1) Length of blocks between intersecting streets shall be no less than
500 or more than 1,320 feet in length.
(2) A block shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots and shall
not be less than 240 feet, except where lots back into a major
thoroughfare, natural feature or subdivision boundary.
C. Lots. Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards:
(1) Lot areas and widths shall conform to at least the minimum
requirements of Chapter 285, Zoning, for the district in which the
subdivision is proposed, provided each residential lot platted shall
contain an area of at least 20,000 square feet and a width of not
less than 100 feet.
(2) The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision proposed for
residential uses shall be appropriate for the location and the type of
development contemplated.
(3) Narrow deep lots shall be avoided. The depth of a lot generally
shall not exceed four times the width as measured at the building
line.
(4) Side lot lines shall generally be at right angles or radial to the
street center lines. This requirement shall not apply where such lot
lines would create irregularly shaped lots which would
unreasonably limit construction, or where adjustments to the
standard lot configuration would protect regulated wetlands or
preserve other natural features, such as topography. Lot lines shall
generally be straight and not include jogs that create irregularly
shaped lots (dogleg lot lines).
(5) Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets.
§ 238-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-7
1:499
(6) Blocks shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of back-to-back
lots, except where lots back onto a major thoroughfare, natural
feature or subdivision boundary.
(7) Through lots (lots with frontage on two parallel streets) are
prohibited, except in the case of a reverse frontage lot that abuts a
major thoroughfare where access to such major thoroughfare is
prohibited.
(8) Corner lots shall be platted at least 10 feet wider than the minimum
width permitted by Chapter 285, Zoning.
(9) Lots facing a three-way intersection should be aligned to prevent
oncoming headlight glare into the living area of the building
envelope.
(10) Building setback lines shall conform to at least the minimum
requirements of Chapter 285, Zoning.
(11) Corner lots shall have access to the lesser traveled roadway.
(12) If the subdivision includes any outlots or excepted parcels, an
illustration shall be provided to demonstrate that the remaining
land can be used or subdivided in conformance with Township
standards.
(13) Areas of the subdivision plat that contain ponds, rivers, canals, or
similar bodies of water shall be recorded as acreage, but shall not
be platted as subdivision lots nor calculated as a portion of the
minimum lot area as required by Chapter 285, Zoning. This
provision shall not apply to artificial ponds or pools created on a lot
after final plat approval.
(14) Lands subject to flooding or otherwise deemed by the Planning
Commission to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential
purposes, or for uses that may in the judgment of the Planning
Commission increase the danger to health, life, or property, or
increase the flood hazard. Such land within a subdivision shall be
set aside for other uses, such as parks or other open space.
(15) Lots that back into such features as arterial streets, shopping
centers, or industrial properties shall contain a landscaped
easement along the rear at least 30 feet wide in addition to the
utility easement to restrict access to the arterial street to minimize
noise and to protect outdoor living areas. Lots extending through a
block and having frontage on two local streets shall be prohibited.
D. Sidewalks, pedestrian through-block connectors and bike paths.
(1) Sidewalks or bike paths may be required by the Township Board,
based upon a recommendation by the Planning Commission, on
both sides of the street or road.
§ 238-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 238-7
1:500
(2) Pedestrian through-block connectors may be required in the middle
of any block over 1,320 feet in length to obtain satisfactory
pedestrian circulation within the subdivision, to provide access to
parks or open space, to provide links with an adjacent subdivision,
or to provide access to an activity center. Where such pedestrian
through-block connectors are required, an area at least 20 feet
wide shall be provided between lots. The Township may require
placement of a fence along the easement to ensure the location is
visible and to protect the adjacent property owners. Pedestrian
through-block connectors shall be paved in accordance with the
specifications of the Township Engineer, provided gravel paths or
wooden boardwalks may be permitted in areas with sensitive
environmental features.
(3) The Township Board, based upon a recommendation of the
Planning Commission, may require a bike path be provided from a
subdivision where it abuts a major thoroughfare. The Township
may also require a bike path to provide access from within the
subdivision to existing or proposed bike paths outside the
subdivision, or to schools, parks, commercial areas and public
institutions.
(4) All sidewalks shall be a minimum five feet wide and constructed to
the specifications of the American Association of State Highway
and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
(5) Bikepaths shall be at least eight feet wide and constructed in
accordance with the specifications of AASHTO.
(6) Sidewalks and bike paths shall be installed by the developer within
the dedicated street right-of-way, private road access easements or
special easement where grades or other factors prevent placement
within the right-of-way or access easement.
E. Landscaping. The selection, size, spacing and planting of all
landscaping within a subdivision shall comply with the landscaping
standards of Chapter 285, Zoning, and the following standards:
(1) General standards.
(a) Tree species should be selected for tolerance of the harsh
roadside conditions in southeast Michigan, for compliance with
sight distance requirements, to ensure maintenance of
accessibility to fire hydrants, to provide a minimum overhead
clearance of 15 feet over any roadway and eight feet over a
sidewalk or bike path, and to avoid interference with overhead
or underground utility lines.
(b) Plantings within 15 feet of a fire hydrant shall be no taller than
six inches.
§ 238-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-7
1:501
(c) The development and planting of required landscaping shall be
the responsibility of the proprietor, not the individual lot
owner.
(d) The Township Board, upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may approve fewer trees if the proprietor
provides evidence that existing healthy trees over 2.5 inches in
diameter at breast height (dbh) or natural habitat areas will be
preserved during and after construction.
(e) The landscape plan shall be approved by the Township Board,
upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, as part of
the final preliminary plat process in consideration of the above
and compatibility with the visual character of the surrounding
area.
(2) Street trees.
(a) The minimum size of all street trees shall be three-inch caliper.
(b) One canopy tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet along a
median boulevard.
(c) Street trees shall be planted so that each lot has at least two
canopy trees and each corner lot has at least three canopy
trees. Street trees shall be placed to avoid any future driveway
locations.
(d) Street trees shall be at least 50 feet from the intersection of
two street right-of-way lines or access easements.
(e) Street trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk.
Where tree location in the public right-of-way is not possible
due to conflicts with overhead or underground utility lines or
restrictions of the WCDPS, street trees may be located on
private property just beyond the front lot line, subject to
Planning Commission approval. Where a meandering sidewalk
or bike path exists or is approved, the street tree locations
shall be determined by the Township. Trees shall be at least
four feet from the edge of any paved surface and shall not
interfere with sight distance required by the WCDPS.
(f) The lowest branch of any canopy tree shall provide a minimum
fifteen-foot clearance over a public street or private road, and a
minimum eight feet above grade from a sidewalk or bike path.
Greater clearances shall be provided if required by the
WCDPS.
(3) Landscaping in culs-de-sac.
(a) A minimum of one canopy tree for every 1,000 square feet of
ground area, rounded upward, shall be planted within each
§ 238-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 238-7
1:502
cul-de-sac or island (e.g., if the island is 2,305 square feet,
three canopy trees would be required).
(b) The lowest branch of any canopy tree within the island shall be
a minimum eight feet above the grade of the island and 15 feet
above the grade of the roadway.
(c) The island must either be mounded to a height of between one
foot six inches and two feet six inches and planted with grass
or ground cover or have four low shrubs planted for every
1,000 square feet of ground area. The shrubs shall be
maintained at a maximum height of two feet six inches.
(4) Subdivision entrances. Subdivision entrances may include
landscaping, lighting, identification signs, wrought iron fences or
other architectural features. All such features shall comply with
Chapter 285, Zoning. A detail of the entranceway shall be
submitted with the tentative preliminary plat. Signs shall not be lit.
Any features proposed to be placed within the county road right-ofway
must meet WCDPS design and sight distance standards. Any
features proposed to be placed outside of the county road right-ofway
must be located within an easement recorded for the
maintenance of such features by the subdivision association.
(5) Landscaping as a buffer zone or transition zone. The Township
Board, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, may
require landscaping along the periphery of the subdivision to serve
as a buffer zone from adjacent uses. A buffer zone may include
trees, shrubs, berms or a combination. A buffer zone may include
preservation of existing woodlands or slopes, or the addition of
landscaping to provide an effective screen. Such buffer zone may
be located within lot setback areas, provided a landscape
conservation easement shall be recorded over such buffer zone.
(6) Required landscape greenbelt. When a subdivision borders a major
thoroughfare, and wherever a rear yard abuts a public street or
private road, an easement or outlot for construction of a thirty-footwide
landscape greenbelt shall be provided, in addition to the
required rear yard setback, measured from the interior setback
line. This buffer zone shall be planted with a minimum of one
canopy tree and one evergreen tree for each 20 feet of greenbelt
length. Existing natural features shall be retained wherever
possible to promote a natural appearance and to protect the
existing ecosystem within the greenbelt. Where a freeform berm is
used as part of the landscape greenbelt, the minimum height shall
be two feet six inches. The maximum slope of the berm facing the
primary road shall be 6:1 and the maximum slope of the berm
facing the inside of the lot shall be 3:1. The construction of the
greenbelt and its plantings shall be the responsibility of the
developer and not the individual lot owner(s).
§ 238-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-7
1:503
§ 238-8. Required improvements.
(7) Detention/retention pond. A minimum of one evergreen tree shall
be planted every 40 feet around the perimeter of all detention or
retention ponds. If the pond is fenced, then landscaping shall be
provided at a rate of one evergreen tree shall be planted every 20
feet around the perimeter of the detention or retention pond.
A. Proprietors are required to install water mains, pavements, storm
drains, sanitary sewers, and sidewalks in public rights-of-way, together
with all structures appurtenant to each, and to do all landscaping
outlined in § 238-7 in the lands described in the final plat.
B. All lots shall be served by the Township's public sanitary sewer system.
Detailed plans for installing sanitary sewers shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer for approval. Upon approval by the Township
Engineer, he will forward the plans to the Michigan Department of
Health for its approval and construction permit. The sanitary sewer
plans shall provide for six-inch wyes and for the installation of service
connections from the street severs to the property line. The Planning
Commission shall approve locations of sanitary sewer lift stations,
which shall be indicated on the final preliminary plat and be located
within the boundaries of the subdivision.
C. All lots shall be served by the Township's public water system. Detailed
plans for installing water mains shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer for approval. Upon approval by the Township Engineer, he will
forward the plans to the Board of Public Works of the Township of
Grosse Ile for its approval, to the Detroit Water Board and the Michigan
Department of Health for their approval and construction permit. The
plans shall provide for the installation of not less than an eight-inch cast
iron water main unless otherwise approved by the Township Engineer,
together with the necessary hydrants, valves, gatewells and fittings to
be installed as required by the Township Engineer and the Board of
Public Works of the Township of Grosse Ile.
D. Detailed plans for installing all streets, highways, and streetlighting
shown on the plat shall be submitted to the Roads Division of the Wayne
County Department of Public Services for approval. Upon approval by
that agency, the proprietor will forward the plans to the Township
Engineer for approval. All streets and highways shall be paved with
plain concrete of a minimum width thickness and design in accordance
with the standards of this chapter; current specifications of the Roads
Division of the Wayne County Department of Public Services; Chapter
205, Roads and Driveways; and the Township Engineer. Such paved
surfaces shall include all necessary excavation, grading, storm sewers,
drainage structures, and be of such a character as to meet with the
current specifications of the Roads Division of the Wayne County
Department of Public Services.
§ 238-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 238-8
1:504
§ 238-9. Preparation of plans and inspection of work.
E. When specified, concrete sidewalks shall be installed in the rights-ofway,
detailed plans for which shall be approved by the Township
Engineer. Sidewalks located along the frontage of lots shall be installed
prior to an occupancy permit being issued for each home, or within six
months of issuance of an occupancy permit where a performance bond
is posted with the Township guaranteeing that the sidewalk shall be
installed. Where required, the subdivision deed restrictions shall
specify that sidewalks must be installed along all road frontages and the
maintenance shall be the responsibility of the abutting lot owner.
F. All landscaping shall be installed prior to approval of the final
preliminary plat, with the exception of street trees. Street trees shall be
installed prior to a final occupancy permit being issued for each home,
or within six months of issuance of an occupancy permit where a
performance bond is posted with the Township guaranteeing that the
trees shall be installed. The subdivision deed restrictions should state
that occupancy permits for homes shall not be granted until the
required tree is installed.
G. Street signs bearing the names of streets of a design approved by the
Wayne County Road Commission shall be located at every street
intersection.
H. Proprietors shall make whatever improvements and preserve whatever
natural resources are required under and resulting from review of the
proposed subdivision plat under and pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 98 of this Code.
I. Detailed plans for grading shall be submitted in conformity with
Chapter 124, Grading, of this Code.
J. An adequate storm drainage system including necessary storm sewers,
catch basins, manholes, culverts and other appurtenances shall be
required in all subdivisions. Detailed plans for storm drainage systems
shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for approval. Detention or
retention ponds shall not be placed within a residential lot. Detention
and retention ponds shall be placed in outlots, so dedicated with
appropriate easements for drainage purposes. Such detention or
retention ponds shall be set back from any road right-of-way a distance
equal to the front yard setback requirements for the subdivision and
from all other boundaries of the outlot a sufficient distance to meet side
yard setback requirements. Detention and retention ponds shall be
landscaped to meet the requirements of § 238-7E(7) of this chapter.
A. The detailed plans required by § 238-8 shall be prepared by a registered
engineer. All plan elevations shall be based on the Township bench
mark system as set forth by the Township Engineer. All such detailed
plans shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for his approval and
§ 238-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-9
1:505
§ 238-10. Additional improvements.
If a plat shows certain proposed improvements in addition to those required
by this chapter, the Land Division Act of 1967 of the State of Michigan, as
amended and as required and pursuant to Chapter 98 of this Code, such
as playgrounds, lakes, lagoons, slips, waterways, bays or canals which are
not in existence at the time of consideration of the plat, the Township Board
may, as a condition to the approval of the plat, require the proprietor to
enter into an agreement with the Township to complete such improvements
within a reasonable time set by the Board. The Board may also require
security deposits to secure performance of such agreement in the manner
and form provided in § 238-11 of this chapter.
§ 238-11. Performance guarantee.
Following final approval of the preliminary plat, the proprietor shall be
required to deposit with the Clerk or an escrow agent cash, surety bond,
or certified check, or the equivalent approved by the Township Board,
whichever the proprietor elects, to insure construction of all improvements,
except where such deposits are required by Wayne County. The amount of
deposit or bond shall be set by the Township Board based on an estimate
prepared by the developer's engineer and approved by the Township
Engineer. The deposit or bond shall guarantee the completion of the
required improvements within a period of time specified by the Township
Board from the date of the approval of the final plat. The Township Board or
escrow agent with approval of the Board shall rebate to the proprietor, as
the work progresses, amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the
work completed to the entire project.
§ 238-12. Evidence of title.
The abstract of title, title insurance policy or attorney's opinion and other
information required by Section 245 of the Land Division Act of 1967 of the
State of Michigan, as amended, shall be furnished by the proprietor before
final approval of the preliminary plat by the Township Board.
§ 238-13. Conformity with Comprehensive Plan.
All plats shall conform with the Comprehensive Plan (Master Plan) of the
Township in effect at the time the plat is presented for approval.
certification that they are consistent with the overall utility plans for
the Township.
B. Inspection of construction shall be performed by the Township
Engineer or by the Wayne County Department of Public Services. On
work inspected by the Township Engineer the proprietor shall pay the
applicable fee provided by § 238-14. On work inspected by the Wayne
County Department of Public Services the proprietor shall pay the
inspection fees required by the Commission.
§ 238-9 GROSSE ILE CODE § 238-14
1:506
§ 238-14. Variances.
The Township Board may grant a variance from the requirements of this
chapter as follows:
A. Process. The process for a variance request from this chapter shall be
as follows:
(1) Applications for any variance shall be made in writing to the
Township Clerk by the developer prior to approval of the final
preliminary plat. The application shall state fully and clearly all
facts relied upon by the proprietor. The application shall include
any required fee, and be supplemented with maps, plans, and other
additional data which may aid the Planning Commission in the
analysis of the requested variance.
(2) The request shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall first conduct a public hearing. Notice of
the public hearing shall be posted in a newspaper of daily record
and sent to landowners within 300 feet of the parcels or lots for
which the variance is sought.
(3) Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
provide a recommendation to the Township Board, in accordance
with the standards below.
(4) The Township Board shall make a decision on the request. In
making its decision, the Township Board may establish
requirements, time constraints or conditions that will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objectives and requirements of
this chapter. The Township Board shall state the reasons for its
finding or decisions as part of its official records.
(5) The Township Board shall have the final authority on variances,
waivers or modifications of the standards of this chapter, except
Wayne County must also approve any variances from county
standards. Appeals of the Township Board decisions shall be to a
court of law.
B. Variance standards. The decision on a variance request shall be based
on a finding that practical difficulties result from strict compliance with
specific provisions or requirements of the chapter. In making its finding,
the Township Board shall take into account the nature of the proposed
use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable
effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity.
No variance or waiver shall be recommended unless the Township
Board finds that:
(1) There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this
§ 238-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-14
1:507
§ 238-15. Schedule of fees.
With the filing of each application, a nonrefundable application fee shall be
paid to the Township, in an amount specified by resolution of the Township
Board, to cover Township administration, review and inspection costs
related to the subdivision.
§ 238-16. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 241
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Fences and walls — See Ch. 103.
Water — See Ch. 268.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his
land.
(2) The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner.
(3) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which said
property is situated.
(4) The variance or waiver will not violate the provisions of the Land
Division Act (Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended) nor
create a violation of Chapter 285, Zoning, Chapter 205, Roads and
Driveways, or any other applicable Township ordinances.
(5) The variance or waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of this chapter and the Township Master Plan.
C. Variances from Chapter 285, Zoning. Variances or waivers from
requirements of Chapter 285, Zoning, may be considered by the Zoning
Board of Appeals where, in the case of a particular proposed
subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the
requirements of this chapter would result in extraordinary hardship to
the proprietor because of unusual topography or other physical
conditions which are not self-initiated or that these conditions would
result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this chapter, a
variance may be granted. Such variances shall be reviewed in
accordance with the procedures and standards contained in Chapter
285, Zoning.
§ 238-14 GROSSE ILE CODE § 238-16
1:508
ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 241-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — The Building Inspector of the Township of Grosse
Ile or his authorized representative.
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL — Any swimming pool intended
to be used by the occupants of a one- or a two-family dwelling and their
gratuitous guests and constructed on a one- or a two-family residential
property.
SWIMMING POOL or POOL — Any artificially constructed portable or
nonportable structure intended for human swimming or bathing, located
either above or below grade, having a depth of 18 inches or more at any
point.
§ 241-2. Enforcement.
The enforcing official shall administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 241-3. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to construct, install or alter any swimming pool within
the Township of Grosse Ile without first having obtained a permit therefor
from the enforcing official.
§ 241-4. Permit application.
Application for a swimming pool permit shall be made to and approved by
the enforcing official prior to the issuance of the permit. Each application
shall be accompanied by two sets of identical plans and specifications in
sufficient detail to show the following:
A. Scaled or dimensioned plan showing a cross-section view of pool and
the location of buildings, swimming pool, pool equipment, fence and
gates.
B. Filter type and size, filtration capacity, backwash requirements, and
suction cleaner or other cleaning devices.
C. Pool piping layout, showing all pipe sizes, valves, gauges, and types of
material to be used.
D. A graph or other acceptable data showing the rated capacity of the pool
pump in gallons per minute (gpm) and head in feet of water.
E. Disposal system for pool wastewater and backwash water.
§ 241-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-4
1:509
§ 241-5. Application approval.
Swimming pools shall be constructed, installed and/or altered only in
conformity with the application as approved by the enforcing official. Any
deviation from the approved application shall be permitted only upon
approval by the enforcing official.
§ 241-6. Permit fees.
The permit fee shall be as established by the Grosse Ile Township Board
and shall be posted or made available at the Township's Department of
Community Development.
§ 241-7. Workmanship.
All work shall be done in an acceptable manner and shall comply with
applicable building, plumbing, electrical, and heating codes of the
Township.
§ 241-8. Inspection.
The enforcing official shall make a final inspection of the pool construction
for the purpose of determining that all provisions of this chapter have been
complied with. Additional inspections shall be made by the enforcing official
when necessary.
§ 241-9. Stop-work order.
Construction work that is being done contrary to the provisions of this
chapter or contrary to the approved application shall be immediately
stopped upon notice from the enforcing official. The stop-work order shall
be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or
to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the
conditions under which the work may be resumed.
§ 241-10. Right of entry.
The enforcing official shall have the right at any reasonable hour to inspect
any swimming pool for the purpose of determining compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
F. Location of sewer lines, sewage disposal systems, water supplies, and
utilities (gas, telephone, electrical, etc.) within 10 feet of the pool, and
location of water wells within 25 feet of the pool.
G. Any topographic features which could cause surface drainage into the
pool.
H. Physical description of pool, including wall, floor and deck finishes and
diving facilities, if any.
§ 241-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 241-11
1:510
§ 241-11. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
§ 241-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-11
1:511

ARTICLE II
Design Requirements
§ 241-12. Pool clearance.
The location and enclosure of any pool shall be such that no hazard exists
for pool users. The minimum distance from the nearest part of the pool
water shall be as follows:
§ 241-13. Pool piping.
The buried portion of the pool suction piping shall be 10 feet or more from
any sanitary sewer pipe or sewage disposal system. The clearance may
be reduced to five feet if the suction line is encased in a watertight pipe
maintained under pump pressure, or drained as approved by the enforcing
official, or the suction line buried less than four inches below grade.
§ 241-14. Pool enclosure.
A. Six feet horizontally to any building wall or fence.
B. Ten feet horizontally from any overhead electrical or telephone wire to
the water's edge. Under no circumstances shall wires of any kind cross
over the water surface.
C. Twenty-five feet horizontally to any private water well casing or 75 feet
to any public or semipublic water well casing, unless a shorter distance
is approved by the enforcing official.
D. Three feet horizontally to any sewer; there shall be 10 feet horizontally
to a septic tank and tile field or other similar treatment facility, provided
the water level in the pool is one foot or more above the ground surface
elevation of the treatment facility.
E. Three feet to any underground water, electrical, telephone, gas or other
pipes and conduits, except for parts of the swimming pool system.
A. No swimming pool shall be constructed or maintained unless such
swimming pool is entirely enclosed by a building, wall and/or fence. The
minimum height of all parts of the fence or wall, including gates, shall
be 48 inches measured on the outside of the fence or wall upward from
the highest adjacent ground. Any gate shall be equipped with a lock and
key. Said fence shall be designed and constructed so that the pool is not
readily accessible to children by climbing or entering through the fence
openings. Fence material shall contain openings not larger than two
inches nominal size nor material that provides ready footing for
climbing. The fence around a swimming pool must be a minimum of six
feet from property lines and principal buildings except where the entire
rear yard is fenced.
B. A permanent aboveground pool which has a structure intended to
provide self-fencing shall satisfy the fencing requirements of this
§ 241-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-14
1:513
§ 241-15. Potable water supply.
Every swimming pool shall be filled and maintained with potable water.
§ 241-16. Method of pool filling.
One or more water pipes or hose connections shall be available to the pool.
There shall be no cross-connections between the potable water system and
the pool circulation system. The water supply to the pool shall be protected
against backflow or back-siphonage of water by means of a fixed air gap of
six inches or more above the highest possible water level or by a properly
installed vacuum breaker. If a hose connection from a sill cock or other
plumbing fixture is to be used, an acceptable vacuum breaker shall be
installed on the hose thread of the sill cock or fixture. No over-the-rim fill
spout will be accepted unless located under a diving board or installed in a
manner as to prevent any hazard.
§ 241-17. Pool drainage.
Facilities shall be provided for disposing of all pool drainage and
wastewater to the community sanitary sewer system or in some other
manner approved by the enforcing official. There shall be a six-inch air gap
between the pool discharge line and the sanitary sewer.
§ 241-18. Material and equipment approval.
Pool equipment and material shall be subject to evaluation and acceptance
by the enforcing official before installation.
§ 241-19. Overflow of water.
The pool and surrounding area shall be constructed and arranged in such
a manner that no water shall return from the deck to the pool. Wastewater
shall not be allowed to create a nuisance or to overflow onto adjoining
property.
§ 241-20. Surface drainage.
No surface or roof drainage shall be permitted to enter the pool.
chapter if it provides: a walkway not less than 20 inches in width
completely around the water's edge and at least three feet above grade;
and the self-fencing shall be at least three feet high above the walkway;
and a foldup stairway or gate which must be locked when residents are
away from the home or when the pool is not in use. The self-fencing
shall make the pool inaccessible to children by climbing or entering
through the fence openings.
§ 241-14 GROSSE ILE CODE § 241-21
1:514
§ 241-21. Finish and cove.
Pool floor and walls shall have a cleanable, light-colored, and impermeable
surface. The pool floor and the deck shall be skid resistant. Where the water
depth is less than five feet, maximum cove radius shall be eight inches.
§ 241-22. Hazards and shape.
There shall be no hazardous projections or low over-water construction in
the pool or the pool enclosure which could trap or injure bathers. The pool
shall be shaped so that all parts of the pool can be observed from a single
vantage point on the pool deck.
§ 241-23. Ladders.
Every pool shall have at least one acceptable ladder or set of steps.
§ 241-24. Lights.
Pool lights, if provided, shall be shielded so as to direct the light away from
adjacent premises.
§ 241-25. Equipment location.
Water treatment equipment shall be installed above grade, except that it
may be installed in a properly drained residential basement, cellar, or other
approved structure. Any accessory building shall comply with applicable
requirements of zoning and building codes.51
§ 241-26. Deck.
A walkway or deck of concrete or other approved impervious material shall
be constructed around the perimeter of the pool and shall be at least three
feet wide.
§ 241-27. Inlets.
A. The minimum number of filtered water inlets shall be determined as
follows:
Number of Inlets
Pool Perimeter
(feet)
1 0 to 60
2 61 to 120
3 121 to 180
4 181 to 240
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction, and Ch. 285, Zoning.
§ 241-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-27
1:515
§ 241-28. Outlets.
One or more outlets shall be placed at the deepest point in every pool for
circulating the pool water and for draining the pool. The effective area of
the drain grating shall be at least four times the area of the outlet pipe.
§ 241-29. Overflows and skimming devices.
Unless a continuous overflow weir and gutter is installed around the pool,
one or more surface skimmers shall be provided. There shall be one
skimmer for each 800 square feet or any fraction thereof, which shall
operate continuously while the pool water is being circulated and which
shall automatically adjust for vertical variations in the water level of three
inches or more. A noncorrosive basket strainer accessible from the deck of
the pool shall be an integral part of the surface skimmer mechanism. All
skimming devices in a pool with a maximum depth exceeding five feet shall
be recessed or flush with the wall of the pool.
§ 241-30. Valves.
A flow-reducing valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the pump.
Valves shall be installed wherever necessary for proper operation and
maintenance of the circulation system. Provisions shall be made for
draining the filtration equipment.
§ 241-31. Pumps.
The pump shall have sufficient capacity at maximum anticipated hydraulic
head to circulate the pool volume each 12 hours and to supply the required
backwash rate to any one filter. Unless hydraulic analysis demonstrates
otherwise, each pump shall supply the required filtration rate at a total head
of at least 50 feet for any sand or anthracite filter system and 60 feet for
a diatomite filter system. The motor horsepower rating shall be determined
for maximum total head conditions at a twelve-hour pool volume turnover
time.
§ 241-32. Strainer.
A pump connecting to a pressure filter shall be equipped on its inlet side
with a noncorrosive hair and lint strainer. The ratio of the open strainer area
to the open area of the suction piping shall be at least four to one.
B. Each of the minimum required water inlets shall be at least 10 inches
below the highest overflow line and at least 10 feet from any other inlet
or from any skimmer, unless otherwise approved by the enforcing
official.
§ 241-27 GROSSE ILE CODE § 241-33
1:516
§ 241-33. Gauges.
A pressure gauge of appropriate range shall be installed on the piping
between the filter(s) and pool unless otherwise approved by the enforcing
official.
§ 241-34. Filters and filter area.
§ 241-35. Sand filters.
§ 241-36. Anthracite filters.
A. One or more filters shall be provided.
B. The total effective filter area in square feet shall be at least equal to the
volume of the pool in gallons divided by 2,160 (three gallons per minute
per square foot for twelve-hour turnover). Each filtering system shall be
provided with a sight glass or visible discharge. The influent shall be
applied to the filter media surface in a manner which prevents direct
turbulent discharge against the media.
C. All pressure filters shall be equipped with an air release at the high
point in the system. If an automatic device is installed for this purpose,
there shall be a manual valve for testing its effectiveness.
D. The shell containing the filter media or elements shall be constructed so
as to provide satisfactory strength and freedom from corrosion, and
shall be installed in a manner to prevent settling or upset.
A. Each pressure sand filter shall be provided with backwash water at a
minimum rate of 12 gallons per minute per square foot of effective
surface area.
B. Filter sand shall be uniformly graded silica material, with effective
particle diameters between 0.45 and 0.55 millimeters and with
uniformity coefficient less than 1.75. The sand shall be free of clay,
organic matter, and water-soluble material and no less than 20 inches in
depth, with a twelve-inch or greater freeboard.
C. Graded gravel or crushed anthracite shall be used to support the filter
media and shall be free of organic and water-soluble material. It shall
be graded by size and separately leveled in layers. The total depth of
the graded gravel shall not be less than 16 inches.
A. Each anthracite pressure filter shall be provided with backwash water
at a minimum rate of 12 gallons per minute per square foot of effective
surface area.
B. The top 20 inches of crushed anthracite shall be used to support this
filter media and shall be as specified in § 241-35C.
§ 241-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-37
1:517
§ 241-37. Diatomite filters.
Diatomite filters shall be provided with backwash water at a rate adequate
to cleanse all filter aid from the elements. A precoat funnel or other feeding
device shall be provided.
§ 241-38. Suction cleaner.
There shall be a suction cleaner outlet connected to the pump suction piping
between the pool and the hair and lint strainer, to permit use of a suction
cleaner or other acceptable device for cleaning the entire pool area.
§ 241-37 GROSSE ILE CODE § 241-38
1:518
ARTICLE III
Operation, Maintenance and Removal
§ 241-39. Operation and maintenance.
Pools and pool equipment shall be operated and maintained in a manner
which will not create health or safety hazards or any public nuisance.
§ 241-40. Supervision.
The pool shall be so supervised that safety hazards are not created. The
gate(s) must be locked when pool is not in use.
§ 241-41. Disinfection.
Proper germicidal levels shall be maintained at all times during pool usage
to protect the health of users. A chlorine residual of 0.3 to 0.6 parts
per million shall satisfy this requirement. Other disinfecting agents than
chlorine may be used if approved by the enforcing official. The hydrogen
ion concentration (pH) of the pool water shall be maintained between 7.2
and 7.6. Testing devices capable of accurately measuring pH and chlorine
residual or other disinfectant shall be available.
§ 241-42. Rescue devices.
A rescue pole, hook, or a similar device shall be available within the pool
enclosure.
§ 241-43. Water restrictions.
The filling of swimming pools from the public water supply shall be
regulated the same as lawn sprinkling.
§ 241-44. Drainage restrictions.
No swimming pool shall be drained to a sewer during a period of heavy
rainfall if such drainage would contribute to an overloading of the sewer.
§ 241-45. Failure to maintain; discontinuance of use; corrections.
Any swimming pool which is not maintained to the minimum standard
established under this chapter shall be placed out of use by the owner after
a notice by the enforcing officials itemizing the corrections needed. Upon
failure to correct the item or items cited, the pool may be ordered removed.
§ 241-46. Pool removal.
Upon discontinuing the use of a pool, the owner thereof shall forthwith
remove all water therefrom and shall remove and/or fill the structure or
excavation with earth level to grade or otherwise make the premises safe.
§ 241-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-46
1:519
Chapter 244
TAXATION
§ 241-46 GROSSE ILE CODE § 241-46
1:520
ARTICLE I
Exemption for Senior Housing
[Adopted 3-13-2000 by Ord. No. 282]
§ 244-1. Legislative findings.
§ 244-2. Definitions.
All terms shall be defined as set forth in the State Housing Authority
Development Act of 1966, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of
Michigan, as amended, except as follows:
ACT — The State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346
of 1966, as amended.
ANNUAL SHELTER RENT — The total collections during an agreed annual
period from all occupants of a housing development representing rent or
occupancy charge, exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat, or other
utilities furnished to the occupants.
AUTHORITY — The Michigan State Housing Development Authority.
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development which contains a significant
element of housing for senior persons of low or moderate income and such
elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal
and educational facilities as the Authority determines improve the quality of
the development as it relates to housing for senior persons of low income.
HOUSING FOR SENIORS — Housing occupied by a single person who is 55
years of age or older, or housing occupied by a family and/or household in
A. The Township acknowledges that it has the authority under the
provisions of P.A. 346 of 1966, as amended, to establish a service charge
to be paid in lieu of taxes by any class of housing exempt from taxation
under this Act. Further, the continuation of the provisions of this article
for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the
effective period of this article are essential to the determination of
economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed
and financed in reliance of such tax exemption.
B. The Township acknowledges that Oakwood Construction Company dfb/
a The Oakwood Companies (the "sponsor") has offered, subject to
receipt of an allocation under the Low Income Housing Tax Credit
(LIHTC), to erect, own, and operate a housing development on certain
real property in the Township of Grosse Ile to serve senior persons, and
that the sponsor has offered to pay the Township on account of this
development an annual service charge in lieu of taxes for that part of
the development that meets the criteria established in the Act.
C. The property is legally described as: see attached.52
52.Editor's Note: The property description is on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 244-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-2
1:521
which at least one member is 55 years of age or older and all other members
are 50 years of age or older.
NET SHELTER RENT — Annual shelter rent minus utility costs.
SENIOR — A single person who is 55 years of age or older, or a household
in which at least one member is at 55 years of age or older, and all other
members are 50 years of age or older.
SENIOR PERSONS OF LOW OR MODERATE INCOME — Senior persons
who meet the eligibility criteria set by the Authority and/or the federal
government.
SPONSOR — Persons or entities which have applied to the Authority for,
or previously received from the Authority, a mortgage loan to finance a
housing development, and includes any successors or assigns of the original
sponsor.
UTILITIES — Those costs for fuel, electricity, water, sanitary sewer, and
those other expenses which are paid by the housing development.
§ 244-3. Class of housing developments.
It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax
exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu
of such taxes shall be housing for seniors, which are financed or assisted
pursuant to the Act. It is further determined that the project proposed by
the sponsor is of this class.
§ 244-4. Establishment of annual service charge.
The housing development proposed by sponsor and the property on which
it shall be constructed shall be exempt from ad valorem property taxes
commencing on the December 31 following the issuance of the certificate
of occupancy. The Township, acknowledging that the sponsor and the
Authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing
development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this
article and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from
all ad valorem property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established
in this article, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to the
receipt of a mortgage loan from the Authority, to construct, own, an operate
the housing development, agrees to accept payment of an annual service
charge in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal
to 6% of the gross shelter rents for as long as the sponsor is exempt from
taxation under the Act, but never more than 50 years.
§ 244-5. Limitations.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 244-4, the service charge to be paid
each year in lieu of taxes for the part of the housing development which
is tax exempt and which is occupied by other than low-income persons or
families shall be equal to the full amount of taxes which would be paid on
that portion of the housing development if the housing development were
§ 244-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 244-5
1:522
not tax exempt. The total number of apartments in the development shall
not exceed 50, of which not more than 40 apartments will house senior
persons of low or moderate income.
§ 244-6. Duration. [Amended 4-7-2001 by Ord. No. 299]
This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the
original mortgage remains outstanding and unpaid or the Authority retains
any interest in the property, provided that the construction of the Housing
Development commences by December 31, 2001, and further provided
that the owner is not in default of the terms of this article or any other
obligation to the Township. The owner shall be given written notification of
any default, along with a thirty-day period in which to correct the default.
§ 244-7. Payment of annual service charge.
The annual service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article
shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes to the
Township, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before April 1
of each year.
§ 244-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-7
1:523
Chapter 247
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Roads and driveways — See Ch. 205. Utilities — See Ch. 258.
§ 247-1. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use
of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-
Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other
applicable law, and to ensure that the Township qualifies for distributions
under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying
with the Act.
§ 247-2. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
§ 247-3. Definitions.
A. The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ACT — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from
time to time.
PERMIT — A nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-ofway
in the Township for its telecommunications facilities.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Grosse Ile, Michigan.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Township Board of the Township of Grosse
Ile or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any
decision or function that is required by law to be made by the Township
Board.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The Township Engineer or his or her
designee.
B. All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meanings as
defined or as provided in the Act, including, without limitation, the
following:
§ 244-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 247-3
1:524
§ 247-4. Permit required; application; fee; previously issued
permits; existing providers.
AUTHORITY — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the
Act.
MPSC — The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department
of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning
as the term "Commission" in the Act.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. "Public right-ofway"
does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES OR FACILITIES — The
equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines,
wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or
can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide
telecommunications services or signals. "Telecommunications facilities
or facilities" do not include antennas, supporting structures for
antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment
and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed
commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of
title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat.
1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio
service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Those terms as defined in
Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179,
MCLA § 484.2102. Telecommunications provider does not include a
person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed
commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of
the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47
CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a "provider"
also includes all of the following:
A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service.
(1)
Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunications facilities located within a public right-of-way.
(2)
(3) A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
§ 247-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-4
1:525
A. Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-ofway
in the Township for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for
and obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter.
B. Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section
6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the
application with the Township Clerk. Upon receipt, the Township Clerk
shall provide one copy to the Township Engineer when a review is
necessary. Applications shall be complete and include all information
required by the Act, including, without limitation, a route map showing
the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in
accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act.
C. Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is
exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCLA
§§ 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the
telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face
of each map.
D. Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable
application fee in the amount of $500.
E. Additional information. The Township Engineer may request an
applicant to submit such additional information which the Township
deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply
with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such
additional information established by the Township Engineer. If the
Township and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of
additional information requested by the Township, the Township or the
applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act.
F. Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act,
authorizations or permits previously issued by the Township under
Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179,
MCLA § 484.2251, and authorizations or permits issued by the
Township to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment
of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985
shall satisfy the permit requirement of this chapter.
G. Existing provider. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days
from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a
telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-ofway
in the Township as of such date, that has not previously obtained
authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCLA § 484.2251, shall submit
to the Township an application for a permit in accordance with the
§ 247-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 247-4
1:526
§ 247-5. Action on application by Township; issuance of permit.
§ 247-6. Use of conduit or utility poles.
Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the
fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
§ 247-7. Route maps.
Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the Township, submit route maps showing
the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to
requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a
telecommunications provider submitting an application under this
subsection is not required to pay the application fee of $500 required
under Subsection D above. A provider under this subsection shall be
given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if
allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act.
A. Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for
a permit is hereby delegated to the Township Engineer or other
appropriate official as determined by the Township Manager. Pursuant
to Section 15(3) of the Act, the Township shall approve or deny an
application for a permit within 45 days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under
§ 247-4B of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the
Township. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the Township shall notify
the MPSC when the Township has granted or denied a permit, including
information regarding the date on which the application was filed and
the date on which the permit was granted or denied. The Township shall
not unreasonably deny an application for a permit.
B. Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the Township
shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or
without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with
Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act.
C. Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the Township may
impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be
limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the
public right-of-way.
D. Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without
limitation on Subsection C above, the Township may require that a bond
be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the
permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to
ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition
during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use.
§ 247-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-7
1:527
the Township. The route maps should be in paper format unless and until
the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act.
§ 247-8. Repair of damage caused by excavation or construction.
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the Township, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly
repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under,
over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the
public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.
§ 247-9. Maintenance fee.
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the Township set
forth in § 247-4D above, a telecommunications provider with
telecommunications facilities in the Township's public rights-of-way shall
pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the
Act.
§ 247-10. Modification of existing fees; refund of fees charged
erroneously.
A. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the
Township hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective
date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way,
to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required
under the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with
the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the Township also hereby
approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunications
facilities in public rights-of-way within the Township's boundaries, so
that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the
Act. The Township shall provide each telecommunications provider
affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the
requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are
charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts
permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the
Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the Township's
policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by
the Township, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in
error.
B. Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to
be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under Subsection
A above shall be void from the date the modification was made and any
previously agreed upon or required fees shall be reinstated.
§ 247-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § 247-11
1:528
§ 247-11. Use of funds.
Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the Township
from the Authority shall be used by the Township solely for rights-of-wayrelated
purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received
by the Township from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street
Fund and/or the Local Street Fund maintained by the Township under Act
No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951.
§ 247-12. Annual report.
Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the Township Engineer shall file
an annual report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds
annually distributed by the Authority.
§ 247-13. Cable television operators.
Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the Township shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the
Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband internet transport access services.
§ 247-14. Effect on existing rights.
Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein
with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that
a telecommunications provider or the Township may have under a permit
issued by the Township or under a contract between the Township and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
§ 247-15. Compliance by Township.
The Township hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this
chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the
provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that
purpose. The Township shall comply in all respects with the requirements
of the Act, including, but not limited to, the following.
A. Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
1976 PA 442, MCLA §§ 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in § 247-4C of this
chapter;
B. Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with § 247-4F of this chapter;
C. Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the
application fee of $500, in accordance with § 247-4G of this chapter;
§ 247-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-15
1:529
§ 247-16. Township's rights and authority unaffected.
Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the
Township's right to review and approve a telecommunications provider's
access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the Township's
authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
§ 247-17. Enforcement officers. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No.
03-05A]
Any police or ordinance officer or other designee of the Township Manager
is hereby authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing
alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation
notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter
violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the
Township Code.
D. Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit
for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the Township, in
accordance with § 247-5A of this chapter;
E. Notifying the MPSC when the Township has granted or denied a permit,
in accordance with § 247-5A of this chapter;
F. Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with § 247-5A of this chapter;
G. Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in § 247-5B of this
chapter;
H. Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-ofway,
in accordance with § 247-5C of this chapter;
I. Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to
its original condition during and after the telecommunications
provider's access and use, in accordance with § 247-5D of this chapter;
J. Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the Township's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter in accordance with
§ 247-10 of this chapter;
K. Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with
§ 247-12 of this chapter; and
L. Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay
certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 247-13 of this chapter.
§ 247-15 GROSSE ILE CODE § 247-18
1:530
§ 247-18. Penalty. [Added 5-12-2003 by Ord. No. 03-05A]
A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall
be subject to a fine of $500 and court costs for each violation. Nothing
in this § 247-18 shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the
Township in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit
issued by the Township.
Chapter 251
TRAFFIC AND PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Violations Bureau — See Ch. 183. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 261.
§ 247-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-18
1:531

ARTICLE I
Shopping Centers
[Adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 137 as Ch. 12 of the Grosse Ile
Township Code]
§ 251-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
PARKING AREA — An area near or contiguous to a shopping center and
used by the public as the means of access to and egress from the stores and
business establishments at the shopping center and for the free parking of
motor vehicles of patrons of the shopping center.
SHOPPING CENTER — A minimum area of three acres of land on which
there is located one or more stores or business establishments and where
there is provided a common off-street parking area to service the same.
§ 251-2. Authority to enact restrictions.
The Township may, upon the request of either the owner or the person
in charge of the general operation and control of the parking area of a
shopping center, by ordinance at the owner's expense:
A. Order stop signs, yield signs or other traffic control devices erected at
specified entrance or exit locations to a shopping center or at any
intersection in the parking area.
B. Regulate traffic in the parking area, including regulation by means of
traffic control signals.
C. Prohibit or regulate the turning of vehicles or specified types of vehicles
at intersections or other designated locations in the parking area.
D. Regulate the crossing of any roadway in the parking area by
pedestrians.
E. Designate any separate roadway, drive or lane in the parking area for
one-way traffic.
F. Prohibit, regulate, restrict or limit the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles in specified areas of the parking area.
G. Designate safety zones, loading zones and other restricted areas in the
shopping center.
H. Provide for the removal and storage of vehicles parking or abandoned
in the parking area during snowstorms, floods, fires or other public
emergencies, or found unattended in the parking area, where they
constitute an obstruction to traffic or where stopping, standing or
parking is prohibited, and for the payment of reasonable charges for
such removal and storage by the owner or operator of any such vehicle.
§ 251-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-2
1:533
I. Adopt such additional reasonable rules with respect to traffic and
parking in a parking area as local conditions may require for the safety
and convenience of the public or of the users of the shopping center.
§ 251-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 251-2
1:534
Chapter 255
TRESPASSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 80.
Hunting and trapping — See Ch. 132.
Minors — See Ch. 155.
§ 251-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 251-2
1:535

ARTICLE I
General Prohibitions
[Adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 137 as Ch. 14 of the Grosse Ile
Township Code.
§ 255-1. Trespass in private structures.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter any privately owned
structure, facility, or building or to willfully enter or go upon the premises
thereof without lawful authority or without having permission to do so from
the owner, occupant, or person in charge thereof.
§ 255-2. Trespass on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter or go upon the private
land of another without lawful authority or without having permission to do
so from the owner, occupant, or person in charge thereof; provided that, in
the case of vacant land, the owner, occupant, or person in charge thereof or
their agent under written authorization to do so has previously posted such
vacant land with a conspicuous notice prohibiting trespass thereon.
§ 255-3. Refusal to leave private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is upon the private land of another
or who is in any private structure, facility or building owned by another or
who is on the premises thereof to refuse, neglect, or fail to depart therefrom
without lawful authority to do so upon being notified or told to depart
therefrom by the owner, occupant or person in charge thereof.
§ 255-4. Trespass in public buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter any public structure,
facility or building or to willfully enter any structure, facility or building
open to the public at such times when such structure, building or facility is
not open to the public without lawful authority or without having permission
to do so from the governmental authority or its representative having
jurisdiction thereof or, in the case of a structure, facility or building open to
the public, without having permission to do so from the owner, occupant, or
person in charge thereof.
§ 255-5. Trespass on public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter or go upon public
land or land open to the public without lawful authority or without having
permission to do so from the governmental authority or its representative
having jurisdiction thereof or, in the case of land open to the public, without
having permission to do so from the owner, occupant or person in charge
thereof provided that such public land has been previously posted by the
governmental authority or its representative having jurisdiction thereof or,
in the case of land open to the public, by the owner, occupant, or person in
§ 255-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-5
1:537
charge thereof or by their agent with written authorization to do so with a
conspicuous notice prohibiting any trespass thereon or prohibiting trespass
in certain areas thereof or prohibiting trespass thereon or on a part thereof
during certain hours of the day or night.
§ 255-6. Refusal to leave public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is in any public structure, facility
or building or who is in any such structure open to the public or who is
upon any public land or upon any land open to the public to refuse, neglect,
or fail to depart therefrom without lawful authority to do so upon being
told to depart therefrom by the governmental authority or its representative
having jurisdiction thereof or, in the case of land open to the public, upon
being notified to depart therefrom by the owner, occupant or person in
charge thereof.
§ 255-7. Trespass into airport structures.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter any structure, facility,
or building located on or at the Grosse Ile Township Airport or to willfully
go upon the premises thereof without lawful authority or without having
permission to do so from the Grosse Ile Township Airport Commission or
its representative or without having permission to do so from the lawful
occupant or person in charge of such structure, facility or building.
§ 255-8. Trespass on airport property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully go upon the land, landing
field or runways or upon any other premises of the Grosse Ile Township
Airport without lawful authority or without having permission to do so from
the Grosse Ile Township Airport Commission or its representative or without
having permission to do so from any occupant or person in charge thereof
having the right or authority to give such permission.
§ 255-9. Vehicles on airport property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any bicycle, motorbike,
motorcycle, motor vehicle or any other vehicle upon the land, landing fields
or runways or upon any other portion of the Grosse Ile Township Airport
or to park any such vehicle thereon without lawful authority to do so or
without permission to do so by the Grosse Ile Township Airport Commission
or its representative or without permission to do so from an occupant or
person in charge thereof having the lawful right to grant such permission;
provided, however, that the foregoing provisions shall not apply to public
roads nor to roadways or areas located in the Grosse Ile Township Airport
designated as roads or parking areas open to the general public during
certain hours of the day and night as designated by the Grosse Ile Township
Airport Commission.
§ 255-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 255-10
1:538
§ 255-10. Exemption from trespass on airport property.
The provisions set forth hereinbefore in this chapter relating to persons
entering upon airport properties and into airport buildings shall not apply
to authorized airport or Township personnel, Airport Commissioners, and
elected Township officials pursuant to the discharge of their respective
duties and responsibilities. Such provision shall further not apply to Grosse
Ile Township Airport tenants and lessees and their respective employees,
customers and invitees and to such other persons entering upon airport
properties and into airport buildings for legitimate purposes or to members
of the general public who enter upon airport properties or into airport
structures, provided that, in all cases, such entry onto the lands of the
airport or into airport structures is in accordance with rules and regulations
adopted by the Township of Grosse Ile Airport Commission governing such
entry.
§ 255-11. Refusal to leave airport property.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is in any airport structure, facility
or building or who is on any land, landing field, runway or upon any
other part of the Grosse Ile Township Airport to refuse, neglect or fail to
depart therefrom without lawful authority to do so upon being notified to
depart therefrom by the Grosse Ile Township Airport Commission or its
representative or upon being notified to depart therefrom by the occupant
or person lawfully in charge or control thereof.
§ 255-12. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-12
1:539

ARTICLE II
Commercial Activities or Operations at Airport
[Adopted 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-03]
§ 255-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY OR OPERATION — The act of performing one
or more activities or operations at the airport as a commercial aviation
operator.
COMMERCIAL AVIATION OPERATOR (OPERATOR) — A person or persons,
firm or corporation who, for compensation or hire, engages in one or
more of the following commercial activities or operations utilizing airport
facilities or property: air cargo, aircraft charter, aircraft fueling, aircraft
rental, aircraft sales, airframe and/or power plant maintenance, avionics
sales and maintenance, aerial advertising, aerial firefighting, aerial
powerline/pipeline patrol, banner towing, flight training and sightseeing,
or other aeronautical activity. This definition excludes any person who
is an employee of an aircraft owner who is exercising his right to selfservice
his aircraft with his own resources in accordance with Federal
Aviation Administration regulations. The burden of proof that the person is
an employee rests with the aircraft owner.
§ 255-14. Prohibited activities; penalty.
A. No person shall conduct any commercial aviation activity or operations,
or act as a commercial aviation operator, or conduct other similar
activities at the Grosse Ile Municipal Airport without first securing a
written agreement from the Airport Commission or its designated
representative and paying the required fees and charges, as set forth in
the Airport Rules and Regulations and Airport Commercial Operating
Standards.
B. Penalties for violation of this section shall be punishable as a municipal
civil infraction violation as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II.
§ 255-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-14
1:541
Chapter 258
UTILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public works — See Ch. 197.
Roads and driveways — See Ch. 205.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
Gas franchise — See Ch. A291.
Electric franchise — See Ch. A292.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. .
§ 255-14 GROSSE ILE CODE § 255-14
1:542
ARTICLE I
Essential Services
[Adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 137 as Ch. 19 of the Grosse Ile
Township Code]
§ 258-1. Permit required; exception.
A permit shall be required and obtained from the Township for and prior
to the change of location of, or the erection, construction, alteration,
replacement, or maintenance of, or for and prior to any such or other work
being done on or with respect to any underground, surface or overhead
gas, electrical or telephone transmission or distribution system or portion,
part or component thereof located within the Township; except, however,
that routine maintenance of any portion thereof not involving a change of
location and being done as part of or associated with normal or emergency
repair or servicing of such system or portion thereof shall be excluded from
the provisions of this article.
§ 258-2. Application for permit.
Application for the permit required by this article shall be made to the
Township's Department of Community Development and shall:
§ 258-3. Inspection.
The work proposed to be done pursuant to the permit applied for under the
provisions of this article shall be done in accordance with any requirements
established by the Township as a condition of the issuance of the permit
and shall be inspected by the Township Engineer in accordance with an
inspection schedule established by the Engineer and recorded on the
permit. Final approval of the work done under permit issued pursuant to
this article shall be obtained from the Township Engineer prior to use of the
work or any portion thereof covered by such permit.
§ 258-4. Fees.
Prior to the issuance of the permit provided for in this article, the permit
applicant shall pay to the Township such permit and inspection fees as are
A. Identify the street, roadway or other location within the Township
where the proposed work is to be done;
B. Contain a description of the proposed work or project and a schematic
drawing showing the work proposed to be done and its relation to any
street, roadway or other location within the Township;
C. Contain specifications and an estimated value of the work proposed to
be done under the permit applied for;
D. Set forth the contemplated date of starting and the estimated time for
completion thereof.
§ 258-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-4
1:543
established under the Township's schedule of inspection and permit fees for
general construction within the Township.
§ 258-5. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 258-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 258-5
1:544
ARTICLE II
Public Right-of-Way
[Adopted 4-7-2001 by Ord. No. 298]
§ 258-6. Title.
This article may be entitled "Public Right-of-Way."
§ 258-7. Definitions.
Unless otherwise indicated, the terms used in this article are defined as
follows:
ALLEY — A public or legally established thoroughfare other than a street
affording a secondary method of vehicular access to abutting property and
not intended for general traffic circulation.
CURB — A part of the street usually of the same elevation as the center of
the street which is parallel to the street which separates the portion of the
roadway established for vehicular traffic from the adjacent greenbelt area
designed to keep vehicular traffic from the greenbelt area.
FACILITIES AND STRUCTURES — Poles, towers, monitoring wells, pipes,
conduits, guy wires, anchors, pedestals, utility boxes, manholes, handholes,
vaults, utility pits, nodes, junction boxes, buildings and enclosures,
including fences.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire area owned or dedicated by the
Township or other governmental agency or entity for public use as a
highway, street, alley or other public place.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any company engaged in providing steam, heat,
electricity, gas, water, sewer, telephone, telegraph, cable television, open
video service, telecommunications, pipeline or other similar service using
the public right-of-way.
STREET — That portion of a public thoroughfare improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic including curbs on paved roads and
shoulders on unimproved thoroughfares.
UTILITY EASEMENT — A right or privilege over a specific portion of land
area granted by the owner to the public, a corporation or some particular
person or persons for specific uses and purposes and which is designated a
public or private easement depending on the nature of the use.
§ 258-8. Use of rights-of-way; Township consent required.
No person, partnership, association or corporation, public or private,
operating a public utility may use the highways, streets, alleys or other
public places in the Township for wires, poles, pipes, tracks, conduits or
other utility facilities without the consent of the Township.
§ 258-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-9
1:545
§ 258-9. Utility franchise requirement.
No person, partnership, association or corporation, public or private,
operating a public utility may transact local business in the Township
without first obtaining a franchise from the Township. Competitive suppliers
of natural gas or electricity with customers in the Township shall obtain
a franchise from the Township. A public utility providing transmission or
distribution services to any person, partnership, association or corporation,
public or private, offering any public utility, natural gas or electric supply
service to customers in the Township shall promptly notify the Township
Clerk in writing of the name and address of such person, partnership,
association or corporation.
§ 258-10. Telecommunications permit requirement.
Providers of telecommunications services using the highways, streets,
alleys, or other public places in the Township shall obtain a permit from the
Township as required by Section 254 of Act No. 179 of the Public Acts of
1991, as amended. It is unlawful to accept any telecommunications services
from a provider of telecommunications services using the highways, streets,
alleys or other public places in the Township which does not have a permit
from the Township.
§ 258-11. Applications for franchises and permits.
§ 258-12. Permits and franchises generally.
A. Applications for permits and franchises under this article shall be made
to the Director of Public Works on a form prepared by the Director of
Public Works. Applications for a right-of-way permit under § 258-8 shall
require the payment of a nonrefundable application fee to be
determined by the Director of Public Works based upon the size and
cost of each project. Applications for a franchise under § 258-9 shall
require the payment of a nonrefundable application fee as set from time
to time by the Township Board. Applicants for a telecommunications
permit under § 258-10 shall pay a fee not exceeding the fixed and
variable costs to the Township in granting a permit by depositing with
the Township a refundable application fee as set from time to time by
the Township Board. The Township will keep a record of the costs to the
Township in each case and render a refund or submit an invoice to the
applicant. [Amended 7-22-2002]
B. Upon receiving a completed application, the Director of Public Works
will advise the Township Attorney who will draft the appropriate permit
or franchise and schedule the matter for consideration by the Township
Board of Trustees.
A. A right-of-way permit under § 258-8 will contain such terms and
conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township Attorney and the
Director of Public Works. The Township Board of Trustees may require
payment of an annual right-of-way fee determined by resolution from
§ 258-9 GROSSE ILE CODE § 258-12
1:546
§ 258-13. Declaration of purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the construction, maintenance
and repair activities in the public right-of-way by public utilities and others
used by the Township for sidewalks, bike paths, sewer, water or other
facilities and to establish permit procedures and standards pertaining to
the installation of facilities and structures within the public right-of-way
and utility easements, encouraging joint planning of public utility, cable
television and telecommunication construction projects in the public rightof-
way, coordinating and standardizing the location of particular kinds of
facilities and structures in the public right-of-way and minimizing their
time to time. A right-of-way permit is revocable at will by the Township
and may be issued for a term not exceeding 15 years.
B. A franchise under § 258-9 will contain such terms and conditions as
deemed appropriate by the Township Attorney and Director of Public
Works. The Township Board of Trustees may require payment of a
franchise fee. Unless submitted to the voters and approved by a 3/5
majority, franchises are revocable at will by the Township. Franchises
may be issued for a term not exceeding 15 years.
C. The Township Board of Trustees will approve or deny a permit under
§ 258-10 within 90 days from the date a provider files an application. A
permit under § 258-10 will contain such terms and conditions as
deemed appropriate by the Township Attorney and Director of Public
Works. The Township Board of Trustees may require payment of a
permit fee not exceeding the fixed and variable costs to the Township of
maintaining the rights-of-way, easements and other public places used
by a provider. The Township may require as a condition of a permit
under § 258-10 that a bond be posted by a provider of
telecommunications services to ensure that the right-of-way, easements
and other public places used by a provider are returned to their original
condition during and after a provider's access and use.
D. In the event that the holder of a permit or franchise (or any subsidiary,
affiliate or other related company) pays a fee, charge, or other payment
of any kind on a periodic basis (i.e., monthly, quarterly, or annually) to
any municipality in the State of Michigan which is higher or in addition
to any fees or charges set forth in a permit or franchise with the
Township, the holder of a permit or franchise shall notify the Township
in writing of the details of such other arrangement within 60 days of its
effective date. Upon receipt by the Township of such notice, a revocable
permit or franchise may be revoked upon notice from the Township. As
a condition for a new permit or franchise, the Township may require
payment of a similar fee or charge as provided to the third party.
E. A person, partnership, association or corporation granted a permit or
franchise shall obtain all other necessary permits or approvals for
construction, maintenance and operation in the Township required by
this chapter, the Township Code, and state and federal law.
§ 258-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-13
1:547
interference and impairment of sidewalks, streets, sanitary sewer, storm
drain or water pipes.
§ 258-14. General permit requirements.
§ 258-15. General construction requirements.
A. It is unlawful for anyone listed in § 258-8 to work within any public
right-of-way or utility easement without a permit from the Township.
B. It is unlawful for anyone to make any excavation or opening in or to
tunnel under any public right-of-way without a permit from the
Township. The Township Manager or a designee may, if public safety
requires, grant immediate permission to a person to make a necessary
excavation or opening within the public right-of-way provided that a
permit is obtained by the next business day.
C. An emergency aboveground repair made by any entity described in
§ 258-8 within the public right-of-way made without a permit must be
reported to the Township by the next business day.
A. No unnecessary damage or injury may be done to any tree, shrub, other
vegetation, land or other structures in the public right-of-way. If any
sidewalk is blocked by any work, a temporary accessway shall be
constructed or provided which must be safe and convenient for
travelers.
B. Owners of any underground facilities and structures within a public
right-of-way must participate in the Miss Dig System and respond to
and stake or locate its facilities and structures within the rules and
regulations as prescribed by the Miss Dig System and hold the
Township, its agents and contractors harmless for any damage to
facilities and structures which may be damaged as a result of the
Township repairing or maintaining its sanitary sewers, storm drains or
water mains located in any public right-of-way if due to untimely or
incorrect locations being staked or identified.
C. The placement of facilities and structures within public right-of-way
and utility easements is subject to approval by the Township Engineer.
The location of aboveground facilities and structures are subject to
review and approval by the Township for visibility, traffic and
pedestrian safety, landscaping, screening and other site conditions.
D. All openings, excavations or obstructions in a public right-of-way must
be properly barricaded and illuminated as required by the Michigan
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices to prevent injury or damage
to persons or vehicles. Safety devices must be installed at all
construction sites to provide adequate notice and warning to both
pedestrians and motorists.
E. All openings, excavations and tunnels in a public right-of-way must be
properly shored and braced in accordance with all standards
§ 258-13 GROSSE ILE CODE § 258-15
1:548
§ 258-16. Application procedure.
promulgated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) and the Michigan Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (MIOSHA) to insure the safety of all workers and
prevent cave-ins and washouts which would likely cause damage to the
surface grade of the street or adjoining portions of the right-of-way. If it
appears that there is a danger to the public safety, the Township has the
authority to install any and all barricades, warning signs and other such
devices that it may deem necessary and may charge the permit holder
for costs incurred in protecting the public and may revoke the permit.
F. Underground facilities and structures constructed of nonmetallic
material are required to have a traceable metallic wrap or
accompanying wire for the purpose of tracing and locating with
conventional locating equipment. When placed in the public right-ofway,
facilities and structures constructed of material susceptible to
breakage (i.e., fiber optic line) may be encased in a protective shell as
approved by the Township.
G. The applicant must agree to abide by all of the terms and conditions as
set by the Township of Grosse Ile. Such terms and conditions will be
provided to the applicant upon receipt of the permit.
A. Application for a construction or maintenance permit under the terms
and conditions of this article and any other applicable provision of the
Township ordinances shall be made on forms provided by the Township
and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications showing the
proposed work to be performed within the public right-of-way.
B. Application for a permit may not be accepted unless it contains all of
the required information, is accompanied by required plans which
conform to the applicable provisions of the Township ordinances and
regulations and is accompanied by the payment of a permit fee as
established by resolution of the Township Board of Trustees from time
to time. The applicant shall pay applicable plan review and inspection
fees. The proposed plans and specifications shall be reviewed by the
appropriate Township departments and Township Engineer depending
on the nature of the work to be performed.
C. Adequate self-insurance or liability policies naming the Township and
its agents as additional insured shall be required by the Township. A
properly executed certificate of insurance containing evidence that the
pertinent policy of insurance or endorsement applies to the provisions
under which the permit is issued and approved as to form by the
Township Attorney shall be filed with the Director of Public Works.
Provision for explosion, collapse, and underground hazard shall be
required on all permits.
§ 258-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-17
1:549
§ 258-17. Bond for new construction. [Amended 7-22-2002]
As a condition of obtaining a permit under §§ 258-13 through 258-22, the
applicant shall be required to file with the Township a cash construction
and restoration bond in an amount of at least $1,000 or 5%, whichever is
greater, as established by the Township Engineer based on the applicant's
approved estimated cost of the project plus restoration, including labor,
materials and overhead. The bond may be utilized to pay all valid claims
for damages resulting from activity within the public right-of-way. The
estimated cost of the project shall be consistent with the installed cost of
the project as reported for state and local tax purposes. The cash bond
shall be conditioned to pay for restoration and for all damages to the public
right-of-way of the Township and to hold the Township harmless of every
damage of every other nature whether to persons or property for which
such Township may be held liable by reason of or which is occasioned by the
doing of a thing or the exercise of the privilege for which the permit upon
which the cash bond was based was granted. The applicant must execute
an agreement to defend, indemnify and hold the Township harmless in the
event a claim arises out of an activity conducted by the applicant within the
right-of-way.
§ 258-18. Blanket work permit; bond for maintenance and repair.
The owner of any facilities and structures within a public right-of-way
may obtain an annual blanket work permit (January 1 to December 30)
covering all maintenance and repair activities but not new construction
upon payment of a fee set by resolution of the Township Board of Trustees,
the posting of a cash construction and restoration bond in the amount of
$2,500 or such other amount established by the Township Engineer based
upon experience with a particular public utility and the filing of detailed
maps describing the location of all the owner's facilities and structures
within the Township. The holder of an annual blanket work permit must
file with the Township, upon request, a report describing the nature and
location of the maintenance and repair work. The bond shall be conditioned
to pay for restoration and all damages to the public right-of-way of the
Township and to hold the Township harmless of every damage of every other
nature whether to persons or property for which such Township may be held
liable by reason of or which is occasioned by the doing of a thing or the
exercise of the privilege for which the permit upon which the cash bond was
based was granted. The applicant must execute an agreement to defend,
indemnify and hold the Township harmless in the event a claim arises out of
an activity conducted by the applicant within the right-of-way.
§ 258-19. Inspection of work; suspension or revocation of permit;
filing of plans.
A. All construction work done pursuant to any permit issued pursuant to
this article shall be inspected by a qualified Township official to
determine that the work conforms with the applicable Township
ordinance provisions. The Township may suspend or revoke any permit
§ 258-17 GROSSE ILE CODE § 258-19
1:550
§ 258-20. Stop-work order; review procedure.
The Director of Public Works may issue a stop-work order to anyone
violating this article, the Township Code, or state or federal law. All
operations for which a permit is granted pursuant to the terms of this
article are under the supervision of the Director of Public Works. If a
permit is refused, suspended or revoked, the applicant may within 10
days of the denial, suspension or revocation appeal that determination to
the Township Board of Trustees. The Township Board of Trustees may,
after proper notice to all interested parties, conduct a hearing concerning
the refusal, suspension or revocation. After conducting the public hearing
the Township Board of Trustees may either affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the Director of Public Works. The decision of the Township Board
of Trustees is final.
§ 258-21. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
where the workmanship or materials used do not conform to the
approved plans and specifications and the applicable provisions of
this article or other applicable ordinances. Violation of the terms and
conditions contained in this article or any other applicable ordinance
or ordinance provision may result in the permit being revoked. It is
unlawful to perform any work authorized by any permit or cause any
work to be performed after a permit has been suspended or revoked.
B. As-built or engineering maps and plans must be submitted by the
applicant to the Township Engineer as soon as they are completed, but
no later than 90 days after completion of the work. If available, a digital
geographical information system layer, using a program, format and
computer media acceptable to the Township and containing such
information and data as the Township may require, which accurately
displays the work may be required. Proprietary information may be
submitted under a promise of confidentiality as provided by the
Freedom of Information Act. [Amended 7-22-2002]
§ 258-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-21
1:551
Chapter 261
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 34.
Motor carrier safety — See Ch. 157.
Operation of motor vehicles — See Ch. 161.
Parking Violations Bureau — See Ch. 183.
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 251.
Winter emergencies — See Ch. 278.
§ 258-21 GROSSE ILE CODE § 258-21
1:552
ARTICLE I
Uniform Traffic Code
[Adopted 1-10-1983 by Ord. No. 144]
§ 261-1. Adoption of code by reference.
The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages promulgated
by the Director of State Police and published in the 1979 Edition of the
Michigan Administrative Code and Amendments as published in the
Quarterly Supplement No. 5 to the 1979 Edition of the Michigan
Administrative Code, in accordance with Public Act 62 of 1956, State of
Michigan, is hereby adopted by reference as in this article modified.
§ 261-2. References to governmental unit.
References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships and
Villages to "governmental unit" shall mean the Township of Grosse Ile,
Wayne County, Michigan.
§ 261-3. Notice to be published.
The Township Clerk shall publish this article in the manner required by law
and shall at the same time publish a supplementary notice setting forth the
purpose of said Uniform Traffic Code and of the fact that a complete copy of
the code is available at the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at
all times.
§ 261-4. Code amendments.
A. Sections 5.15 through 5.15g., both inclusive, of the Uniform Traffic
Code are hereby deleted and otherwise are hereby amended and
modified to read as follows: [Added 4-25-1983 by Ord. No. 145]
B. Operating under influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled
substance, per se violation.
Section 1. Definition of "operate" or "operating."
"Operate" or "operating" means being in actual physical control of a
vehicle regardless of whether or not the person is licensed under the
Michigan Vehicle Code as an operator or chauffeur.
§ 261-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-4
1:553
Section 2. A person, whether licensed or not, who is under the
influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a
combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, shall not
operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general
public, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within
the Township. A peace officer may, without a warrant, arrest a person
when the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person
was, at the time of an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the
accident and was operating the vehicle upon a public highway or other
place open to the general public, including an area designated for the
parking of vehicles, in the Township while in violation of this section or
Section 3.
Section 3. A person, whether licensed or not, whose blood contains
0.10% or more by weight of alcohol shall not operate a vehicle upon a
highway or other place open to the general public, including an area
designated for the parking of vehicles, within the Township.
C. Mopeds and motorcycles. [Added 9-26-1983 by Ord. No. 146]
(1) Section 1.016 of the Uniform Traffic Code, dated March 1981,
entitled"Moped," is amended to read as follows:
Section 1.016 "Moped" means a two- or three-wheeled vehicle
which is equipped with a motor that does not exceed 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement, produces 2.0 brake horsepower
or less, and cannot propel the vehicle at a speed greater than 30
miles per hour on a level surface. The power drive system shall not
require the operator to shift gears.
(2) Section 6.23(a) of the Uniform Traffic Code, dated March 1981,
entitled "Motorcycles: protective helmet standards," is amended to
read as follows:
Section 6.23(a) A person operating or riding on a motorcycle, and
any person less than 19 years of age operating a moped on a public
thoroughfare shall wear a crash helmet on his or her head. Crash
helmets shall be approved by the Department of State Police.
(3) Section 6.28 is hereby added to the Uniform Traffic Code, dated
March 1981, to read as follows:
§ 261-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 261-4
1:554
Section 6.28(1) When a moped required to be registered under
this act is sold by a retailer to a general purchaser, the certificate
of registration shall be obtained in the name of the purchaser.
The application shall be signed by the purchaser of the moped
and shall be accompanied by a fee of $15. Upon receipt of the
application in approved form, the Secretary of State shall enter
the application upon the Secretary of State's records and issue
to the applicant a certificate of registration containing the decal
for the moped, the name and address of the owner and other
information the Secretary of State considers necessary. A moped
shall not be required to be insured in the manner specified for
motor vehicles under Chapter 31 of Act No. 218 of the Public
Acts of 1956, as amended, being §§ 500.3101 to 500.3179 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws. The certificate of registration shall be
pocket size, shall accompany the vehicle, shall be legible and
shall be made available for inspection upon demand by a law
enforcement officer.
Section 6.28(2) A decal indicating that the certificate of
registration is in full force and effect shall be issued. A registration
certificate and decal shall not be issued earlier than 90 days
preceding the commencement date of the new registration period.
Display of the decal shall be as prescribed by rule promulgated by
the Secretary of State.
D. Safety belt usage required. Each driver and front seat passenger of a
motor vehicle operated on a street or highway in the Township of
Grosse Ile shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt,
except that a child less than four years of age shall be protected by a
child restraint system, as required by federal and state law. Each driver
of a motor vehicle transporting a child four years of age or more, but
less than 16 years of age in the front seat of the motor vehicle, shall
secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt.
Enforcement of this article shall be accomplished only as a secondary
action whenever a driver of a motor vehicle has been detained for a
suspected violation of another Township ordinance or state law. A
person who violates this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction
and subject to a fine not to exceed $100. [Added 9-10-1990 by Ord.
No. 177]
E. The Township of Grosse Ile hereby amends Section 4.21 of the Uniform
Traffic Code as adopted by Grosse Ile Township to read as follows:
[Added 11-12-1990 by Ord. No. 179]
Sec. 4.21. Bicycle paths: uses allowed.
F. Bicycles paths: uses allowed. [Amended 1-25-2010 by Ord. No.
10-02]
§ 261-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-4
1:555
(1) Bicycles paths are to be used only by bicyclists, pedestrians and
pedestrians with pets and persons in wheelchairs, and no other use
is permitted.
(2) A person shall not park or operate any type of vehicle on a bicycle
path.
(3) A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 261-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 261-4
1:556
ARTICLE II
Vehicle Code
[Adopted 8-14-2000 by Ord. No. 294]
§ 261-5. Adoption of Michigan Vehicle Code.
The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL §§ 257.1 through MCL
257.923, as amended, is adopted by reference (2000 Edition).
§ 261-6. Definition of local authority.
All references in the Michigan Vehicle Code to local authorities shall mean
the Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 261-7. Penalties.
The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by
reference; provided, however, that the Township may not enforce any
provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is greater than 93 days.
§ 261-8. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith and with the
provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code are hereby repealed only to the
extent necessary to give this article full force and effect.
§ 261-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article and the Michigan Vehicle Code is to regulate
the operation of vehicles, to provide for the regulation and use of streets,
highways and alleys and other public and semipublic places within the
Township of Grosse Ile and to provide penalties for the violation of said code
and ordinances.
§ 261-10. Inspection of code.
A person may inspect or obtain a copy of the Michigan Vehicle Code at the
Grosse Ile Township Clerk's office located at 9601 Groh Road, Grosse Ile,
Michigan, during regular business hours.
§ 261-11. Issuance of citation.
The officer who issues a citation under this article shall mark the local
ordinance box on the citation and may make reference to the offense being
charged by writing the description of the offense and/or by citing the last
three numbers from the Michigan Vehicle Code or by any other manner
which would reasonably inform the defendant of the charge.
§ 261-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-11
1:557
Chapter 268
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Sewer use — See Ch. 210.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 241.
Water district — See Ch. 271.
§ 261-11 GROSSE ILE CODE § 261-11
1:558
ARTICLE I
Watering Ban
[Adopted 8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 137 as Ch. 40 of the Grosse Ile
Township Code]
§ 268-1. Purpose and statutory authority.
Pursuant to an order by the Department of Public Health of the State of
Michigan, issued January 22, 1979, in accordance with the provisions of
Public Act 339 adequately controlling use of water taken from the water
system of the Township for lawn sprinkling during peak water use periods
within the Township, this Code article is enacted in compliance with such
requirement.
§ 268-2. Definitions.
When used in this article of the Code, the following terms shall have the
following meanings unless a specific provision of this article provides for a
different meaning:
PERSON — Includes not only any natural person but also any partnership,
association, profit or nonprofit corporation, unincorporated or incorporated
club, any other group or combination of individuals acting jointly or in
concert, and any other legally recognized public or private entity.
TO WATER — The act of obtaining and using water from the Grosse Ile
Township water system for the purposes of watering or sprinkling any lawn
within the Township.
§ 268-3. Use prohibited during certain months.
It shall be unlawful for any person to water or cause to be watered any
lawn within the Township of Grosse Ile during the months of May through
September, inclusive, except as otherwise provided in § 268-4 of this article.
§ 268-4. Exceptions.
The prohibition contained within § 268-3 of this chapter shall not apply
during those times and on those days as the Township Board may by formal
motion except based upon and in consideration of peak water use periods
within the Township.
§ 268-5. Presumption of use.
A. Any person having any ownership interest of any land within the
Township of Grosse Ile on which an act prohibited by this article occurs
shall be deemed to have caused such prohibited act to have taken place
if such person resides on or is otherwise in possession or has
supervisory control of such land.
B. In the event that a person having any ownership interest of any land
within the Township of Grosse Ile on which an act prohibited by this
§ 268-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-5
1:559
§ 268-6. Penalty. [Added 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
article occurs does not reside on such land, then in such event the
person who is in possession or has supervisory control of such land area
shall be deemed to have caused such prohibited act to occur on such
land area.
§ 268-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 268-6
1:560
ARTICLE II
Water Service Lien
[Adopted 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 240]
§ 268-7. Establishment of lien.
The Township of Grosse Ile, Wayne County, Michigan, shall have and there
is hereby created as security for the collection of any water rates, or
any assessments, charges or rentals due or to become due for the use
of consumption of water supplied to any house or other building or any
premises, lot or lots, or parcel or parcels of land by the Township through
operation of its water distribution system, a lien upon such house or other
building and upon the premises or lot, or lots, or parcel or parcels upon
which such house or other building shall be situated or to which such water
was supplied.
§ 268-8. When effective.
The lien created pursuant to foregoing section of this article shall become
effective immediately upon the distribution of the water through the
Township's water distribution system to the premises or property supplied
as stated in the foregoing section of this article.
§ 268-9. Lien priority.
The lien created pursuant to this article shall have priority over all other
liens except taxes or special assessments whether or not such other liens
accrued or were recorded prior to the accrual of the water lien created
under this article.
§ 268-10. Exceptions; leased property. [Amended 7-22-2002]
In any instance where a lease has been legally executed which contains a
provision therein that the lessee or tenant shall be liable for payment of
water bills at the leased premises, no water lien as provided for in this
article shall be created or exist as to any such water bills for water service
to the leased premises accruing subsequent to the filing by the lessor of
an affidavit with the Township's Department of Public Works (DPW) setting
forth the existence of such a lease containing such a provision; containing
the expiration date of such lease; and providing that the lessor will give 20
days' notice to the Township's DPW Department of any cancellation, change
in or termination of said lease. Where notice is given by the aforestated
affidavit that a lessee is responsible for the payment of water bills under the
provisions of his lease, no further water service shall be rendered to such
premises after the date of filing such affidavit with the Township's DPW
Department until a cash deposit as set from time to time by the Township
Board shall have been made as security for the payment of such charges
and service.
§ 268-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-11
1:561
§ 268-11. Discontinuance of service.
In addition to other remedies provided by statute or otherwise, the
Township shall have the right to discontinue water service to the premises
against which the water lien has accrued whenever any person shall fail
to pay the rates, assessments, charges or rentals for such water service
to the premises. No attempt of the Township to collect such water rates,
assessments, charges or rentals by any process provided for under statute
or otherwise shall in any way invalidate or waive the lien upon the premises.
§ 268-12. Enforcement of lien.
In the event that any water rates, assessments, charges or rentals due for
water service supplied by the Township shall not be paid and said unpaid
charges exceed $300, the Township official in charge of the collection
thereof shall have said charges entered upon the next tax roll as a charge
against such premises for the winter tax bill along with a fifteen-percent
administration fee and it shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced.
The Township Board may by resolution amend this section in the future as
to when the delinquent water bill may be placed on the winter tax bill and
the administration fee to be charged.
§ 268-13. Penalty.
Penalties for violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this article.
§ 268-11 GROSSE ILE CODE § 268-13
1:562
ARTICLE III
Cross-Connections
[Adopted 3-11-2002 by Ord. No. 02-04; amended in its entirety
4-8-2002 by Ord. No. 02-06]
§ 268-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BACKFLOW — Water of questionable quality, wastes, or other contaminants
entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.
CROSS-CONNECTION — A connection or arrangement of piping or
appurtenances through which water of questionable quality, wastes or other
contaminants can enter the public water supply system.
SAFE AIR GAP — The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above
the maximum high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device, or
container to which public water is furnished which shall be not less than
two times the inside diameter of the water inlet pipe, but shall not be less
than one inch and need not be more than 12 inches.
SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY — A water supply system maintained in
addition to a public water supply, including, but not limited to, water
systems from ground or surface sources not meeting the requirements of
Act No. 399 of the Public Acts of 1976, being §§ 325.1001 to 325.1023 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws, or water from a public water supply which in any
way has been treated, processed, or exposed to any possible contaminant or
stored in other than an approved storage facility.
SUBMERGED INLET — A water pipe or extension thereto from a public
water supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture, or appliance which may
contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant, and
which is unprotected against backflow.
WATER UTILITY — A governmental unit, municipal or private corporation,
association, partnership, or individual engaged in furnishing water to the
public for household or drinking purposes. This definition includes the
Township of Grosse Ile.
§ 268-15. Rules applying to water supply and cross-connections.
A. A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with
existing laws, ordinances and rules, including Act No. 266 of the Public
Acts of 1929, as amended, being §§ 338.901 to 338.917 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws.
B. A cross-connection shall not be made between a public water supply
system and a secondary water supply. A cross-connection shall not be
made by submerged inlet. A cross-connection shall not be made
between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary
waste or a chemical contaminant. A cross-connection shall not be made
§ 268-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-15
1:563
between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank or
vessel which may contain a contaminant.
C. A water utility shall develop a comprehensive control program for the
elimination and prevention of all cross-connections. The plan for the
program shall be submitted to the Department for review and approval
within one year after the effective date of these rules. When the plan is
approved, the water utility shall implement the program for removal of
all existing cross-connections and prevention of all future crossconnections.
The program shall include, but not be limited to, all of the
following:
(1) A complete description of the method of administering the
program, including the designation of inspection and enforcement
agency or agencies.
(2) A time schedule for inspection and reinspection of all water utility
customer's premises for possible cross-connections. The periodic
reinspection shall be to ascertain whether or not safe air gaps or
required protective devices are in place and in working order.
(3) A description of the methods and devices, as approved by the
Department, used to protect the public water supply.
D. A user of public water supply shall obtain written approval from the
water utility or authorized inspection agency of any proposed corrective
action or protective device before using or installing it. The total time
allowed for completion of the necessary corrections shall be contingent
upon the degree of hazard involved and include the time required to
obtain and install equipment. If the cross-connection has not been
removed after a reasonable period of time, the water utility shall
physically separate the public water supply from the on-site piping
system in such a manner that the two systems cannot again be
connected by any unauthorized person. A water utility shall report
annually to the Department on the status of the cross-connection
control program on a form provided by the Department.
E. When a secondary water source is used in addition to a public water
supply system, exposed public water and secondary water piping shall
be identified by distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that
each pipe may be traced readily in its entirety. If piping is so installed
that it is impossible to trace it in its entirety, it will be necessary to
protect the public water supply at the service connection in a manner
acceptable to the Department.
F. A private water storage tank supplied by a public water supply system
shall be deemed a secondary water supply unless it is designed and
approved for potable water usage.
G. The Township of Grosse Ile adopts by reference the water supply crossconnection
rules of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
§ 268-15 GROSSE ILE CODE § 268-15
1:564
§ 268-16. Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the Grosse Ile Department of Public Works (GIDPW)
to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water
supply where cross-connection with the public water supply is deemed
possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on the
potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the GIDPW and
as approved by the MDEQ, or it successor agency, if required.
§ 268-17. Right of entry.
The representative of the GIDPW shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water
supply system of the Township of Grosse Ile for the purpose of inspecting
the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections. On request, the
owner, lessees, or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system
or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of
access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of a
cross-connection.
§ 268-18. Discontinuance of water service.
The GIDPW is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service
after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation
of this article exists and to take such other precautionary measures deemed
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water
supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the
cross-connection(s) have been eliminated in compliance with the provisions
of this article.
§ 268-19. Testing of backflow prevention devices.
All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially upon
installation to be sure that the device is working properly. Subsequent
testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified by the
GIDPW and in accordance with MDEO requirements. Only individuals
approved by the GIDPW shall be qualified to perform such testing. That
individual(s) shall certify the results of his/her testing.
§ 268-20. Protection of potable water supply.
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the
public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as
specified by this article and by the state and the Township of Grosse Ile
Plumbing Code.53 Any water outlet which could be used for potable or
being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative
Code, in their current form and as may be amended in the future.
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
§ 268-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 268-20
1:565
domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be
labeled in a conspicuous manner as "WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING".
§ 268-21. Effect on other provisions.
This article does not supersede the State Plumbing Code and the Township
of Grosse Ile Plumbing Ordinance, but is supplementary to them.
§ 268-22. Penalty.
Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this article or any written order of the GIDPW, in pursuance thereof, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $500 for each violation and/or 90 days
in jail. Each day upon which a violation of this article shall occur shall be
deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this article.
§ 268-20 GROSSE ILE CODE § 268-22
1:566
Chapter 271
WATER DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 210. Water — See Ch. 268.
§ 271-1. District established; limits.
The establishment of the Grosse Ile Township Special Assessment Water
District No. 100 consisting of the following properties is hereby confirmed:
Lots 1 through 44, inclusive, of Normandin Subdivision; Lots 21 through 39,
inclusive, and Lots 45 through 63, inclusive, of Daniel Reaumes Subdivision;
Lots 9A1, 9A2, 9C1, 9C2, 9C3, 9C4, 10A, 6B, 6B2, 7 and 12 of Gasco's
Subdivision; Lot 144b4b of Supervisor's Grosse Ile Plat No. 10; and Lots 383
through 388 and Lots 390, 391 and 398 of Supervisor's Grosse Ile Plat No.
44.
§ 271-2. Installment payments; interest.
The front foot assessment established for the Grosse Ile Township Water
Special Assessment District No. 100 at the rate $13.79 per front foot of
assessed property may be paid at the rate of 10% per year for a period of
10 years with interest on the unpaid balance at any time outstanding at
the rate of 6 1/4%. The first installment of 10% of the assessment is due
June 1, 1975, with interest thereon at the rate of 6 1/4% for seven months.
Subsequent installment payments over the balance of the 10 years shall
be due June 1 of each succeeding year until paid with interest due on the
unpaid balance at that time of 6 1/4% per annum. Any assessment may
be paid in full at any time and interest due and owing on the outstanding
balance shall be computed at the 6 1/4% per annum rate to date of payoff.
An installment shall not be deemed to be late until July 1 immediately
following the June 1 due date on which date and thereafter a 4% collection
charge on the unpaid installment plus interest thereon at 3/4% per month
shall be applied and added to the overdue installment.
§ 268-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-2
1:567
Chapter 275
WETLANDS AND DRAINAGEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Environmental assessment — See Ch. 98.
Fishing and recreational activities — See Ch.
113.
Flood control — See Ch. 116.
Hunting and trapping — See Ch. 132.
Land use hearing notices — See Ch. 139.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 271-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 271-2
1:568
ARTICLE I
Findings, Purpose and Construction
§ 275-1. Legislative findings.
The Grosse Ile Township Board finds that the wetlands and drainageways
of Grosse Ile Township are indispensable and fragile natural resources
which serve numerous, beneficial functions by providing breeding, nesting
and feeding grounds for fish and wildlife, maintenance of water quality
through nutrient cycling and sediment trapping, flood and storm water
runoff control through hydrologic absorption and storage capacity, pollution
treatment by serving as a biological and chemical oxidation basin, open
space, greenways, outdoor recreation areas, and aesthetics. Important
types of wetlands on Grosse Ile include emergent marshes, forested
wetlands, shrub/scrub wetlands, and aquatic beds. The preservation of
wetlands and drainageways in an undisturbed and natural condition is
necessary to maintain important physical, aesthetic, recreational and
economic assets for existing and future residents of Grosse Ile Township
and the State of Michigan.
§ 275-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are to provide for:
A. The protection, preservation, proper use of wetlands and drainageways
in Grosse Ile Township in order to minimize disturbance to them as to
prevent damage from erosion, turbidity or siltation; loss of natural
filtration or pollution reduction capability; loss of fish or other
beneficial aquatic organisms; loss of wildlife or the destruction of the
natural habitat thereof; or a loss of water quality supporting the
abundant fishery and waterfowl use of the Detroit River and Lake Erie.
B. The coordination of and support for the enforcement of applicable
federal, state, and county ordinances and statutes including but not
limited to:
(1) Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act (Act 203, Public Acts
of 1979, as amended)54 enforced by the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources;
(2) Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act and Section 10 of the
Federal River and Harbor Act of 1899, enforced by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers;
(3) Inland Lakes and Streams Act (Act 346, Public Acts of 1972, as
amended), enforced by the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources; and
54.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed by the Public Acts of 1995, No. 59. See MCLA
§ 324.30101 et seq.
§ 275-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-2
1:569
§ 275-3. Declaration of necessity.
The Township Board declares that this chapter is essential to the health,
safety, economic and general welfare of the people of the Township, and
to the furtherance of the policy set forth in Article 4, Section 52, of the
Constitution of the State of Michigan, the Michigan Environmental
Protection Act (Act 127, Public Acts of 1970) and the Goemaere-Anderson
Wetland Protection Act (Act 203, Public Acts of 1979, as amended).
§ 275-4. Construction and application.
The following rules of construction apply in the interpretation and
application of this chapter:
(4) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (Act 347, Public Acts of
1972, as amended),55 enforced by the Wayne County Health
Department.
C. Compliance with the Michigan Environmental Protection Act (Act 127,
Public Acts of 1970)56 which imposes a duty on government agencies
and private individuals and organizations to prevent or minimize
degradation of the environment which is likely to be caused by their
activities.
D. Regulation of the use of wetlands and drainageways.
E. Procedures for appealing decisions and requesting variances.
F. Penalties for violation of this chapter.
A. In the case of a difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
B. Particulars provided by way of illustration or enumeration shall not
control general language.
C. Ambiguities, if any, shall be construed liberally in favor of the protection
and preservation of natural resources.
55.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed by the Public Acts of 1994, No. 451. See MCLA
§ 324.30101 et seq.
56.Editor's Note: See now Public Acts of 1994, No. 451 (MCLA § 324.101 et seq.)
§ 275-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 275-4
1:570
ARTICLE II
Definitions and General Provisions
§ 275-5. Definitions.
Terms not specifically defined in this chapter shall have the meanings
customarily assigned to them. The following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively given in this section:
ACTIVITY — Any use, operation, development or action involving a change
in, on or to uplands or bottomlands caused by any person, including, but not
limited to, constructing, operating or maintaining any use or development;
erecting buildings or other structures; depositing or removing material;
dredging; ditching; land balancing; draining or diverting water; pumping
or discharge of surface water; grading; paving; vegetative clearing or
excavation, mining or drilling operations.
AQUATIC VEGETATION — Plants and plant life forms which naturally occur
in and are adapted to life, at, near or predominantly near water.
BOTTOMLAND — The land area of a pond, stream, watercourse or
drainageway which lies below the ordinary high water mark and which may
or may not be covered by water.
CANAL — A man-made watercourse.
CHANNEL — The geographical area within the natural or artificial banks
of a watercourse required to convey continuously or intermittently flowing
water under normal or average flow conditions.
CONTIGUOUS — Any of the following:
DEPOSIT — To fill, place or dump.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any drainage course, watercourse, drain, pipe, natural
stream, creek, or swale which serves to transport stormwater runoff.
A permanent connection or other direct physical contact with a lake,
pond, river or stream, including surface or ground water connections.
A.
A seasonal or intermittent direct water connection with a lake, pond,
river or stream, including surface or ground water connections.
B.
Located within 500 feet of the ordinary high water mark of an inland
lake, pond, river or stream, or located within 1,000 feet of the ordinary
high water mark of the Detroit River.
C.
Separated only by man-made barriers, such as dikes, roads, berms, or
other similar features.
D.
§ 275-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5
1:571
FILL MATERIAL — Soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, debris and refuse, waste
of any kind, or any other material which displaces soil or water or reduces
water retention potential.
LAKE — A natural or permanent artificial water body that has definite
banks, a bed, visible evidence of a continued occurrence of water, and a
surface area of water that is five acres or more in size.
MAY — An auxiliary verb qualifying the meaning of another verb by
expressing ability, permission, or possibility. The word "may" is indicative of
discretion or choice between two or more alternatives.
MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES (MDNR) — The
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) or any subsequent
state agency thereof responsible for issuing permits for use of wetlands,
drainageways and waterways under the Inland Lakes and Streams Act
(Act 346, Public Acts of 1972, as amended), and the Goemaere-Anderson
Wetland Protection Act57 (Act 203, Public Acts of 1979, as
amended).[Added 8-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-12]
MITIGATION OF WETLANDS —
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK — The line between upland and
bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels,
below which the presence and action of the water is so common or
recurrent that the character of the land is markedly distinct from the upland
and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil
and the vegetation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including governmental
agencies conducting operations within the Township.
Methods for eliminating or reducing potential damage and/or
destruction to natural ecosystems as a result of wetland impacts.
Mitigation may include any or all of the following:
Methods for eliminating or reducing potential damage or
destruction to wetlands;
(1)
(2) Creation of wetlands from uplands to offset the loss; or
Enhancing or providing for the preservation of the natural
ecosystems associated with the on-site wetlands to remain through
such means as restoring an on-site area to a natural state and/or
dedicating a preservation easement.
(3)
A.
Mitigation shall not be considered when it is feasible and prudent
to avoid wetland impacts or when the impacts would be otherwise
prohibited under federal, state and local wetlands protection
regulations.
B.
57.Editor’s Note: Said act was repealed by the Public Acts of 1995, No. 59. See MCLA §
324.30101 et seq.
§ 275-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 275-5
1:572
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Grosse Ile Township Planning
Commission.
POND — A natural or permanent artificial water body that has permanent
open water with a surface area that is more than one acre but less than five
acres.
PROTECTED WETLANDS — Land characterized by the presence of water
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support (and that under normal
circumstances does support) wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is
commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh and which is any of the
following:
RUNOFF — The surface discharge of precipitation to a drainageway or low
area.
SEASONAL — Any intermittent or temporary activity which occurs annually
and is subject to interruption from changes in weather, water level, or time
of year, and may involve annual removal and replacement of any operation,
obstruction or structure.
SOILS —
STREAM — A waterway which has definite banks, a bed and visible
evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water.
A. Contiguous to any lake, pond, river or stream.
Not contiguous to any lake, pond, river or stream; and more than two
acres in size.
B.
Not contiguous to any lake, pond, river or stream; and two acres or
less in size if the Michigan Department of Natural Resources (MDNR)
determines that protection of the area is essential to the preservation
of the natural resources of the state from pollution, impairment, or
destruction and the MDNR has so notified the owner.
C.
POORLY DRAINED SOILS — Those general organic soils from which
water is removed so slowly that the soil remains wet for a large part
of the time. The water table is commonly at or near the surface during
a considerable part of the year. Poorly drained conditions are due to a
high water table, to a slower permeable layer within the soil profile, to
seepage, or to some combination of these conditions.
A.
VERY POORLY DRAINED SOILS — Those soils from which water is
removed from the soil so slowly that the water table remains at or
on the surface a greater part of the time. Soils of this drainage class
usually occupy larger or depressed sites and are frequently ponded.
B.
HYDRIC SOILS — Soils that are saturated, flooded, or ponded long
enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions that
favor the growth and regeneration of wetland vegetation.
C.
§ 275-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-5
1:573
STRUCTURE — Any assembly of materials above or below the surface of the
land or water, including, but not limited to, houses, buildings, bulkheads,
piers, docks, rafts, landings, dams, sheds or waterway obstructions.
TOWNSHIP — Grosse Ile Township or any commission, authority,
department or division of the Township government.[Amended 8-25-2003
by Ord No. 03-12]
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Grosse Ile Township Board.
UPLAND — The land area which lies above the ordinary high water mark,
or well-drained land which supports upland vegetation.
USE APPROVAL — The Township approval required for conducting normally
prohibited activities as identified in Article III within protected wetlands
and natural drainageways.
WATERCOURSE — Any waterway, drainageway, drain, canal, river, stream,
lake, or detention basin, or any body of surface water having well-defined
banks, either continually or intermittently flowing.
WETLAND — Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support (and that under normal circumstances
does support) wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred
to as a bog, swamp, or marsh. Wetlands protected under this chapter are
defined as "protected wetlands."
WETLAND DISTRICT — All protected wetlands located on the site.
WETLANDS AND DRAINAGEWAYS MAP — The Township map, updated as
necessary, delineating the general location of wetlands and drainageways
which may be subject to regulation under this chapter. Delineation of
wetland boundaries on individual parcels or sites shall be the responsibility
of persons applying for a wetland or drainageway use approval.
WETLAND VEGETATION — Plants, such as trees, shrubs, and grasses,
that exhibit adaptations to allow, under normal conditions, germination
or propagation and to allow growth with at least their root systems in
water or saturated soil. Wetland vegetation is the macrophytic plant life
that occurs in areas where the frequency and duration of inundation or
saturation produces permanently or periodically saturated conditions of
sufficient duration to exert a controlling influence on the plant species
present.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR — The Grosse Ile Township Zoning
Administrator or Township staff authorized to act in this capacity.
§ 275-6. Abrogation; conflict with other provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to conflict with present or
future state statutes on the same subject matter; conflicting provisions of
this chapter shall be abrogated to, but only to, the extent of the conflict.
Moreover, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed, if possible, to
be consistent with and in addition to relevant state and federal regulations
and statutes. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
§ 275-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § 275-6
1:574
requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the Township and
shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by
state statutes. This chapter shall not repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
All other Township ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed or amended to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 275-7. Relationship to state and federal permit requirements.
In some cases, property owners requesting approval to use wetlands and
drainageways will be subject to state and federal permit requirements.
Criteria and procedures used by federal, state and local agencies for
protecting wetlands and issuing permits may not always be the same.
§ 275-8. Adoption and amendment.
The Township Board shall be responsible for chapter adoption and
amendment, and shall consider recommendations submitted in writing by
the Planning Commission.
§ 275-9. Continuance of nonconforming uses.
A regulated activity that was lawful before the enactment of this chapter,
but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be
continued provided that it is not:
A. Approvals under this chapter shall not relieve a property owner of the
need to obtain a permit from the Department of Natural Resources and/
or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, if required.
B. While issuance of a wetland use permit by the Township is not required
where a permit has been issued by the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources and/or the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, this shall not relieve
a property owner of the need to obtain all other required Township
approvals. [Amended 8-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-12]
C. If requirements of federal, state, and local officials vary, the most
stringent requirements shall be followed.
D. The Township may defer the review and approval of site plans,
subdivision plats and other land use permit applications until after
wetland use permits from the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers have been
obtained.
A. Changed to another nonconforming location or operation;
B. Reestablished after having been discontinued for one year;
C. Expanded, except in conformity with this chapter; nor
§ 275-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-9
1:575
§ 275-10. Applicability to private and public agency activities.
The provisions of this chapter, including use approval requirements and
criteria, shall apply to activities and operations proposed by all persons,
private organizations, individuals, and public agencies.
§ 275-11. Notice to Department of Natural Resources.
The Township shall notify the Michigan Department of Natural Resources
of the adoption of this chapter. The Township shall enter into an agreement
with the Michigan Department of Natural Resources providing for the
exchange of information and for the coordination of permit and use
approvals as required by Section 8 of the Goemaere-Anderson Wetland
Protection Act (Act 203, Public Acts of 1979).
D. Rebuilt or repaired after complete or partial destruction, when the
destruction exceeds 50% of the fair market value immediately prior to
damage, as determined by two independent assessments.
§ 275-9 GROSSE ILE CODE § 275-11
1:576
ARTICLE III
Activities
§ 275-11.1. Review of Township activities. [Added 8-25-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-12]
§ 275-12. Activities not requiring Township approval. [Admended
8-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-12]
Wetlands may be used for the following activities without the necessity of a
Township wetland use permit under this article. The intent of this section is
to provide consistency with the Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act
(Act 203, Public Acts of 1979, as amended), however the uses listed below
may not be permitted by the Zoning Ordinance58 within the various zoning
districts. All activities are subject to the regulations and restrictions of all
other Township ordinances.
A. Prior to any application by Grosse Ile Township to the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
for a wetland use permit, the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed application for a wetland use permit. The
Planning Commission shall review the complete wetland use permit
application, receive public comment and make a recommendation to
the Township Board prior to the Township submitting such permit to the
applicable agency.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall publish a notice of public hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Separate notice shall
be sent by mail or personal delivery to all persons to whom real
property is assessed within 300 feet of the location of the proposed
wetland use.
C. Where Grosse Ile Township proposes the use of a wetland regulated by
the Township under the provision of this chapter, the Township shall be
required to obtain the approval of the Planning Commission following
the procedures and requirements of this chapter.
A. Fishing, trapping, hunting or birdwatching.
B. Swimming, boating, or canoeing.
C. Hiking.
D. Grazing and/or watering of animals.
E. Farming, horticulture, silviculture, lumbering, and ranching activities,
including plowing, irrigation, irrigation ditching, seeding, cultivating,
minor drainage, harvesting for the production of food, fiber, and forest
products, or upland soil and water conservation practices. Wetland
altered under this subdivision shall not be used for a purpose other than
58.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 285, Zoning.
§ 275-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-12
1:577
a purpose described in this subsection without a permit obtained under
this chapter.
F. Maintenance or operation of serviceable structures in existence on the
effective date of this amendment or constructed pursuant to this
chapter.
G. Construction or maintenance of farm or stock ponds.
H. Maintenance, operation, or improvement which includes straightening,
widening, or deepening of the following which is necessary for the
production or harvesting of agricultural products:
(1) An existing private agricultural drain.
(2) That portion of a drain legally established pursuant to the Drain
Code of 1956, Act No. 40 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended,
being §§ 280.1 to 280.630 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, which
has been constructed or improved for drainage purposes.
(3) A drain constructed pursuant to other provisions of this chapter.
I. Construction or maintenance of farm roads, forest roads, or temporary
roads for moving mining or forestry equipment, if the roads are
constructed and maintained in a manner to assure that any adverse
effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized.
J. Drainage necessary for the production and harvesting of agricultural
products if the wetland is owned by a person who is engaged in
commercial farming and the land is to be used for the production and
harvesting of agricultural products. Except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, wetland improved under this section after the effective
date of this amendment shall not be used for nonfarming purposes
without a permit from the Township. This shall not apply to a wetland
which is contiguous to a lake or stream, or to a tributary of a lake or
stream, or to a wetland which the Township has determined by clear
and convincing evidence to be a wetland which is necessary to be
preserved for the public interest, in which case a permit shall be
required.
K. Maintenance or improvement of public streets, highways, or roads,
within the right-of-way and in such a manner as to assure that any
adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized.
Maintenance or improvement does not include adding extra lanes;
increasing the right-of-way; or deviating from the existing location of
the street, highway, or road.
L. Maintenance, repair, or operation of gas or oil pipelines and
construction of gas or oil pipelines having a diameter of six inches or
less, if the pipelines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in a
manner to assure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be
otherwise minimized.
§ 275-12 GROSSE ILE CODE § 275-12
1:578
§ 275-13. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following unless and until
written approval is obtained from the Township pursuant to this chapter, or
unless it is conducted as part of an activity not requiring a use permit under
§ 275-12:
M. Maintenance, repair, or operation of electric transmission and
distribution power lines and construction of distribution power line if
the distribution power lines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in
a manner to assure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be
otherwise minimized.
N. Operation or maintenance, including reconstruction of recently
damaged parts, of serviceable dikes and levees in existence on the
effective date of this amendment or constructed pursuant to this
chapter.
O. Construction of iron and copper mining tailings basins and water
storage areas.
P. Activities within wetlands that are regulated by the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
where a current permit for such activities has been obtained from the
applicable agency.
A. Deposit or permit to be deposited any material or structures, into,
within or upon any protected wetlands; or into any drainageway.
B. Remove or permit to be removed any material (including soils or tree
stumps) from any protected wetland; or into any drainageway.
C. Remove or permit to be removed any vegetation, including trees, which
would adversely affect the nutrient cycling or sediment trapping
functions of the protected wetland.
D. Dredge, fill, grade, or land balance bottomlands or protected wetlands.
E. Create, enlarge, diminish or alter a lake, creek, stream, canal, river or
any other naturally or artificially occurring water body or drainageway.
F. Construct, place, enlarge, extend or remove a temporary, seasonal or
permanent operation or structure upon bottomlands or protected
wetlands.
G. Construct, extend, or enlarge any pipe, culvert, or open or closed
drainage facility which discharges silt, sediment, organic or inorganic
materials, chemicals, fertilizers, flammable liquids or any other
pollutants to any protected wetland or drainageway except through a
retention area, settling filter, or treatment facility designed to control
and eliminate the pollutant.
§ 275-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-13
1:579
H. Construct, enlarge, extend or connect any private or public sewage or
waste treatment plant discharge to any lake, stream, drainageway or
watercourse, or protected wetland except in accordance with the
requirements of Wayne County, State of Michigan and/or the United
States, to the extent that such entities have jurisdiction.
I. Drain, or cause to be drained, any water from a protected wetland.
J. Alter the flow of surface water or groundwater which is essential for
sustaining protected wetland hydrology, vegetation, or aquatic life.
§ 275-13 GROSSE ILE CODE § 275-13
1:580
ARTICLE IV
Wetlands and Drainageways Map
§ 275-14. Map preparation.
The Township shall maintain and make available for public inspection a
mapping which shows the general location of protected wetlands and
drainageways subject to Township approval requirements. A wetland map
shall serve as a general guide for the location of potential regulated wetland
areas within the Township. Wetland areas not shown on the official wetland
map may still be subject to regulation by the Army Corps of Engineers,
the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and/or the Township. The
accuracy and scale of information presented on the map shall be stated. The
map shall be updated as necessary.
§ 275-15. Responsibility for site surveys.
The Wetlands and Drainageways Map shall not be considered a substitute
for on-site field inspection. The applicant for a use approval shall be
responsible for identifying boundaries of protected wetlands, and
drainageways located on the project site. Field investigations to delineate
the precise boundaries of wetlands on a site shall be the responsibility of
the property owner and subject to all delineation requirements herein.
§ 275-16. Use of map by Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall use mapping and site surveys to identify
areas which may be subject to federal, state and local regulation. Upon
receipt of an application for a preliminary subdivision plat, site plan, lot
split, grading approval, building permit, or other Township approval, the
Zoning Administrator shall review the site location in relationship to
wetland mapping and site surveys. Applicants shall be notified in writing
if it is found that protected wetlands or drainageways may be located on
the site, and if an application for wetland and drainageway use approval
has not been submitted to the Zoning Administrator. All Township review
and approval procedures may be deferred until such time as a complete
wetlands and drainageways use application has been received, or until
satisfactory evidence has been presented to show that protected wetlands
or drainageways are not located on the site.
§ 275-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-16
1:581

ARTICLE V
Application Process and Fees
§ 275-17. Application for use of wetlands or drainageways.
Applications for approval to use wetlands or drainageways shall consist of
the following:
A. One copy of a wetlands use permit application form of the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources.
B. One copy of a drawing of the proposed activity, including at least the
following:
(1) Title block, including the applicant's name, name of body of water,
section of Township, description of activity, scale of drawing, and
date drawing was prepared. The title block shall indicate the name
and professional credentials of the engineer, architect, planner, or
other person preparing the site drawing and the name and
professional credentials of the wetlands scientist or environmental
specialist who has delineated wetlands boundaries and types.
Professional credentials will include a resume and list of
experience for the firm or individual preparing the wetland
delineation.
(2) Location and extent of protected wetlands and drainageways on
the site, as identified through field survey and presented on a
topographic map of suitable scale. For wetland use permit
applications that are accompanying a site plan or plat, the wetlands
map/survey shall be at the same scale as the site plan or plat. For
wetland use permit applications that are not accompanying a site
plan or plat, projects five acres or smaller, shall be at a scale of at
least one inch equals 50 feet is required; projects larger than five
acres, shall be at a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet is
acceptable.
(3) Types of wetlands on the site, i.e., forested, shrub, emergent
marsh, wet meadow, and aquatic bed, identified by using methods
approved by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources as set
forth in the "Michigan Wetland Determination Manual Draft for
Field Testing" or other official publications.
(4) A site plan, subdivision plat, or planning map which overlays the
proposed development or project onto the wetland district and
drainageways. Existing and proposed structures shall be clearly
identified in relation to existing shore features (length of frontage,
water depth and bottom configuration). If existing structures were
previously authorized by Township, state or federal permit show
corresponding permit numbers.
§ 275-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-17
1:583
(5) Typical cross-sections of existing and proposed shoreline,
waterline, structures, dredge cuts and fills, including dimensions
and elevations, and location of wetlands.
(6) Type, volume and area for proposed shoreline construction
materials, dredge material, and fill materials.
(7) Type and location of soil erosion control measures, such as silt
fences, straw bale berms, and sediment basins to be used during
construction, including measures which will be used to trap
sediment which might otherwise run off into wetlands.
(8) If the proposed activity involves bulkhead construction, show the
distance along both property lines from the face of the bulkhead to
the center line of a street or other definable reference point (e.g.,
northeast corner of concrete patio, twelve-inch maple on west
property line).
(9) If the proposed activity involves dredging, furnish the following:
(a) If the dredging material is to be placed on-site, outline the
disposal areas on the drawing. If the dredge material is to be
hauled away, provide a vicinity map showing the disposal area.
(b) Show method of containing dredge material to prevent reentry
of the material into any drainageway or wetlands. Describe all
procedures which the applicant will use to minimize adverse
effects of construction.
(10) If the activity involves a bridge or culvert crossing, furnish the
following:
(a) Typical cross-section of the drainageway representative of the
channel and area downstream of the proposal.
(b) Plan view of the proposal.
(c) Cross-section view of the proposed structure on the existing
structure (if applicable). This view should include the existing
and proposed road center line for the width of the watercourse
or a minimum of 300 feet on either side of the structure.
(d) A profile view of the proposed structure showing the proposed
end treatment and bank stabilization.
C. One copy of a cover letter signed by the landowner including the
following information:
(1) Name of project and one sentence description.
(2) Date upon which the activity is proposed to commence.
§ 275-17 GROSSE ILE CODE § 275-17
1:584
(3) A full description of any potential pollution, impairment or
destruction to the water or any natural resources resulting from
the project.
(4) List of all federal, state, county or other local government agency
permits or approvals required for the proposed project including
permit approvals or denials already received. In the event of
denials, the reasons for denials shall be given. Attach copies of all
permits which have been issued.
(5) Signature of applicant.
D. A letter of nonjurisdiction from the Department of Natural Resources
and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for wetlands regulated solely
by the Township.
E. Use applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on or
before the date that application is made for Township approvals
including, but not limited to preliminary subdivision plats, site plans, lot
splits, grading approvals, or building permits. Township approvals for
preliminary subdivision plats, site plans, lot splits, grading approvals,
or building permits shall not be granted until approval for the use of
protected wetlands, or drainageways has been obtained.
F. If the use application is for a wetland which is regulated by the
Department of Natural Resources and/or the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, then the applicant shall make complete application for a use
permit with the applicable agency. The Planning Commission shall
review a copy of the application and may make written recommendation
to the applicable agency that the wetland use permit application has
been filed. The Planning Commission may request that such agency
hold a public hearing prior to making a determination on the wetland
use permit application, as provided for by Section 8 of the Goemaere-
Anderson Wetland Protection Act (Act 203, Public Acts of 1979, as
amended), being § 281.708 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. If the
Department of Natural Resources and/or the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers determine that the wetland is not under the jurisdiction of
these agencies, then the applicant shall be required to file a use
application with the Township. [Amended 8-25-2003 by Ord. No.
03-12]
G. If the use application is for a wetland which is regulated solely by the
Township, the applicant shall submit a complete application to the
Zoning Administrator. Upon receipt the Zoning Administrator shall
review the use application for completeness. Applicants shall be
notified in writing of any missing items. Following a determination that
a use application is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall specify
the number of copies to be submitted by the applicant. The application
shall be reviewed under the procedures of § 275-18. The Zoning
Administrator shall forward one copy of the use application to the
Department of Natural Resources.
§ 275-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-18
1:585
§ 275-18. Application review.
General review procedure for use permit applications regulated solely by
the Township:
A. At the request of the applicant, an administrative meeting may be held
to review the proposed activity in light of the purposes of this chapter.
B. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator shall
examine wetland mapping and may conduct or authorize the
completion of a field inspection to verify the accuracy of information
received. The receipt of a use application shall comprise permission
from the owner to complete a wetlands and drainageways inspection.
C. If a proposed project does not require Planning Commission review and
approval, such as single family residential site plans, bike paths, and
other similar projects as specified under Chapter 285, Zoning, or other
Township ordinances, the Township Zoning Administrator is
responsible for approval or disapproval of the use applications.
Applicants shall be notified in writing of the Township decision,
including reasons for denial of the use application, within 90 days of
filling a complete application meeting all of the requirements of
§ 275-17. The Zoning Administrator may forward any wetland use
permit application, which is part of a project being administratively
reviewed, to the Planning Commission for approval or disapproval.
D. If a proposed project requires Planning Commission review and
approval in accordance with Chapter 285, Zoning, Chapter 238,
Subdivision Control, or other Township ordinances, the Planning
Commission shall be responsible for reviewing the use application for
approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval.
(1) Applicants shall be notified in writing of the Township decision,
including reasons for denial of the use application, within 90 days
of filling a complete application meeting all of the requirements of
§ 275-17.
(2) In order to facilitate uniformity between the wetland use permit
approval and any site plan approval or final preliminary plat
recommendation to the Township Board, the applicant may
voluntarily delay the wetland use permit approval until such time
that the Planning Commission makes a final decision on the site
plan or plat. The concurrent approval of the wetland use permit
application and final Planning Commission action on the site plan
or plat is intended to ensure that the location, configuration and
extent of the wetland use permit conforms correctly to the final site
design for the site plan or plat as approved.
E. The Township shall notify the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources of the Township decision.
§ 275-18 GROSSE ILE CODE § 275-18
1:586
§ 275-19. Review standards and criteria.
In arriving at a determination with respect to a proposed wetlands and
drainageways use application, Township officials shall take into
consideration at least the following standards and criteria:
F. Prior to review of any use application by the Planning Commission,
notice shall be provided to adjacent property owners within 500 feet of
the subject parcel containing the wetland (including property directly
across public right-of-ways and easements). The notice shall identify
the location and proposed use of wetlands and drainageways, the time
and place at which the use application may be inspected, and the date,
time and place of any scheduled public meetings where the proposed
use application will be discussed.
G. Township administrative officials may coordinate field inspections and
assessments with state and federal agencies to the maximum feasible
extent.
H. Whenever a use application is approved, the reviewing authority
(Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission) shall:
(1) Attach any reasonable conditions considered necessary to ensure
that the intent of this chapter will be fulfilled, to minimize or
mitigate damage or impairment to, encroachment in or
interference with natural resources and processes within the
wetland district or drainageways, or to otherwise improve or
maintain the water quality. Any conditions related to impact
mitigation shall follow the provisions of § 275-20 of this chapter.
(2) Fix a reasonable time to complete the proposed activity.
(3) Require the applicant to file with the Township a cash or corporate
surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit in an amount, if any,
determined necessary by the Township to ensure compliance with
this chapter and conditions of the use approval, including any
mitigation and monitoring plan.
I. Final Township authorization to undertake any approved project in
wetlands and drainageways shall be contingent upon receipt of
evidence that required state and federal permits, if any, have been
obtained.
J. Any change in the size, scope, or use of a project site shall be
considered to be a new activity and shall require the filing of a new
wetlands and drainageways use application.
A. A permit shall be issued only if the proposed project or activity is clearly
in the public interest, and is otherwise lawful in all respects.
B. In determining whether the activity is in the public interest, the benefit
which would reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposal shall
§ 275-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-19
1:587
§ 275-20. Wetland mitigation.
be balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the
activity, taking into consideration the local, state and national concern
for the protection and preservation of natural resources from pollution,
impairment and/or destruction. An approval shall not be granted for
a project where the disruption to the aquatic resources is shown to
be unacceptable, when balanced against the public benefit that is
expected to accrue from the proposed activity. The following general
criteria shall be applied in undertaking this balancing test:
(1) The relative extent of the public and private need for the proposed
activity.
(2) The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations and
methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity,
including alternatives which are off-site or on other commercially
available properties.
(3) The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects
which the proposed activity may have on the public and private use
to which the area is suited, including the benefits the wetland
provides.
(4) The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the cumulative
effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the
watershed.
(5) The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic,
ecological, or recreational values and on the public health or fish or
wildlife.
(6) The size and quality of the wetland being considered.
(7) The amount and quality of remaining wetland in the area.
(8) Proximity to any waterway.
(9) Extent to which upland soil erosion adjacent to protected wetlands
or drainageways is controlled.
(10) Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed land
change to the general area.
(11) Findings of necessity for the proposed project which have been
made by other state or local agencies.
C. An approval shall not be granted unless the applicant also shows either
of the following:
(1) The proposed activity is primarily dependent upon being located in
the wetland; or
(2) A feasible and prudent alternative does not exist.
§ 275-19 GROSSE ILE CODE § 275-20
1:588
A. Prior to considering a proposal for wetland mitigation, the applicant
shall submit evidence that all of the following requirements have been
satisfied:
(1) That all feasible and prudent efforts have been made to avoid the
loss of wetland resource values.
(2) That all practical means have been considered to minimize impacts.
(3) That it is practical to replace the wetland resource values which
will be unavoidably eliminated.
B. If the reviewing authority (Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission) determines that it is practical to replace the wetland
resource values which will be unavoidably impacted, the following
criteria shall be considered when reviewing an applicant's mitigation
proposal:
(1) Mitigation shall be provided on-site where practical and beneficial
to the wetland resources. If mitigation on-site is not practical and
beneficial, mitigation in the immediate vicinity of the permitted
activity may be considered. In all cases, mitigation shall be
provided within the jurisdiction of Grosse Ile Township.
(2) Any proposal shall assure that, upon completion, there shall be no
net loss to the wetland resources.
(3) The proposal shall give consideration to replacement of the
predominant functional values lost within the impacted wetland.
(4) Any mitigation activity shall be completed before initiation of other
permitted activities, unless a phased concurrent schedule can be
agreed upon between the Township and the applicant.
(5) Monitoring to establish documentation of the functional
performance of the mitigation shall be required as permit
conditions, as well as necessary corrective actions required, to
deliver the wetland resource values identified. Monitoring shall be
conducted for a period of three to five years, as determined by the
Township reviewing authority (Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission), with written reports provided to the Township on an
annual basis. If wetland mitigation is not successful, as measured
by the establishment of wetland hydrologic conditions and
vegetation, then additional mitigation and monitoring may be
required by the Township.
(6) The applicant shall be required to post a performance bond with
the Township prior to undertaking any wetland activity approved
by the Township under this chapter. The Township shall refund the
performance bond to the applicant after the monitoring period is
successfully completed as described in Subsection B(5) above.
§ 275-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-20
1:589
§ 275-21. Appeal procedures.
C. If the reviewing authority (Zoning Administrator or Planning
Commission) determines that it is not practical to replace the wetland
resource values which will be unavoidably impacted, then the Township
may require other measures to ensure preservation or enhancement of
the natural ecosystems associated with the on-site wetlands to remain.
This may include the following:
(1) Restoration to a natural state of an area which is an ecologically
integral part of the on-site wetlands to remain; and/or
(2) Dedication of a preservation easement over an area which is an
ecologically integral part of the on-site wetlands to remain. This
shall be done to preserve the natural quality of these wetlands and
minimize additional wetland impacts.
D. Wetland impact mitigation and monitoring plans shall become
conditions of use approval.
E. All costs for preparing and carrying out mitigation and monitoring
plans shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
A. An applicant who is aggrieved by a decision of the designated official
concerning the use of wetlands and drainageways may appeal the
decision to the Planning Commission. In reviewing the appeal, the
Planning Commission shall determine whether the review criteria and
standards set forth in this chapter have been met. The Planning
Commission, based upon its appellate review, may reverse, affirm or
modify the approval granted by the Township administrative official.
B. An applicant who is aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Commission
concerning the use of wetlands and drainageways may make an appeal
to the Township Board.
C. All appeals must be filed, in writing, within seven days following the
decision. The issuance of a use approval shall be suspended pending the
outcome of the appeal.
D. Adjacent property owners shall be notified of the appeal and the date,
time and place at which the appeal will be considered.
E. The Township Board, based upon its appellate review, may reverse,
affirm or modify the approval granted by the Planning Commission. In
reviewing the appeal, the Township Board shall determine whether the
review criteria and standards set forth in this chapter have been met.
F. If an applicant who is aggrieved by a decision of Grosse Ile Township
concerning the use of wetlands and drainageways, and has exhausted
all appeals, the landowner may request a revaluation of the affected
property for assessment purposes to determine its fair market value
under the use restriction.
§ 275-20 GROSSE ILE CODE § 275-21
1:590
§ 275-22. Fees.
G. This chapter does not limit the right of a wetland owner to institute
proceedings in any circuit or the circuit court of the state against any
person when necessary to protect the wetland owner's rights.
A. With the filing of an application, a nonrefundable application fee shall
be paid to the Township, in an amount specified by resolution of the
Township Board, to cover Township administration and inspection costs
related to the use application.
B. An escrow fee shall be established in an amount determined by the
Township Board to pay for the estimated cost of consultant(s) who may
be retained by the Township to assist with the review of the
application.In the event that the cost of the consultant services is less
than the escrow fee, the applicant shall be refunded the balance. In the
event the cost of consultant services exceeds the amount of the escrow
fee, the applicant shall pay the deficiency to the Township prior to the
issuance of a use approval. A denial of an applicant for a use application
shall not affect the applicant's obligation to pay the escrow fee provided
for in this section.
§ 275-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-22
1:591

ARTICLE VI
Protection During Construction
§ 275-23. Maintenance of erosion control measures.
Maintenance of erosion control structures and measures, including but not
limited to silt fences, straw bale berms, and sediment traps, shall be the
responsibility of the landowner.
§ 275-24. On-site demarcation of protected wetlands and
drainageways.
Through staking or other means, the landowner shall identify the location
of protected wetlands and drainageways on the project site.
§ 275-25. Encroachment into wetlands.
Encroachment of equipment or earth-moving activities onto wetlands shall
be prohibited.
§ 275-26. Display of use approval certification; inspections.
A certificate or authorization for activities in protected wetlands and
drainageways shall be prominently displayed at the project site. The owner
shall display the certificate or authorization continuously while authorized
activities are conducted and for 10 days following completion. The owner
shall allow Township representatives to enter and inspect the premises
at any reasonable time, and failure to allow inspections shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
§ 275-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-26
1:593

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 275-27. Penalty.
§ 275-28. Separate offenses defined.
Each act of violation, and every day upon which any violation shall occur,
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 275-29. Injunction.
Any activity conducted in violation of this chapter is declared to be a
nuisance per se, and the Township may commence a civil suit in any court
of competent jurisdiction for an order abating or enjoining the violation.
§ 275-30. Restoration requirements for illegal wetlands alteration.
In the event of a violation involving illegal alteration of wetlands protected
under this chapter, the Township Zoning Administrator shall have the power
to order complete restoration of the wetland area by the person or agent
responsible for the violation. If such responsible person or agent does not
complete such restoration within a reasonable time following the order,
the Township shall have the authority to restore the affected wetlands to
their prior condition wherever possible, and the person or agent responsible
for the original violation shall be held liable to the Township for the cost
of restoration. Requirements and specifications for wetland restorations
ordered by the Township shall be coordinated with state and/or federal
agency requirements and specifications for wetland restoration, if any.
§ 275-31. Stop-work order.
The Township Zoning Administrator may issue a stop-work order or
withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, permits or inspections until
the provisions of this chapter, including any conditions attached to a use
approval, have been fully met.
§ 275-32. Other remedies available to Township.
The penalties provided for in this article shall not be exclusive and the
Township shall be entitled to seek any and all other remedies available at
law or in equity in connection with the violation of this chapter.
A. Unless a use approval has been granted by the Township, any of the
activities listed in § 275-13 of this chapter shall be considered a
violation.
B. Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1,
Article II, Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this
chapter. [Amended 7-22-2002]
§ 275-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 275-32
1:595
Chapter 278
WINTER EMERGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Violations Bureau — See Ch. 183.
Traffic and parking — See Ch. 251.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 261.
§ 278-1. Declaration of winter emergency; notification; duration.
[Amended 7-22-2002]
Whenever the Township Supervisor, Manager, Fire Chief/Police Chief, or
designee of the Fire Chief/Police Chief, finds, on the basis of falling snow,
sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the United States
Weather Bureau or other weather service, that weather conditions will
make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking
on streets within the Township be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing
and other purposes, then said official or his designee shall declare a winter
emergency and have this information broadcast by the local television
and/or radio stations for public broadcast, or by loudspeakers or other
broadcasting equipment, or by signs or personal notification. The winter
emergency shall remain in effect for all Township streets and areas so
designated within the Township for the period of time set by the Township
or until the particular street or area has become substantially clear of snow
and ice from curb to curb for the length of the entire block, whichever
occurs first.
§ 278-2. Parking restrictions.
§ 278-3. Posting of parking prohibitions.
Notice of the parking prohibition during a winter emergency shall be posted
by appropriate signs on the two major streets which lead into the Township,
and shall indicate that the prohibition applies to all streets within the
Township which are scheduled for snow removal in the Township.
A. Once a winter emergency is declared, parking shall be prohibited on all
streets within the Township and all Township municipal parking lots
and areas so designated under this chapter until the winter emergency
is terminated by announcement or until the particular street has
become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the
length of the entire block.
B. Any owner of a motor vehicle which is parked on any street within the
Township scheduled for snow removal during the winter emergency
shall be responsible for a civil infraction.
§ 275-32 GROSSE ILE CODE § 278-4
1:596
§ 278-4. Towing of vehicles.
Any motor vehicle which is parked or left abandoned on any street within
the Township or any Township owned parking lot in violation of this chapter
may, at the direction of any of the individuals authorized to declare a winter
emergency, be towed and impounded by the Police Department and no
person shall recover any such motor vehicle without first paying for the cost
of removal and storage. Any payments required by this section shall not be
construed as a penalty so as to preclude prosecution for the civil infraction.
§ 278-5. Closing of streets.
Whenever the Township Police Chief or his designee finds on the basis of
falling snow, sleet or freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the
United States Weather Bureau or other weather service of snow, sleet or
freezing rain that weather conditions will make it necessary that vehicular
traffic be prohibited on any street within the Township until said street may
be plowed, then the Police Chief or his designee may declare the closing
of the applicable streets and have this information broadcast by the local
television and/or radio stations for public broadcast, or by loudspeakers
or other broadcasting equipment, or by signs or personal notification. The
closing of the street shall remain in effect for the period of time declared
by the Police Chief or his designee or until the particular street or area has
become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length
of the entire block, which ever occurs first.
§ 278-6. Blowing, pushing or dumping snow into streets or public
sidewalks.
No person shall blow, push, or dump snow into any street or public sidewalk.
Any person who violates this section is responsible for municipal civil
infraction and is also responsible for all costs incurred by the Township to
remove the snow which the violator put onto the public sidewalk or street.
These costs incurred by the Township are in addition to any fine imposed
for said civil infraction.
§ 278-7. Curfew.
The Police Chief or his designee may declare a curfew for the Township of
Grosse Ile when as a result of the weather conditions a public emergency
within the Township exists or reasonable apprehension of an immediate
danger or when public safety is imperiled as a result of the weather
conditions. The curfew would cover the time period of 7:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m. and no person would be allowed on the Township streets except those
proceeding to and from work or answering emergency calls or who had
special permission from the Township or other governmental authority.
§ 278-8. Clearing of fire hydrants.
No person shall blow, push or dump snow onto a fire hydrant. Any person
who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and
§ 278-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-8
1:597
in addition, is responsible for the costs of removing the snow put on the fire
hydrant by the violator. The costs imposed under this chapter are in addition
to any fine the violator will be responsible for under the civil infraction.
§ 278-9. Clearing of fire lane.
Any property owner or person who occupies property that is open to the
public for business or public assembly is responsible to maintain a clearly
plowed fire lane on the their property so that it is accessible to fire trucks.
Any person or occupant or property owner who fails to comply with this
section will be responsible for any costs incurred by the Township during
any winter emergency to plow said fire lane. In the alternative, the Fire
Chief or his designee is authorized to close down any business or public
assembly if in his discretion it is necessary to do so during a winter
emergency because the fire trucks would not be able to have access to that
particular property in case of a fire.
§ 278-10. Penalty. [Amended 7-22-2002]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1, Article II,
Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this chapter.
Chapter 282
WOODLAND AND TREE PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Environmental assessment — See Ch. 98.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Zoning — See Ch. 285.
§ 282-1. Legislative findings.
A. The Township finds that growth and development resulting in increased
demand upon natural resources has had the effect of encroaching upon,
despoiling and/or eliminating many of the woodlands, trees, and
associated forms of vegetation. These resources, if preserved and
maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, provide air quality
protection, maintenance of water quality, reduction of flood surges and
soil erosion, and protection of vital wildlife habitat. In addition, these
resources provide important aesthetic, ecological, recreational and
economic benefits to existing and future residents of the Township and
must, therefore, be protected.
B. Specifically, the Township finds that:
(1) Trees and woodland systems protect public health through the
absorption of airborne pollutants and generation of oxygen,
§ 278-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 282-1
1:598
§ 282-2. Purposes.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the protection, preservation
and conservation of the Township's woodland systems, natural corridors,
heritage trees and protected trees by providing a planting and reforestation
and woodland acquisition program, and by managing and protecting the
following environmental qualities:
through the reduction of excessive noise and mental and physical
damage related to noise pollution, and through their cooling
properties in the summer months;
(2) Trees and woodland systems play an important role in the
absorption of nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, from
water as it passes from the surface to groundwater tables and
lower aquifers;
(3) Trees and woodland systems, through their root systems, stabilize
the soil and play an important and effective part in soil
conservation, erosion control, and flood control;
(4) Trees and woodland systems are essential components to the
general welfare of the Township, providing natural beauty, natural
character, recreational opportunities and wildlife habitat;
(5) Protecting this natural resource, and reproductive and
regenerative capabilities of trees and woodland systems maintains
this heritage for existing and future Township residents;
(6) The Township will benefit by instituting a woodland acquisition and
tree planting program to protect and replenish trees lost due to
development; and
(7) The protection of such natural resources is a matter of paramount
public concern, as provided by Article IV, Section 52, of the
Constitution of the State of Michigan and the Michigan
Environmental Protection Act of 1970, MCL § 691.1201 et seq.
A. Ecological. Provide for the protection, preservation, replacement, and
proper maintenance and use of woodland systems in order to maintain
ongoing natural processes such as water cycling, nutrient cycling, and
photosynthesis/transpiration; to minimize disturbance and structural
changes to vegetative cover; and to minimize damage from erosion,
siltation, windthrow and disease.
B. Forestry. Prohibit the unregulated cutting of trees or harvesting of
forest products within a woodland; to establish a permit process which
will regulate the cutting of trees and harvesting of forest products; and
to prescribe the review process for the issuance of tree cutting and
harvesting permits.
§ 282-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-2
1:599
§ 282-3. Definitions.
Terms not specifically defined in this chapter shall have the conventional
meaning. The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
BASAL AREA — The cross-sectional area of a tree trunk measured at 4 1/2
feet above the existing grade.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The area of the lot where a building may legally
be constructed. The building envelope is defined by the required front yard,
rear yard and side yard setbacks.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT — The area enclosed or to be enclosed by the
exterior walls of a building.
CONSTRUCTION ZONES — The exact size and placement of construction
zones will be determined by the Planning Commission or the Department of
Community Development during the permit process, but will include, at a
minimum, the following areas:
C. Aesthetic character. Protect the Township's woodland systems and
trees in order to maintain and improve their current and future visual
character, not only for residential areas and homesites, but also as
natural settings for development in all zoning districts.
D. Conservation. Protect the reproductive and regenerative capabilities of
all woodland systems to maintain plant and tree diversity; protect
groundwater recharge areas; maintain visual screening, windbreak,
dust collection and noise barrier characteristics exhibited by woodland
systems.
E. Wildlife habitats. Protect the existing woodland systems in the
Township in order to limit the loss of existing wildlife habitat, to
maximize the quality and quantity of woodland corridors available
across the Township, and to encourage habitats suitable for wildlife
communities.
F. Recreational use. Protect the natural environment of wooded areas in
order to provide recreational trail systems linked throughout the
Township for pedestrian hiking and other passive uses.
G. Rare species habitats. Protect individual trees which are known to be
rare within the southeastern area of the State of Michigan, or have
reached a certain age of maturity to be considered a landmark
specimen or which are known to represent historical value to the
community.
The building footprint(s) plus a maximum surrounding 25 feet and a
twenty-foot-wide utility driveway access for all principal building(s) on
the property. These areas shall total no more than 1/3 of the minimum
lot or parcel size defined in the underlying residential zoning. This
fraction is increased to 2/3 in R-1-C zoning.
A.
§ 282-2 GROSSE ILE CODE § 282-3
1:600
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (dbh) — The diameter in inches of a tree
measured at 4 1/2 feet above the existing grade.
DRIP LINE — An imaginary vertical line which extends downward from the
outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES TRUST FUND — A fund to be exclusively
used for activities associated with the acquisition of woodland systems, land
acquisition for reforesting, or planting of woodland systems and natural
corridors.
GRUBBING — The removal of understory vegetation, groundcover, shrubs
or trees on any area greater than 10,000 square feet. In those instances
when grubbing is permitted, it shall not include the removal of any trees
with a dbh of greater than six inches.
HERITAGE TREE — A heritage tree shall include any tree known to have
significance because of its size, location, and/or memorial or historic value
as designated by the Township or the state, not excluding other cognizant
authorities. The Natural Resources Committee or others as designated by
Board is responsible for providing a list and map of such trees to the
Township for Board approval.
IMPACT — The effect of operations on any area.
LAND CLEARING — Those operations where trees and vegetation are
removed. Operations may include locating, constructing, placing, inserting
or excavating materials such as soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, mud, debris or
refuse.
MICHIGAN BIG TREE — Swamp white oak, Honeylocust, Downy Hawthorn,
and all others registered by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
NATURAL CORRIDOR TREE — Any tree which is located within a natural
corridor identified on the Township Natural Corridor Map and described by
the Grosse Ile Natural Corridor Description.
OPERATIONS — The locating, moving or depositing of any material, or any
construction use or activity, or a combination thereof, which in any way
modifies the condition of land subject to this chapter.
Road rights-of-way, utility easements and areas as identified in
Subsection C.
B.
Designated areas that must incur regulated tree losses due to
engineering requirements such as infrastructure, but not limited to
utilities, swales, site grading, or other regulatory requirements.
C.
Designated areas defined in a building permit that must incur regulated
tree losses due to construction of secondary structures.
D.
For commercial, industrial and special land use developments, the area
necessary to provide the minimum number of parking spaces required
by other ordinances.
E.
§ 282-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-3
1:601
OWNER — Any person who has dominion over, control of, or title to any land
in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including governmental
agencies conducting operations within the Township, and all tree removal
companies and persons removing trees on behalf of self or others.
PROTECTED AREA — Area between the trunk of a regulated tree,
extending to the dripline of the tree canopy.
PROTECTED TREE — Any tree of six-inch dbh or greater.
PROTECTIVE BARRIER — A physical structure limiting access to a
protected area composed of tape or other suitable materials which ensures
compliance with the intent of this chapter.
REGULATED TREE(S) — Protected trees and heritage trees.
REMOVAL or REMOVE — The cutting, injury and/or destruction of trees or
any form of vegetation by any method on any lands subject to this chapter.
STRUCTURE — Any assembly of materials above or below the surface of
the land or water including, but not limited to, houses, buildings, bulkheads,
piers, docks, landings, dams, waterway obstructions, towers and utilities
TRANSPLANT — The digging up of a tree from one place on a property and
the planting of the same tree in another place on the same property or offsite
property approved by the Township.
TREE — A woody plant with an erect perennial trunk which at maturity is
13 feet or more in height and which has a more or less definite crown of
foliage.
TREE SURVEY — Registered survey which includes the identification of
regulated trees with a permanent tag or marker, a corresponding list of
common name and species, tree size and the location of all regulated trees
on a topographic plan drawing.
TREE WELL — A structure constructed of masonry, wood, metal or other
material approved by the Township that serves to protect the trunk and
roots of a tree from being covered by soil or other material. A tree well must
be constructed so as not to create a safety hazard..
WOODLAND — A forested area of 1/2 acre or more with a gross basal area
of 30 square feet per 1/2 acre and containing a minimum of 20 trees per 1/2
acre greater than six inches in dbh. The dripline of the trees define the area
of the woodland.
§ 282-4. Permit required; exceptions.
A tree removal/land clearing permit must be applied for and received from
the Township if performing activities as described under Subsection A of
this section.
A. A tree removal/land clearing permit shall be required for the following:
§ 282-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § 282-4
1:602
(1) The removal or destruction of any regulated tree.
(2) Land clearing or grubbing within a woodland.
(3) New and replacement infrastructure.
B. A tree removal/land clearing permit is not required:
(1) For actions made necessary by an emergency, such as tornado,
windstorm, flood, freeze or other natural disaster, in order to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property, and where it
would be contrary to the interest of the public, or to the health or
safety of one or more persons, to defer cutting pending submission
and processing of a permit application.
(2) Written notice must be given to the Township within five working
days prior to conducting these activities:
(a) Tree removal in order to perform maintenance or repair of
lawfully located roads, sewers, structures and facilities used in
the service of the public to provide transportation, electric,
gas, water, telephone, telecommunication, or other services on
existing easements.
(b) To remove dead trees where the damage resulted from an
accident or nonhuman cause.
(c) To remove dead, damaged or diseased trees.
(d) To thin woodland systems to foster growth of regulated trees.
(e) To remove up to two regulated trees in any twelve-month
period excluding Michigan Big Trees.
(f) To avoid damage of existing primary and secondary structures.
(g) The removal of trees within exempt construction zones.
C. The permit shall contain the name and address of the property owner
and/or the designee of the owner, the legal description and location of
the property, and a site plan showing all regulated trees within 30 feet,
or the lot line, whichever is less, of construction areas and identifying
those regulated trees that are proposed for removal.
D. A tree location diagram will be required prior to an on-site examination
made by the Township enforcement agent under the following
conditions:
(1) Where a permit is requested to remove trees on a lot upon which is
located an occupied one-family dwelling; or
(2) Where a permit is required to remove three or fewer trees.
E. Incomplete applications and/or tree replacement plans may not be
accepted or reviewed by the Township.
§ 282-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-4
1:603
§ 282-5. Review of plats.
F. Complete applications will be reviewed under the requirements
described in § 282-5.
G. Individual residential lots shall be reviewed by the Township staff
according to the requirements of § 282-5B.
A. Subdivision plats.
(1) Conceptual review. A person requesting conceptual approval of a
subdivision plat is required to submit a brief description regarding
the quality and predominance of trees by species. An aerial
photograph (one inch equals 50 feet) should also be provided
showing the general layout of the proposed subdivision. Conceptual
approval will be based on the person's ability to demonstrate intent
to avoid or minimize impacts to regulated trees.
(2) Pre-preliminary review.
(a) A person requesting pre-preliminary approval of a subdivision
plat is required to submit a tree survey indicating all trees 12
inches dbh or greater that are located in the following areas:
[1] All road rights-of-way and a thirty-foot zone on both sides.
[2] Utility easements and drainageways and a thirty-foot zone
on both sides.
[3] Other easements or areas to be cleared for any reason
during initial subdivision development.
(b) The person is also required to identify building envelopes for
each lot. A written statement describing how he/she intends to
conform with the replacement plan requirements of § 282-10
should be included. Approval will be based upon the person's
intent to comply with the requirements of § 282-10.
(3) Preliminary review. A person requesting preliminary approval of a
subdivision plat is required to submit a tree survey identifying all
regulated trees located in areas specified in Subsection A(2). The
proposed subdivision plat for all residential districts should also
identify all proposed site improvements. A detailed replacement
plan is required as defined by § 282-10. Approval will be based
upon compliance with § 282-10.
B. Site plan review.
(1) Preliminary site plan review.
(a) A person submitting a building permit application is required
to submit a tree survey indicating all regulated trees located on
the site that are proposed to be impacted by the development
§ 282-4 GROSSE ILE CODE § 282-5
1:604
§ 282-6. Provisions to be minimum requirements.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
adopted for the public health, safety and general welfare. It is not intended
by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere
with any existing provision of law or ordinance, or with any rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted or issued; provided, however,
that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by
existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
§ 282-7. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all property located within the Township and
shall include property in all zoning classifications.
§ 282-8. Penalty.
or by utility easements, including a thirty-foot zone or lot line,
whichever is less, surrounding the area to be developed.
(b) If the preliminary site plan identifies impacts to regulated
trees, the person must submit a statement explaining why
there are no prudent and feasible alternatives to the plan. If
the person fails to prove that no prudent and feasible
alternative exists, preliminary site plan approval will be denied
or tabled until the plan is modified to minimize or eliminate
impacts. If the person does prove that no prudent and feasible
alternative exists, then a written statement explaining the
person's intent to comply with requirements of § 282-10 shall
be submitted. The preliminary plan for all land use districts
should indicate all proposed site improvements. Approval of
the preliminary site plan shall be based on the person's intent
to avoid or minimize impacts and to comply with § 282-10.
(2) Final site plan review. A person requesting final site plan approval
is required to submit a detailed replacement plan as defined by
§ 282-10. Approval will be based on compliance with § 282-10.
A. Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of Chapter 1,
Article II, Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations of this
chapter. [Amended 7-22-2002]
B. Any activity conducted in violation of this chapter is declared to be a
nuisance per se, and the Township may commence a civil suit in any
court of competent jurisdiction for an order abating or enjoining the
violation.
C. If operations are conducted that are contrary to the use permit required
by this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances, the Township
§ 282-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-8
1:605
§ 282-9. Property inspection.
The Township designated enforcement agent may make reasonable entry
upon any lands or waters within the Township for the purpose of
enforcement of this chapter or for the conduct of any investigation, survey
or study pursuant to this chapter.
§ 282-10. Replacement plan requirements.
police or Department of Community Development shall issue an order
to the permit grantee to stop work. If a permit has not been issued,
then the Township shall notify the person of the violation of the permit,
this chapter or other applicable laws or ordinances. A person shall not
continue, nor cause or allow to be continued, activity in violation of
such an order, except with permission of the enforcing agency to abate
a dangerous condition or remove the violation, or except by court order.
If an order to stop is not obeyed, the enforcing agency may apply to
the Circuit Court for the county in which the premises are located
for an order enjoining the violation of the order, or may take other
measures as determined necessary by the Township. A person shall also
be required to replace trees removed without authorization by trees
equal in dbh to the total dbh of all removed trees. This remedy is in
addition to, and not in limitation of, any other remedy provided by law
or ordinance, and does not prevent criminal prosecution for failure to
obey the law.
D. Trees that are protected during construction, relocated or replaced will
be monitored by the Township for a period of no less than two years.
Trees which have not remained healthy as a result of activities
associated with approved operations, or trees that have died or been
subsequently removed, will be required to be replaced within 30 days of
notice from the Township, or at a seasonable time to be determined by
the Township. The person would also have the option to contribute to
the Environmental Resources Trust Fund in lieu of replacing the
affected tree(s).
E. Any person violating the provision of this chapter shall become liable to
the Township for any expense or loss or damage occasioned by the
Township by reason of such violation.
A. Tree relocation or replacement shall be at a rate defined in this section
provided that all replacement trees are of 2 1/2 inches dbh or greater.
(Replacement tree species shall be of similar species as those
removed.)
Type of Tree Removed Replacement Requirement
Heritage trees One tree per 4 inches dbh of tree removed
All other regulated trees One tree per 6 inches dbh of tree removed
§ 282-8 GROSSE ILE CODE § 282-10
1:606
§ 282-11. Tree protection during construction.
B. Environmental trust fund. In lieu of replacing regulated trees, the
person has the option to contribute money to the Township
Environmental Trust Fund. Payment to the fund per tree removed shall
be in accordance with the schedule below:
Type of Tree Removed Replacement Requirement
Heritage trees $300 per 4 inches dbh
All other regulated
trees
$300 per 6 inches dbh
C. Construction zones. Construction zones are exempt from tree
replacement requirements.
D. Tree removal. Residential lots are exempt from tree replacement
requirements when all of the following conditions are met:
(1) There is a certificate of occupancy for primary structure on the lot.
(2) Tree removal will occur only within the minimum lot area defined
as the closest allowable minimum area near the primary structure
in the underlying zoning district.
(3) Tree removal will occur only within a construction zone as
designated by the Department of Community Development for
accessory structures.
(4) Trees are not removed for sale of use off the lot.
(5) Trees are not removed from conservation easements, wetlands or
other restricted use areas.
(6) Two regulated trees per year may be removed annually by the
property owner on all other lot areas with no replacement
requirement. This specifically excludes harvesting for sale
purposes.
E. Heritage tree protection. Heritage trees shall not be removed unless
and until the person has demonstrated that no other practical options
exist. Replacement requirements will not be waived.
A. Before development, land clearing, filling or any operation commences
for which permission is required by this chapter, the developer or
builder shall be required to erect, for the protection of remaining trees,
barriers as approved by the Township. Such protection shall remain in
its approved location until such time as it is authorized to be removed
by the Township, or issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. During
construction, no attachments or wires shall be affixed to any trees so
protected. Wood, metal or other substantial material shall be utilized in
the construction of barriers. Barriers will be required for all trees being
protected, except in the following cases:
§ 282-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-11
1:607
§ 282-12. Variance and appeal procedures.
(1) Street right-of-way and utility easements may be ribboned off by
placing stakes a maximum of 50 feet apart and tying ribbon, plastic
tape, rope, etc., from stake to stake along the outside perimeters of
such areas to be cleared.
(2) Property areas separate from the construction or land clearing
area into which no equipment will venture shall be ribboned off as
above [Subsection A(1)].
B. Activity to be conducted within the drip line of any tree designated to be
retained, including, but not limited to, the placing of any solvents,
material or construction machinery within the drip line will be reviewed
on a case-by-case basis. Township approval of said activity will be made
within five working days and will be based upon degree of impact
anticipated. Clean soil may be placed within the drip line of a tree
designated to be retained providing that a tree well is constructed that
will keep soil at least six feet from the edge of the trunk of the tree. No
more that four inches of soil shall be permitted to be placed over the
roots of any tree designated to be retained within an area six feet from
the edge of the trunk of the tree.
A. A person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Department of
Community Development or Township police concerning any provision
of this chapter may appeal the decision to the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission may reverse, affirm or modify the approval
granted by the Department of Community Development or Township
police.
B. A person who is aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Commission
concerning any provision of this chapter may make an appeal to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. All appeals must be filed, in writing, within 30 days following the
decision.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals, based upon its appellate review, may
reverse, affirm or modify the decision made by the Planning
Commission.
E. Variances and appeals shall be granted only in accordance with:
(1) Compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions governing use
of the property for a permitted purpose or would render conformity
with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome. The showing of
mere inconvenience is insufficient to justify a variance or an
appeal.
(2) The requested variance or appeal can be granted in such fashion
that the spirit of the chapter will be observed and public safety and
welfare secured.
§ 282-11 GROSSE ILE CODE § 282-12
1:608
§ 282-13. Fees.
Administrative costs associated with processing of a building permit, or
in processing the subdivision plat or site plan submitted with a building
permit, shall be charged to the person per a fee schedule determined by the
Grosse Ile Township Board of Trustees.
Chapter 285
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 40.
Certificates of occupancy — See Ch. 59.
Condominium projects — See Ch. 71.
Downtown Development Authority — See Ch.
84.
Environmental assessment — See Ch. 98.
Fences and walls — See Ch. 103.
Flood control — See Ch. 116.
Grading — See Ch. 124.
Land use hearing notices — See Ch. 139.
Macomb Street landscaping — See Ch. 150.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 238.
Wetlands and drainageways — See Ch. 275.
Woodland and tree preservation — See Ch.
282.
PREAMBLE
Pursuant to the authority conferred by
Michigan Public Act 184 of 1943, as amended,
drafted and adopted for the purpose of
meeting the needs of the state's citizens for
food, fiber, energy and other natural
resources, places of residence, recreation,
industry, trade, service and other uses of land;
ensuring that use of land shall be situated
in appropriate locations and relationships;
limiting the inappropriate overcrowding of
land and congestion of population,
transportation systems, and other public
facilities; facilitating adequate and efficient
provision for transportation systems, sewage
disposal, water, energy, education, recreation
and other public service and facility
requirements; and promoting public health,
safety and welfare, now therefore, the
Township Board of Grosse Ile, Wayne County,
Michigan, hereby ordains:
(3) In deciding upon an appeal from an action taken by an
administrative official or body, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
determine if the administrative official or body has made an error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination in the
enforcement and/or interpretation of the chapter.
§ 282-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-13
1:609
ORDINANCE TITLE
An ordinance enacted under Michigan Public
Act 184 of 1943, as amended, governing the
unincorporated portions of the Township of
Grosse Ile, Wayne County, Michigan, to
regulate and restrict the location and use of
buildings, structures and land for trade,
industry, residential use, and for public and
semipublic or other specified uses; to regulate
and limit the height and bulk of buildings and
other structures; to regulate and to determine
the size of yards, courts, and open spaces; to
regulate and limit the density of population
and, for said purposes, to divide the Township
into districts and establish the boundaries
thereof; to provide for changes in the
regulations, restrictions, and boundaries of
such districts; to define certain terms used
herein; to provide for enforcement; to
establish a Zoning Board of Appeals; and to
impose penalties for violation of this
ordinance.
§ 282-13 GROSSE ILE CODE § 282-13
1:610
ARTICLE 1
Rules of Construction and Definitions
[Ord. No. 239, effective 8-31-1997]
285-1.1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Grosse
Ile Zoning Ordinance." Within the following text it may be referred to as the
"chapter."
285-1.2. Rules of construction.
A. The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter:
(1) The particular shall control the general.
(2) In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall
control.
(3) Words used in a singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly
indicates the contrary.
(4) The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The
word "may" is permissive, with the decision made by the Planning
Commission, Township Board, or Board of Zoning Appeals, as
indicated.
(5) The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
(6) All measurements shall be to the nearest integral number, except
density and lot measurements.
(7) The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for,"
"intended for" and "maintained for."
(8) The word "building" includes the word "structure." The word
"build" includes the words "erect" and "construct."
(9) The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association, or any other entity
recognizable as a "person" under the laws of Michigan.
(10) Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as defined herein.
Words or terms not herein defined shall have the meaning
customarily assigned to them.
B. Usage of conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the
contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions,
provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," or
"either/or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
285-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.2
1:611
285-1.3. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meaning ascribed to them:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."
ACCESSORY USE — See "use, accessory."
ADULT CARE FACILITY — Any structure constructed for residential
purposes that is licensed by the State of Michigan pursuant to Public Act
287 of 1972, Public Act 116 of 1973, or Public Act 218 of 1979. These acts
provide for the following types of residential structures:
ALTERATION — Any change, addition or modification to a structure or type
of occupancy, or any change in the structural members of a building, such
as walls or partitions, columns, or beams or girders.
ANIMAL, DOMESTICATED (PET) — An animal that is commonly considered
capable of being trained or is capable of adapting to living in a human
(1) "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions,
or events shall apply;
(2) "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events may apply singly or in any combination (i.e., "or" also means
"and/or");
(3) "Either/or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination.
ADULT FOSTER CARE FACILITY — A residential structure that is
licensed to provide room, board and supervised care, but not
continuous nursing care, for unrelated adults over the age of 17, in
accordance with Public Act 218 of 1979, as amended, and the Adult
Foster Care Administrative Rules as administered by the Michigan
Department of Social Services. The following four types of adult foster
care homes are provided for by these rules:
ADULT FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME — A residence for six or
fewer adults to be provided with room, board and supervised care.
Licensee must live in the home, and local zoning approval is not
required prior to issuance of a license. [Amended 7-22-2002]
(1)
ADULT FOSTER CARE SMALL GROUP HOME — Residence for 12
or fewer adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local
zoning approval is required prior to issuance of a license only if
seven or more residents will live in the house.
(2)
ADULT FOSTER CARE LARGE GROUP HOME — Residence for 13
to 20 adults. Licensee is not required to live in the home. Local
zoning approval is required prior to issuance of a license.
(3)
(4) CONGREGATE FACILITY — Residence for more than 20 adults.
A.
285-1.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:612
environment and being of use to human beings and which is not likely
to bite without provocation or cause death, maiming or illness to human
beings, including, by way of example, bird (caged), fish, rodent (bred,
such as a gerbil, rabbit, hamster or guinea pig), cat (domesticated), lizard
(nonpoisonous), and dog. Wild, vicious, or exotic animals shall not be
considered domesticated. Animals bred, raised or boarded for commercial
purposes are not considered pets.
ANIMAL, NONDOMESTICATED, VICIOUS OR EXOTIC — Any animal that
attacks, bites, or injures human beings or domesticated animals without
adequate provocation or which, because of temperament, conditioning, or
training, has a known propensity to attack, bite, or injure human beings or
domesticated animals, or an animal from a species which is not commonly
domesticated or kept as livestock, or which is not native to the State of
Michigan, or a species which, irrespective of geographic origin, is of wild
or predatory character, or which because of size, aggressive or vicious
characteristics would constitute an unreasonable danger to human life or
property if not kept, maintained or confined in a safe and secure manner,
including any hybrid animal that is part exotic animal.
APARTMENT — See "dwelling, multiple-family."
AUTOMOBILE, BOAT OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES (NEW AND
USED) — A building or premises used primarily for the sale of new and used
automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles and other motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE OR VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — An enclosed building
where the following services may be carried out: general repairs, engine
rebuilding, and reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision services, such
as frame or fender straightening and repair; painting and undercoating of
automobiles; and similar vehicle repair activities.
AUTOMOBILE OR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — A place where gasoline
or other vehicle engine fuel, kerosene, motor oil and lubricants, and grease
are sold directly to the public on the premises for the purpose of operation
of motor vehicles, including the sale of minor parts and accessories, and
snack food items commonly consumed by travelers (such as pop, candy,
packaged snacks and similar foods typically dispensed through a vending
machine). Service stations may also include incidental servicing of and
minor repair of motor vehicles within an enclosed building, such as tuneups,
lubrication, tire repair and replacement, and similar repair work involving
a minimum of noise, odors, or production of material wastes.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partially or totally below
grade but is so located that the vertical distance from the average grade
to the floor below is greater than the vertical distance from the average
grade to the ceiling. This definition shall not apply to earth-bermed or earthsheltered
holes. (See Figure 1.)
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:613
Figure 1
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — Any dwelling in which overnight
accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests for
compensation, including provision for a morning meal only for the overnight
guest. A bed-and-breakfast is distinguished from a motel in that a bedand-
breakfast establishment shall meet the location, design and operation
standards of Article 19.
BEDROOM — A room designed or used in whole or in part for sleeping
purposes.
BLOCK — The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the
two nearest intersecting streets, crossing or terminating; or between the
nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river
or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the
continuity of development.
BOARDING HOME — A residential building that is single-family residential
in character, which has been adapted to provide boarding rooms with or
without meals for compensation. A home utilized for the boarding and
care of persons with disabilities or requiring specialized care shall not be
considered a boarding home; such facility shall be considered an adult care
facility, which shall be licensed by the State of Michigan and subject to the
requirements applicable to that use.[Added by Ord. No. 302, effective
11-21-2001]
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Township Zoning Board of Appeals, created
pursuant to the provisions of Michigan Public Act 184 of 1943, as amended.
BOAT — A watercraft (including but not limited to any vessel, ship,
motorboat, sailboat, barge, scow, tugboat or rowboat) which is any one of
the following:
A. Greater than 16 feet in length;
B. Has a motor or engine of more than five horsepower;
C. Used for rental or other commercial purposes; or
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:614
BOAT CLUB/MARINA — A facility which extends into or over the Detroit
River, canal or waterways in the Township and provides docking for four or
more boats, or offers service to the public or members of the marina for
docking, storing and loading of boats. A boat club shall include a common
lot within a subdivision, a common area within a condominium or any other
parcel of land held in common by a subdivision, association, similar agency
or group of individuals which provides docking, storing and loading for four
or more recreational watercraft.
BOAT DOCK/WELL — The water area in which a boat lies when it is made
fast to shore installations.
BOATHOUSE — Any enclosed structure designed for the storage of boats
and marine equipment.
BOAT LIFT — A device referred to as a hoist, davits, etc., that may be used
to raise boats or cargo.
BOAT/PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A vessel that meets all of the following
requirements:
BOAT PIER — See "pier."
BOAT PORT — Any covered structure open on all sides designed for the
storage of boats and marine equipment.
BUILDABLE — Land which possesses physical conditions suitable for
construction, or which may be improved to make it suitable for
construction, subject to the restrictions of all applicable federal, state,
county and Township regulations.
BUILDING — Any structure which is affixed to the land, has one or more
floors and a roof, is bounded by either open area or the lot lines of a zoning
lot, and is used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
property of any kind.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building on the same lot with the principal
building or use, but the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the
principal building or use.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The area of a lot which is defined by the minimum
setback and spacing requirements within which building construction is
permitted by this chapter.
Registered or required to be registered with the Michigan Department
of State or documented by the United States Coast Guard.
D.
Uses a motor-driven propeller or an internal combustion engine
powering a water jet pump as its primary source of propulsion;
A.
Is designed without an open load carrying area that would retain water;
and
B.
Is designed to be operated by one or more persons positioned on, rather
than within, the confines of the hull.
C.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:615
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average grade around
the perimeter of the building to the highest point of the roof surface on a
flat roof, to the deckline for mansard roofs, and to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. (See Figure 2.)
Figure 2
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the face of the building, and, for the
purposes of this chapter, the building line shall be the same as the front
setback line as determined by the neighborhood setback line, but no less
than the required minimum setback in the zoning district. (See Figures 3
and 4.)
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:616
Figure 3
Figure 4
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building or, where the context so indicates, a
group of buildings which are permanently affixed to the land and which
are built, used, designed, or intended for the shelter or enclosure of the
principal use of the parcel.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:617
BUILDING/STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — A building or structure which is
not permanently affixed to the property and is permitted to exist for a
specific reason for a specific period of time. An example of a temporary
building is a trailer used on a construction site or a tent.
BULK — The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings
and structures and the location of the same with respect to one another,
including standards for:
BULKHEAD LINE — A line established by the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality with the concurrence of the Township of Grosse
Ile, pursuant to Michigan Public Act 346 of 1972, the Inland Lakes and
Streams Act, which line terminates the jurisdiction of the Township of
Grosse Ile waterward from the shoreline with regards to filling, dredging
and construction. (See Figure 5.)
Figure 5
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for burial of deceased
human beings and dedicated for such purposes. Columbariums, crematories
and mausoleums are excluded.
CHILD-CARE ORGANIZATION, STATE-LICENSED — A facility for the care
of children under 18 years of age, as licensed and regulated by the state
under Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of 1973 and Act No. 218 of the
A. The height and area of buildings;
The location of exterior walls in relation to lot lines, streets, and other
buildings;
B.
C. Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area;
D. Open space; and
E. The amount of lot area required for each dwelling unit.
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:618
Public Acts of 1979 and the associated rules promulgated by the State
Department of Social Services. Definitions for various care organizations
are listed below:
CHILD-CARE CENTER or DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility other than
a private residence, receiving more than six preschool or school age
children for group day care for periods of less than 24 hours a day,
and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to
the child. It includes a facility which provides care for not less than
two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per
day. The facility is generally described as a child-care center, day-care
center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play
group, or drop-in center. "Child-care center" or "day-care center" does
not include a Sunday school conducted by a religious institution or a
facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared
for during short periods of time while persons responsible for such
children are attending religious services.
A.
CHILD CARING INSTITUTION — A child-care facility which is
organized for the purpose of receiving minor children for care,
maintenance, and supervision, usually on a twenty-four-hour basis, in a
building maintained for that propose, and operates throughout the year.
It includes a maternity home for the care of unmarried mothers who are
minors, an agency group home, and institutions for mentally retarded
or emotionally disturbed minor children. It does not include hospitals,
nursing homes, boarding schools, or an adult foster care facility in
which a child has been placed.
B.
FOSTER FAMILY HOME — A private home in which at least one but not
more than four minor children, who are not related to an adult member
of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are given care and
supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or
more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
C.
FOSTER FAMILY GROUP HOME — A private home in which more than
four but fewer than seven children, who are not related to an adult
member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are provided
care for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more
consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
D.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A private home in which at least one but
fewer than seven minor children are received for care and supervision
for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal
guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family
by blood, marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to
an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.
[Amended 7-22-2002]
E.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A private home in which more than six
but not more than 12 children are given care and supervision for
periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal
F.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:619
CHURCH OR TEMPLE — Any structure wherein persons regularly assemble
for religious activity.
CLINIC, MEDICAL — See "medical clinic/center."
CLUB — An organization of persons for special purposes or for the
promulgation of sports, arts, science, agriculture, literature, politics, or
similar activities but not operated for profit.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS AND TOWERS —
Commercial radio and television, microwave, mobile phone, pager, public
utility, and other transmitting or relay antennas and towers operated for the
purposes of generating revenue.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL — See "school, commercial."
COMMERCIAL USE — The use of property in connection with the purchase,
sale, barter, display, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or personal
services and the maintenance or operation of offices.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle possessing commercial license
plates and which falls into one or more of the categories listed below:
COMMUNICATION ANTENNA — Accessory noncommercial radio wave
transmitting, relay or reception device, including radio, television, satellite
dishes and other accessory noncommercial antennas. The definition of
"communication antenna" shall include antennas that are accessory to a
commercial use where such antennas are not an essential part of that
guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by
blood, marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an
unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.
A. Truck tractor;
Semitrailer, which shall include flatbeds, stake beds, roll-off containers,
tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type enclosures;
B.
Vending trucks, such as ice cream, milk, bread, fruit or vending supply
trucks;
C.
D. Tow trucks;
E. Commercial hauling trucks;
F. Vehicle repair service trucks;
Service trucks such as pickup trucks or vans that are used in
conjunction with a repair or maintenance business, such as a plumbing,
electrical, or carpentry business;
G.
H. Snowplowing trucks;
Any vehicle with a commercial license plate having a gross vehicle
weight in excess of 10,000 pounds or a total length in excess of 22 feet.
I.
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:620
commercial activity (e.g., television, satellite dish at a restaurant). (Also see
"commercial communication antennas and towers.")
CONDOMINIUM — A system of separate ownership of individual units and/
or multiunit projects according to Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended. In
addition to the interest acquired in a particular unit, each unit owner is also
a tenant in common in the underlying fee and in the spaces and building
parts used in common by all the unit owners, such as yards, foundations,
basements, floors, walls, hallways, stairways, boat basins, elevators and all
other related common elements. (See Figure 6.)
Figure 6
CONDOMINIUM ACT — Michigan Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended.
CONDOMINIUM, CONTRACTIBLE — A condominium project from which
any portion of the submitted land or building may be withdrawn pursuant to
express provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with
the Grosse Ile Township Code of Ordinances and the Condominium Act.
CONDOMINIUM, CONVERSION — A condominium project containing units
some or all of which were occupied before the establishment of the
condominium project.
CONDOMINIUM, CONVERTIBLE AREA — A unit or a portion of the
common elements of the condominium project referred to in the
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:621
condominium documents within which additional condominium units or
general or limited common elements may be created pursuant to provisions
in the condominium documents and in accordance with this chapter and the
Condominium Act.
CONDOMINIUM, GENERAL COMMON ELEMENT — The common
elements other than the limited common elements intended for the common
use of all co-owners. (See Figure 6.)
CONDOMINIUM, LIMITED COMMON ELEMENT — A portion of the
common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of
fewer than all of the co-owners. (See Figure 6.)
CONDOMINIUM SETBACKS — Condominium setbacks shall be measured
as described below (see Figure 6):
CONDOMINIUM, SITE CONDOMINIUM PROJECT — A condominium
project designed to function in a similar manner or as an alternative to
a platted subdivision. A residential site condominium project shall be
considered as equivalent to a platted subdivision for purposes of regulation
in this chapter. (See Figure 6.)
CONDOMINIUM UNIT — The portion of the condominium project designed
and intended for separate ownership as described in the master deed,
regardless of whether it is intended for residential, office, industrial,
business, recreational, use as a time-share unit, or any other type of use.
CONDOMINIUM UNIT SITE (I.E. SITE CONDOMINIUM LOT) — The area
designating the perimeter within which the condominium unit must be built.
After construction of the condominium unit, the balance of the condominium
unit site shall become a limited common element. General common element
shall not be considered part of the site condominium lot. The term
"condominium unit site" shall be equivalent to the term "lot" for purposes
of determining compliance of a site condominium subdivision with the
FRONT YARD SETBACK — The distance between the public street
right-of-way or private road easement line and the foundation of the
unit site. Where there is no public right-of-way or access easement, the
front yard setback required in the district shall be measured from 15
feet from the nearest pavement edge to the foundation of the unit.
A.
SIDE YARD SETBACK — The distance between the side of a
condominium building unit and the side unit (lot) line. Where no unit
(lot) lines are provided, the distance between the closest points of two
units shall be double the side yard setback required in the zoning
district.
B.
REAR YARD SETBACK — The perimeter shall be the distance between
the limit of the development and the rear of the unit; within the
development rear yard setbacks shall be measured as the distance
between the rear building line and the rear site (lot) line, or, where lot
lines are not defined, the space between the rear building lines of two
buildings shall be double the rear yard setback required in the zoning
district.
C.
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:622
provisions of this chapter pertaining to minimum lot size, minimum lot
width, minimum lot coverage and maximum floor area ratio. (See Figure 6.)
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store that is designed and primarily
stocked to sell food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers
who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a
supermarket).[Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
CURB CUT — The entrance to or exit from a property provided for vehicular
traffic to or from a public or private thoroughfare.
DECK — An unroofed platform, commonly constructed of wood, which is
typically attached to a house and which is typically used for outdoor leisure
activities. (Also see "porch.")
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units situated on or to be developed
per net or gross acres of land. For purposes of calculating maximum density,
only 25% of the acreage determined to be wetlands protected by the
Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act, Public Act 203 of 1979, and/or
the Township of Grosse Ile shall be calculated toward the total site acreage.
All open bodies of water, land within the one-hundred-year floodplain, public
rights-of-way and areas within overhead utility line easements are excluded
from calculation. For individual lots, see "lot area."
DISTRICT — A portion of the Township of Grosse Ile within which, on a
uniform basis, certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and within
which certain yards, open spaces, lot areas, and other requirements are
established.
DOCK (BOAT WELL) — See "boat dock/well."
DRIVE-IN — A business establishment so designed that its operation
involves providing a service or a product to patrons while they are in a
parked car, rather than within a building.
DRIVE-THROUGH — A business establishment whose method of operation
involves the delivery of a service or product directly to a patron inside
a vehicle, typically through a service window or other appurtenance to a
building, where vehicles are queued within a stacking area or approach to
the service window or facility.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building designed for and occupied by
two or more families, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom
facilities for each. Examples of multiple-family dwellings include dwellings
commonly known as "apartments," "terrace dwellings," and "townhouses,"
which are defined as follows:
TOWNHOUSE — An attached dwelling unit with common walls, its
own front door which opens to the outdoors, and, typically, with its
own utility connections and front and rear yards. Townhouses are also
commonly known as "terrace dwellings" or "row houses."
A.
APARTMENT — An attached dwelling unit with common walls
contained in a building with other apartment units which are commonly
reached off of a common stair landing or walkway. Apartments are
B.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:623
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — An independent residential building
designed for and occupied by one family only. Single-family dwellings are
commonly the only principal use on a parcel or lot.
DWELLING UNIT — Any building, or part thereof, containing one or more
rooms, along with bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed as a selfcontained
unit for occupancy by one family for living, cooking, and sleeping
purposes, either continuously, permanently, temporarily, or transiently.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for the limited
use of private land for private, public or quasi-public purposes, such as for
franchised utilities, a conservation easement or an access easement for a
private road or service drive, and within which the owner of the property
shall not erect any permanent structures.
ERECTED — Any physical change on a site, including construction,
reconstruction, or alteration of buildings or structures thereon. Excavation,
fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered part of erection.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public or quasi-public franchised utilities or municipal
departments of underground, surface or overhead gas, steam, electrical,
fuel or water systems for the purposes of transmission, distribution,
collection, communication, supply, or disposal, including towers, poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police
call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment, which are
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or
municipal departments for the general health, safety, and welfare of the
public. "Essential services" shall not include buildings, storage yards,
cellular telephone towers, commercial antenna towers, air quality
monitoring stations, school bus parking yards, sales or business offices, or
commercial buildings or activities.
EXCAVATION — The removal or movement of soil, sand, stone, gravel, or fill
dirt except for common household gardening, farming, and general ground
care.
EXCEPTION — An exclusion from the normal rules and regulations of this
chapter for the purpose of permitting particular uses or structures which
are considered essential or appropriate in certain locations or under certain
conditions as may be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals. A variance
is not required for uses or structures which are permitted by an exception.
FAMILY — Either of the following:
typically rented by the occupants. Apartment buildings often may have
a central heating system and other central utility connections.
Apartments typically do not have their own yard space. Apartments are
also commonly known as "garden apartments" or "flats."
A domestic family which is one or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling; or
A.
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:624
FENCE — An unroofed structure of definite height and location constructed
of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal, or any other material or combination
of materials serving as a physical barrier, marker, or enclosure.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (I.E. TOTAL FLOOR AREA) — Gross floor area shall
constitute the total floor area occupied by a use and measured to include all
space used primarily or incidentally for such use.
FLOOR AREA, USABLE NONRESIDENTIAL — The sum of the horizontal
areas of each floor, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls,
including all areas used for or intended to be used for the sale of
merchandise, provision of services, or service to patrons, clients or
customers. Floor area which is used for or intended to be used for the
storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, or for utilities or sanitary
facilities shall be excluded from the computation of usable nonresidential
floor area.
FLOOR AREA, USABLE RESIDENTIAL — The sum of the horizontal areas of
each floor used for human occupancy as measured from the exterior faces
of the exterior walls or from the center line of common walls separating
two buildings. “Usable residential floor area” shall not include basements,
cellars, unenclosed porches or attics not used for human occupancy, or any
accessory floor space used for the vehicle parking or heating or ventilating
equipment.[Amended 8-30-2004 by Ord. No. 04-01]
FOSTER CARE HOME — See "adult care facility."
FOSTER CHILD — A child unrelated to a family by blood or adoption with
whom he or she lives for the purposes of care and/or education.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building for parking or storage of motor vehicles
owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory.
Private garages shall not have public repair facilities. A private garage may
be either attached to or detached from the principal structure.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — See "automobile or vehicle repair garage."
The functional equivalent of the domestic family which is persons living
together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and
distinct domestic character and is the functional equivalent of a
domestic family with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which
constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render the
domestic family a cohesive unit. All persons of the functional equivalent
of the domestic family must be cooking and otherwise operating as a
single housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society,
club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, or
group, coterie, or organization which is not a recognized religious
order, nor include a group of individuals whose association is temporary
and resort-seasonal in character. There shall be a rebuttable
presumption enforceable by the Zoning Administrator in the first
instance that the number of persons who may reside as a functional
equivalent family shall be limited to six.
B.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:625
GOLF COURSE OR COUNTRY CLUB — The premises upon which the game
of golf is played, including clubhouses, parking lots, swimming pools, tennis
courts, or other facilities or uses customarily incidental to a golf course or
country club.
GRADE — The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating
the number of stories or height of a building. The building grade shall be the
level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade
is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by
averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building.
GUEST HOUSE — An accessory building intended for temporary or periodic
use as an auxiliary sleeping facility but which does not have kitchen
facilities and is not permitted to be used as a permanent residence.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — See "building height."
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or profession conducted entirely
within a dwelling by the inhabitants thereof, where such use is clearly
incidental to the principal use of the dwelling as a residence and meets the
requirements of Article 19.
HOTEL OR MOTEL — A series of dwelling units located in one or more
buildings and designed primarily for overnight lodging by transients. Each
unit typically has a bedroom, bathroom, closet space, and a separate
entrance.
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY — An installation other than a hospital,
hotel, or nursing home, which provides room and board to nontransient
persons primarily 60 years of age or older. “Housing for the elderly” may
include the types of facilities listed below:[Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-01]
SENIOR APARTMENTS — Multiple-family dwelling units occupied by
persons 55 years of age or older.
A.
ELDERLY HOUSING COMPLEX — A building or group of buildings
containing dwellings where the occupancy is restricted to persons 60
years of age or older or couples where either the husband or wife is 70
years of age or older.
B.
CONGREGATE HOUSING — A type of semi-independent housing
facility for senior citizens containing congregate kitchen, dining, and
living areas, but with separate sleeping rooms. Such facilities typically
provide special support services, such as transportation and limited
medical care.
C.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES — A special combination of housing,
supportive services, personalized assistance and health care designed
to respond to the individual needs of senior citizens who need a wide
range of health and support services, including personal nursing care.
These facilities will have a central kitchen, dining, recreational, and
other services with separate bedrooms or living quarters, and are also
commonly referred to as “convalescent homes” or “nursing homes.”
D.
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:626
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Man-made material which covers the surface
of land and substantially reduces the infiltration of stormwater to a rate
of 5% or less. "Impervious surface" shall include pavement, buildings, and
structures.
JUNK — Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products or
merchandise with parts missing, or other scrap materials that are damaged,
deteriorated, or are in a condition which prevents their use for the purpose
for which the product was manufactured.
JUNKYARD — An area where waste and used or secondhand materials
are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including but not limited to junk, scrap iron, metals, paper, rags,
tires, bottles and automobiles.
KENNEL — Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs, cats, or other
domestic animals three months or older are kept, either permanently or
temporarily, either for sale, breeding, boarding, training, hobby, protection,
or pets.
LANDSCAPING — See Article 13.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET — An area that is safely and conveniently
located for pickups and deliveries, scaled to the delivery vehicles expected
to be used, and accessible to such delivery vehicles when required off-street
parking spaces are filled.
LOT (OR ZONING LOT OR PARCEL) — For the purposes of enforcing this
chapter, a lot is defined as a piece of land to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit under single ownership and control that is at least sufficient
in size to meet the minimum requirements for use, coverage, area, setbacks,
and open space as required herein. A lot shall have frontage on a dedicated
roadway or, if permitted by the regulations set forth herein, on a private
road. Where such a lot is divided by a public street or a private road, each
part of such lot shall meet minimum area requirements for the zone in
which it is located. A lot may consist of:
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot
exclusive of any abutting public street right-of-way or private road
easements, or the submerged area of any canal, river or pond (below the
shoreline or ordinary high water mark). The lot area shall be used in
determining compliance with minimum lot area standards. (See Figure 7.)
A. A single lot of record;
B. A portion of a lot of record;
C. A combination of complete lots of record, or portion thereof; or
D. A piece of land described by metes and bounds.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:627
Figure 7
LOT, CORNER — A lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut their full
length upon a street, provided that such two sides intersect at an angle of
not more than 135°. Where a lot is on a curve, if the tangents through the
extreme point of the street lines of such lot make an interior angle of not
more than 135°, it shall be considered a corner lot. In the case of a corner
lot with a curved street line, the corner is that point on the street lot line
nearest to the point of intersection of the tangents described above. For
purposes of this chapter, a corner lot is considered a double frontage lot.
(See Figure 8.)
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:628
Figure 8
LOT COVERAGE — The part or percent of the lot that is occupied by
buildings or structures. (See Figure 7.)
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured along the median between the side lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot which extends from one street to another
or from a street to the river or to a canal. (See Figure 8.)
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot. (See Figure 8.)
LOT LINES —
The lines bounding a lot as follows (see Figure 7):
FRONT LOT LINE — The line abutting a street. On a corner lot,
the shorter street line shall be considered the front lot line. On a
double frontage lot, the line that separates said lot from the street
which is designated on the plat as the front shall be considered the
front lot line. On a lot that abuts the river or canal, both the line
abutting the street and the shoreline shall be considered front lot
lines.
(1)
REAR LOT LINE — Ordinarily that lot line which is opposite and
most distant from the front lot line. On a corner lot or a lot that
abuts the river or canal and a street, the line opposite the shorter
front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line. In the case of lots
that are pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary
line parallel to the front lot line, not less than 10 feet in length,
lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.
(2)
A.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:629
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the County Register of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by
metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded and is
considered as such for tax purposes.
LOT SPLIT AND CONSOLIDATION — The dividing or uniting of lots of
record by virtue of changes in the deeds in the office of the County Register
of Deeds.
LOT WIDTH — The straight line distance between the side lot lines,
measured at the two points where the minimum building line, or setback
line, intersects the side lot lines. (See Figure 9.)
Figure 9
MANUFACTURED HOME — A dwelling unit which is designed for longterm
residential use and is wholly or substantially constructed at an off-site
location.
MARINA — See "boat club/marina."
MASTER PLAN OR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A document which is
adopted under the guidance of the Planning Commission in accordance
with the Michigan Township Planning Act (Public Act 168 of 1959, as
amended) and consists of graphic and written materials which indicate the
general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all physical
development of the Township.
MEDICAL CLINIC/CENTER — An establishment where human patients who
are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a
group of physicians, dentists or similar professionals.
(3) SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than the front or rear lot line.
In the case where the above definitions are not sufficient to designate
lot lines, the Zoning Administrator shall designate the front, rear and
side lot lines in consideration of the orientation of the building(s) on the
lot, the address of the lot, the orientation of other buildings along the
block, and natural features affecting site design.
B.
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:630
MEZZANINE — An intermediate floor in any story occupying more than 1/
3 of the floor area of such a story, but which extends over only part of the
main floor. (Also see "story.")
MINI-WAREHOUSE — A building which consists of several individual
storage units, each with a separate door and lock and which can be leased
on an individual basis.
MOBILE HOME — A structure that is designed or used for residential
occupancy, built upon or having a frame or chassis to which wheels may be
attached by which it may be moved upon a highway, whether or not such
structure actually has, at any given time, such wheels attached to it or is
jacked up or skirted.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which two or more
mobile homes, occupied for permanent residential purposes, are or may
be located in compliance with the Mobile Home Commission Rules and
Michigan Public Act 419 of 1976, as amended.
MOTEL — See "hotel."
MOTOR HOME — See "recreational vehicle."
NATURAL FEATURES — Include soils, wetlands, floodplains, water bodies
and channels, topography, trees and other types of vegetative cover, and
geologic formations.
NOISE — [Added 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-03]
AMBIENT NOISE — The amount of background noise at a given
location prior to the installation of a facility regulated by this chapter.
Ambient sound level is measured on the decibel [dB(A)] weighted scale.
There shall be two measurements for ambient sound level:
The statistical background sound level (L90) shall be the sound
pressure level that is exceeded 90% of the time by ambient
background noise.
(1)
The statistical high sound level (L10) shall be the sound pressure
level that is exceeded 10% of the time by ambient background
noise.
(2)
A.
DECIBEL dB(A) — The unit of measure used to express the magnitude
of sound pressure and sound intensity. The sound pressure level in
B.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:631
NUISANCE — Any offensive, annoying, or disturbing practice or object
which prevents the free use of one's property or which renders its ordinary
use or physical occupation uncomfortable. "Nuisance" commonly involves
continuous or recurrent acts which give offense to the senses, violate the
laws of decency, obstruct reasonable and comfortable use of property or
endanger life and health.
NURSERY, DAY NURSERY, NURSERY SCHOOL OR CHILD DAY-CARE
CENTER — See "child-care organization."
NURSERY, PLANT MATERIAL — A space, building, and/or structure, or
combination thereof, where live trees, shrubs, and other plants used for
gardening and landscaping are propagated, stored or offered for sale on the
premises.
NURSING HOME, CONVALESCENT HOME OR REST HOME — See
"housing for the elderly."
OPEN AIR BUSINESS — Business and commercial uses conducted solely
outside of any building unless otherwise specified herein. Examples of open
air businesses include:
OPEN SPACE — That part of a zoning lot, including but is not limited to
lawns, decorative planting, walkways, active and passive recreation areas,
playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, living plant materials, wetlands
and watercourses, courts or yards, which is open and unobstructed by
any built features from its lowest level to the sky and is accessible to all
residents upon the zoning lot. This area is intended to provide light and
air and is designed for environmental, scenic, or recreational purposes.
Open space may include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative plantings,
walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains,
swimming pools, living plant materials, wetlands and watercourses. Open
space shall not be deemed to include driveways, parking lots or other
surfaces designed or intended for vehicular travel. Refer to Article 10, O-1
Open Space District, for public open space.
decibels measured on the A scale of a standard sound level meter
having characteristics defined by the American National Standards
Institute, Publication ANSI S1.4-71.
Retail sales of garden supplies and equipment, including but not limited
to trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, trellises, and lawn
furniture;
A.
Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products, including fruits,
vegetables and Christmas trees.
B.
Various outdoor recreation uses, including but not limited to tennis
courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf,
golf driving ranges, and amusement parks.
C.
Outdoor display and sale of automobiles, recreational vehicles, garages,
swimming pools, playground equipment, and similar goods.
D.
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:632
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24
hours.
OUTLOT — A parcel of land which is designated as an "outlot" on the
recorded plat and which is usually not intended to be used for the same
purposes as other lots in the plat.
PARCEL — See "lot."
PARKING LOT — An area which provides vehicular parking spaces for
parking of more than two vehicles and includes drives and aisles for
maneuvering so as to provide safe and convenient access for entrance and
exit.
PARKING SPACE — An area of definite length and width designated for
parking an automobile or other vehicle and which is fully accessible for such
purposes.
PAWNSHOP — Any business that loans money on deposit or pledge of
personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed
evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal
property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again
at a stipulated price.[Added 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — See "boat/personal watercraft."
PET — See "animal, domesticated."
PIER — A structure extending outward from the shoreline for use as a
promenade or to secure and provide access to boats. (See Figure 5.) (Also
see "wharf.")
PILE, SPRING OR MOORING — A column of timber steel or concrete driven
into the ground below the water to tie off or otherwise moor a boat.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) — An existing development which
was approved under the planned unit development regulations prior to
discontinuance of the PUD regulations.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Township of
Grosse Ile, Wayne County, Michigan.
PORCH — A structure, attached to the ground, which serves as a covered
entrance to a building, commonly enclosed in part and not heated or air
conditioned. (Also see "deck.")
PRINCIPAL USE — See "use, principal."
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department,
or board duly authorized to furnish to the public under government
regulations any of the following: electricity, gas, steam, communication
services, transportation services, water, sewer service, or sewage
treatment.
RECOGNIZABLE AND SUBSTANTIAL BENEFIT — A clear benefit, both
to the ultimate users of the property in question and to the community,
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:633
which would reasonably be expected to accrue, taking into consideration
the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the proposed development and
uses. Such benefits may include long-term protection or preservation of
natural resources and natural features, historical features, or architectural
features, or elimination of or reduction in the degree of nonconformity of a
nonconforming use or structure.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Various types of recreational vehicles are
defined below:
RESALE AND CONSIGNMENT SHOP — A business that accepts previously
owned or used merchandise for purchase by others, not including a pawn
shop. Such business shall not include those selling vehicles, auto parts,
scrap or waste. Resale shall include the sale of goods directly acquired by
the shop. Consignment shall include those instances where the shop will
display goods for sale and provide agreed-upon payment to the original
seller upon sale of that item(s) to another party.[Added 9-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-03]
RESTAURANT — Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of
food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state and whose
method of operation is characteristic of a drive-in, drive-through, fast-food,
or full-service restaurant, or combination thereof, as defined below.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A portable vehicle on a chassis, which is designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreation, and
vacation, which may be identified as a "travel trailer" by the
manufacturer. Travel trailers generally include self-contained sanitary,
water, and electrical facilities.
A.
PICKUP CAMPER — A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup
or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use
as a temporary dwelling during the process of travel, recreation, and
vacation.
B.
MOTOR HOME — A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human
habitation, sleeping, and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels
and capable of being moved from place to place under its own power.
Motor homes generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
C.
FOLDING TENT TRAILER — A folding structure, mounted on wheels
and designed for travel and vacation use.
D.
BOATS and BOAT TRAILERS — Include boats, floats, rafts, and canoes,
plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway. (Also see
"boat.")
E.
OTHER RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Includes snowmobiles, jet
skis, all-terrain or special-terrain vehicles, and utility trailers, plus the
normal equipment used to transport them on the highway.
F.
A. RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — See "drive-in."
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:634
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The strip of land on which facilities such as roads,
highways or utilities are built.
ROAD — See "street."
ROADSIDE STAND — A temporary or permanent building operated for
the purpose of seasonally selling produce raised or produced on the same
premises by the proprietor of the stand.
SCHOOL — A public, parochial, or private elementary, intermediate, and/or
high school offering courses in general education.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL — A privately owned establishment offering
specialized training for profit, such as art, dance, music, theater, ballet and
martial arts.
SCHOOL, NURSERY — See "nursery, day nursery, nursery school or child
day-care center."
SERVICE TRUCK — See "commercial vehicle."
SETBACK — The distance between a front, side or rear lot line and the
nearest supporting member of a structure on the lot. Setbacks from a
public street or private road shall be measured from the right-of-way line
or easement. The minimum setback requirement is the minimum distance
between a front, side or rear lot line and the nearest supporting member
of a structure in order to conform to the required setback provisions of this
chapter. (See Figure 7.)
SHOPPING CENTER — A grouping of two or more business establishments
developed in accordance with an overall plan and designed and built as an
interrelated project.
SHORELINE, ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK — The line between upland
and bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels,
below which the presence and action of the water is so common or
recurrent that the character of the land is marked distinctly from the upland
and is apparent in the soil, the configuration of the soil surface and the
vegetation.
SIGN — The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs,
trademarks, or combination thereof visible to the general public and
designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises
B. RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — See "drive-through."
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A restaurant whose method of operation
involves minimum waiting for delivery of the prepared food to the
customer at a counter or cafeteria line for consumption at the counter
where it is served, or at tables, booths, or stands inside the structure or
out, but not in a motor vehicle at the site.
C.
RESTAURANT, FULL-SERVICE — A restaurant whose method of
operation involves the delivery of the prepared food by waiters and
waitresses to customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed
building.
D.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:635
on which the sign is located. Various types of signs and sign-related terms
are defined as follows:
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign which uses lights, moving parts, or other
means to depict a creature or being as living or having life.
A.
BANNER SIGN — A sign produced on cloth, paper, fabric or similar
material, either with or without frames.
B.
FESTOON SIGN — A sign consisting of a wreath or garland of flowers,
leaves, paper or other material hanging in a loop or curve.
C.
D. FLAG — See "banner sign."
FREESTANDING OR GROUND SIGN — A sign which is erected upon
or supported by the ground, including signs on poles or pylons that are
anchored in the ground.
E.
GASOLINE PRICE SIGN — Any sign more than two square feet in
area which is used to advertise the price of gasoline. In the event
that the brand identification sign is attached to or a part of the sign
advertising price, that portion of the sign used for advertising price
shall be considered the gasoline price sign.
F.
MARQUEE — A roof-like structure or awning projecting over an
entrance, such as to a theater.
G.
MONOLITH SIGN — A three-dimensional, self-supporting, basemounted,
freestanding sign consisting of two or more sides extending
up from the base and upon which a message is painted or posted. A
monolith sign may also consist of a base-mounted cylindrical structure
upon which a message is painted or posted.
H.
OBSOLETE SIGN — A sign that advertises a product that is no longer
made, an event that has past, or a business that has closed.
I.
OUTLINE TUBING SIGN — A sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with
a gas such as neon, which glows when electric current is sent through
it.
J.
PENNANT SIGN — A sign or display consisting of long, narrow, usually
triangular flags.
K.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign which is not permanently affixed to a
building face or to a pole, pylon, or other support that is permanently
anchored in the ground. Portable signs are capable of being readily
moved from one location to another.
L.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign so constructed and erected as to be
attached at one end to a building, metal pole or other structure from
which it projects and unattached on the other end.
M.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign used to indicate that a parcel of property
or building is for sale, lease, or rent.
N.
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:636
SITE PLAN — A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with
complete dimensions the boundaries of a site and the location of all
buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development features
proposed for a specific parcel of land and conforming to the standards of
this chapter. (See Article 21.)
SPECIAL LAND USE — A use, either public or private, which possesses
unique characteristics and therefore cannot be properly classified as a
permitted use in a particular zoning district or districts. After due
consideration of the impact of each such proposed use upon the neighboring
land and of the public need for the particular use at the proposed location,
such special land use may or may not be permitted by the Planning
Commission, subject to the terms of this chapter. (See Article 22.)
STABLE, PRIVATE — An enclosed area intended for the keeping of horses
for the noncommercial use of the residents of the principal residential use
on the site.
STATE-LICENSED FACILITY — See "adult care facility."
STORAGE — Objects, materials, vehicles and boats which are kept in the
same place for over 72 hours.
STORY — That portion of a building, other than a basement or mezzanine as
defined herein, included between the surface of any floor and the floor next
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon and structurally supported by the
roof of a building.
O.
SANDWICH SIGN — A sign consisting of two advertising boards laid
back-to-back and at least partially supported by each other.
P.
SPINNERS — A sign or display consisting of paper, plastic, or other
parts that spin.
Q.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is intended to be erected only a
few days or weeks, including portable signs, trailer signs, banners,
pennants, or any other sign which is not permanently affixed to a
building face or to a pole, pylon, or other support that is permanently
anchored on the ground.
R.
TRAILER SIGN — A sign that is mounted on a frame with wheels and
is capable of being pulled by a vehicle or by hand. For the purposes of
this chapter, trailer signs shall be considered portable signs.
S.
WALL SIGN — A sign which is attached to, affixed to, placed upon,
or painted upon any exterior wall or surface of any building, building
structure, or part thereof, provided that no part of any such sign
extends more than 12 inches from the face of the exterior wall. For the
purposes of this chapter, signs attached to the face of a mansard roof
shall be considered wall signs.
T.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign located in or on a window and visible to the
general public from the exterior.
U.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:637
above it or, if there is not a floor above, then the ceiling above. A mezzanine
shall be deemed a full story when it covers more than 50% of the area of the
story underneath said mezzanine or if the vertical distance from the floor
next below the mezzanine to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more.
STORY, HALF — The uppermost story lying under a pitched roof, the usable
floor area of which does not exceed 2/3 of the floor area of the uppermost
full story. (See Figure 1.)
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way, other than a
public or private alley, dedicated to or designed for travel and access to
any land, lot or parcel, whether designated as a road, avenue, highway,
boulevard, drive, lane, place, court, or any similar designation. Various
types of roads are defined below.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ARTERIAL STREET OR ROADWAY — A street or roadway which carries
high volumes of traffic at relatively high speeds and serves as an avenue
for circulation of traffic onto, off of, or around Grosse Ile Township.
An arterial road may also be defined as a major thoroughfare, major
arterial or minor arterial. Since the primary function of the arterial is
to provide mobility, access to adjacent land uses may be controlled to
optimize capacity along the roadway.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street or road whose principal function is
to carry traffic between minor and local roads and arterial roads but
which may also provide direct access to abutting properties.
B.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street or road that terminates in a vehicular
turnaround.
C.
LOCAL OR MINOR STREET — A street or road whose principal function
is to provide access to abutting properties and which is designed to
be used or is used to connect minor and local roads with collector or
arterial roads. Local streets are designed for low volumes and speeds
of 25 miles per hour or less, with numerous curb cuts and on-street
parking permitted.
D.
PRIVATE ROAD — Any road which is to be privately maintained and
has not been accepted for maintenance by Wayne County, the State of
Michigan or the federal government but which meets the requirements
of this chapter or has been approved as a private road by the Township
under any prior ordinance.
E.
PUBLIC STREET — Any road or portion of a road which has been
dedicated to and accepted for maintenance by the Township, Wayne
County, State of Michigan or the federal government.
F.
ALLEY — A dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access
to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on
another street and not intended for general traffic circulation.
G.
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:638
ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, principal and accessory
buildings, swimming pools, signs, waterfront structures, fences, decks,
terraces, dog runs, and tennis and basketball courts.
SUBDIVISION PLAT — The division of land in accordance with the
Subdivision Plat Act, Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended.
SWIMMING POOL — Any permanent, nonportable structure or container,
located either above or below grade, designed to allow holding of water
to a depth of greater than 24 inches, intended for swimming, bathing
or relaxation. The definition of "swimming pool" includes spas, hot tubs
and similar devices. A swimming pool shall be considered an accessory
structure for purposes of computing lot coverage. (See Chapter 241,
Swimming Pools, of the Municipal Code.)
TEMPORARY BUILDING — See "building/structure, temporary."
TEMPORARY USE — See "use, temporary."
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Grosse Ile, Wayne County, Michigan.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Township of Grosse Ile,
Wayne County, Michigan.
USE — The purpose for which land or premises or a building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied, maintained, let
or leased.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found
in connection with, and located on the same zoning lot as the principal use
to which it is related.
USE, PERMITTED — A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts provided it conforms to all requirements, regulations,
and standards of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The principal purpose for which land or a building is
arranged, designed or intended or for which land or a building is or may be
occupied.
USE, SPECIAL LAND — See "special land use."
USE, TEMPORARY — A use which is not permanent to the property and is
permitted to exist for a specific reason for a specific period of time.
UTILITY TRAILER — A small trailer that is designed to be pulled by an
automobile, van, or pickup truck.
VARIANCE — A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter granted
when strict enforcement of this chapter would cause undue hardship owing
to circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is
granted.
VIDEO ARCADE — The use of a building or a portion of a building for the
location, operation, and placement of five or more mechanical amusement
devices. "Mechanical amusement device" shall mean any device, apparatus,
mechanical equipment or machine operated as amusement for required
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:639
compensation. The term does not include vending machines used to
dispense foodstuffs, toys, or other products for use and consumption.
WASTE RECEPTACLE (I.E. DUMPSTER) — Any accessory exterior
container used for the temporary storage of rubbish, pending collection,
having a capacity of at least one cubic yard. Recycling stations and exterior
compactors shall be considered to be waste receptacles.
WATERCRAFT — See "boat."
WHARF — A structure parallel to the shoreline. (See Figure 5.)
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) — [Added 6-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-03]
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS) — A combination of:
A surface area, either variable or fixed, for utilizing the wind for
electrical power; and
(1)
A shaft, gearing, belt, or coupling utilized to convert the rotation
of the surface area into a form suitable for driving a generator,
alternator, or other electricity-producing device; and
(2)
The generator, alternator, or other device to convert the
mechanical energy of the surface area into electrical energy; and
(3)
The tower upon which any, all, or some combination of the above
are mounted.
(4)
Other components not listed above but associated with the normal
construction, operation, and maintenance of a WECS.
(5)
(6) WECS include horizontal, and vertical axis wind turbines.
A.
HORIZONTAL AXIS WECS — A WECS which converts wind energy
into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator with a
horizontal axis of rotation. This type of WECS is directional in that it
achieves optimal energy production while pointed into or away from the
direction of the wind.
B.
285-1.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-1.3
1:640
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted in
this chapter. The measure of yard is the minimum horizontal distance
between the lot line or water's edge and the building or structure. (See
Figure 7.)
VERTICAL AXIS WECS — A WECS which converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator with a vertical
axis of rotation. This type of WECS is not directional in that it does not
need to be pointed into or away from the direction of the wind in order
to achieve optimal energy production.
C.
WECS HEIGHT — The distance between the ground (at normal grade)
and the highest point of the WECS (being the tip of the blade, when the
blade is in the full vertical position or the top of the pole, whichever is
higher).
D.
WECS SURVIVAL WIND SPEED — The maximum wind speed, as
designated by the WECS manufacturer, at which a WECS in unattended
operation (not necessarily producing power) is designed to survive
without damage to any structural equipment or loss of the ability to
function normally.
E.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front
lot line or water's edge and the nearest line of the principal building.
A.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the
rear lot line and the nearest line of the principal building.
B.
YARD, SIDE — An open space between a principal building and the side
lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of
which shall be the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the side
lot line to the nearest point on the principal building.
C.
285-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-1.3
1:641

ARTICLE 2
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
[Ord. No. 286, effective 4-16-2000; Ord. No. 292, effective
9-24-2000]
285-2.1. Creation of districts; Zoning Map; interpretation of district
boundaries. [Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
A. Creation of districts. For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of
Grosse Ile is hereby divided into the following zoning districts which
shall be known by the following names and symbols:
R-1-A Single-Family Residential District
R-1-B Single-Family Residential District
R-1-C Single-Family Residential District
R-1-D Single-Family Residential District
R-1-E Single-Family Residential Overlay District
R-1-F Hickory Island Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Low-Density Multiple-Family Residential District
R-3 Medium-Density Multiple-Family Residential District
R-4 Mobile Home Park District
C-1 Convenience Commercial District
MSD Macomb Street District
SE Special Environmental District
A-1 Airport and Light Industrial District
O-1 Open Space District
PRD Public Recreation District
B. Adoption of Zoning Map. The boundaries of these districts, shown upon
the map designated as the "Official Zoning Map" on file in the Township
Clerk's office, are hereby established and are incorporated in this
chapter by reference and made a part thereof, and the map and all
notations referenced and other information shown on said map shall be
as much a part of this chapter as if the matters and information set forth
were fully contained herein.
C. Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries of districts shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules
shall apply:
(1) The boundaries of zoning districts are intended to follow center
lines, streets or other rights-of-way, watercourses, and lot lines, or
be parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless otherwise clearly
indicated on the Zoning Map.
285-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-2.1
1:643
285-2.2. Zoning of vacated areas.
Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is hereafter vacated, such
street, alley, or public way shall automatically and without further action of
the Township Board be classified in the same zoning district and be subject
to the same zoning regulations as the property to which it adjoins and
becomes attached.
285-2.3. Conformity with district regulations required.
No structure or tract of land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered or moved, except in
conformity with the regulations specified herein for the zoning district in
which the structure or land is located.
285-2.4. Amendment of district boundaries.
The Township Board may from time to time, on recommendation from the
Planning Commission, amend or change the district boundaries, pursuant to
the authority and procedures set forth in Michigan Public Act 184 of 1943,
as amended, and the procedures and standards of Article 23, Variances and
Amendments.
(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the boundary
lines of lots of record shall be construed as following such lot lines.
(3) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines and, in the event of change in the shoreline,
shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
(4) Where, due to the scale, lack of details, or illegibility of the Zoning
Map, there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the
intended location of district boundaries shown thereon,
interpretation concerning the exact location of district boundary
lines shall be determined upon written application, or upon its own
motion, by the Zoning Board of Appeals, after recommendation by
the Planning Commission.
D. R-1-E Single-Family Overlay District. The R-1-E Single-Family
Residential Overlay Zoning District shall apply to all land areas of the
Township that are zoned R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C and R-1-D single-family
residential. All land areas located within the Overlay Zoning District
shall be subject to the provisions of this district as specified in Article 3,
Single-Family Residential Districts.
285-2.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-2.4
1:644
ARTICLE 3
Single-Family Residential Districts
[Ord. No. 209, effective 9-25-1994; amended by Ord. No. 225.5,
effective 2-12-1996; Ord. No. 258, effective 4-18-1999; Ord. No. 271,
effective 8-29-1999; Ord. No. 286, effective 7-16-2000; Ord. No. 292,
effective 9-24-2000; 7-22-2002; 11-11-2002 by Ord. No. 02-07;
1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 03-01; 1-13-2003 by Ord. No. 03-01.5;
8-30-2004 by Ord. No. 04-01; 7-24-2006 by Ord. No. 06-06;
7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-02]]
285-3.1. Intent.
The regulations concerning single-family residential districts provide for
a residential environment consisting of predominantly low-density, singlefamily
dwelling units, with a limited range of other uses that are considered
necessary or appropriate to enhance the quality of life within Grosse Ile's
residential neighborhoods. More specifically, the regulations set forth
herein are intended to:
A. Provide a high-quality residential living environment which encourages
safety and enhancement of property values;
B. Protect open areas, shorelines, woodlands, wetlands, and other
distinctive natural features that contribute to the overall quality of life
on Grosse Ile;
C. Ensure development is in accordance with the availability of public
utilities, facilities, and services;
D. Prevent overcrowding by establishing standards for density, minimum
lot sizes and minimum yard dimensions;
E. Protect residential areas by promoting traffic volumes and speeds
consistent with the neighborhood character based on a hierarchy of
street functional classification;
F. Discourage development which is inconsistent with the quality and
design of existing residential neighborhoods;
G. Accommodate care facilities that are single-family residential in
character while avoiding an excessive concentration of these facilities
within the single-family residential districts; and
H. Ensure infill development is consistent with the character of
established neighborhoods, is compatible with the size, scale, setback,
and architectural character of surrounding homes, does not overbuild
small lots, minimizes impacts to views, privacy, and access to sunlight
and contributes to the distinct, cohesive character in the various
neighborhoods, which are significant factors in the Township's quality
of life.
285-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.2
1:645
285-3.2. Residential districts established.
In consideration of the above intent, six single-family residential districts
have been established as follows:
285-3.3. Permitted uses.
In the single-family residential districts, no building shall be erected and
no building or land shall be used except for the following uses, unless
otherwise permitted in this chapter, or by state or federal law, subject to the
standards and requirements set forth herein:
A. R-1-A Single-Family District: includes standards which recognize the
unique characteristics along the shoreline through requirements for
larger lots and special measurements of setbacks to preserve views and
open space, and accommodates the lowest density development on
primarily waterfront property.
B. R-1-B Single-Family District: includes standards which regulate
development in most developed residential areas in the Township,
including most existing single-family subdivisions.
C. R-1-C Single-Family District: addresses special considerations in the
existing small lot subdivisions within the Township. No additional R-1-C
is considered appropriate on Grosse Ile due to overcrowding, demand
on public services and the environmental impact which would result
from additional development at this density.
D. R-1-D Single-Family District: accommodates low-density development.
E. R-1-E Single-Family Overlay District: is designed to permit maintenance
of the existing smaller lots within the R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C and R-1-D
Districts, while ensuring that newly created lots or buildable sites shall
be developed at a larger lot size that is necessary to protect the public
health safety and welfare that would be otherwise impacted by higherdensity
development. This overlay district is intended to allow further
development while limiting density to a level that is within the capacity
of the Township's roadways, schools, water, sewer, storm drainage, and
other public services. It is further the intent of this district to limit the
impact that new development will have on the natural features of the
island.
F. R-1-F Hickory Island Single-Family District: reflects the unique
characteristics of the historic development of Lower Hickory Island.
This island was platted in 1905 with smaller lots and predates the
enactment of the first zoning ordinance. This island has been largely
built-out in a pattern that is unique from most other areas of Grosse Ile.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling units meeting the residential
design standards of § 285-3.4E. Single-family subdivisions and site
285-3.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.3
1:646
condominium projects must also comply with Municipal Code
requirements including Chapter 238, Subdivision Control, and
Chapter 71, Condominium Projects, as appropriate.
(2) Essential services not including buildings or storage yards, when
operating requirements necessitate their location within the
district to serve the immediate vicinity as determined by the
Planning Commission.
(3) Land designated as public parks public open space, bike paths and
lands designated for preservation as part of the natural drainage
system.
(4) State-licensed adult foster care family home in a single-family
residence (six or fewer adults).
(5) State-licensed adult foster care family home in a single-family
residence (six or fewer adults; foster care five or more days per
week).
(6) Family day care (one to six children, less than 24 hours' care).
(7) Foster family home (one to four children, 24 hours' care).
B. Accessory uses, buildings and structures. The following accessory uses,
buildings and structures customarily incidental to any of the principal
uses, when located on the same parcel and not involving any business,
profession, or trade, except as provided for herein, shall be permitted,
subject to the provisions set forth in Article 19, General Provisions.
(1) A garage designed and used for the storage of vehicles owned and
customarily used as part of a residential lifestyle by the occupants.
[Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
(2) A private stable, subject to the conditions contained in Chapter
130, Horses, of the Municipal Code.
(3) A private swimming pool, subject to conditions contained in
Chapter 241, Swimming Pools, of the Municipal Code.
(4) Off-street parking and storage shall be permitted on lots with a
principal structure as follows:
(a) One recreational vehicle, small utility trailer or truck with a
maximum capacity of one ton shall be permitted, subject to the
following:
[1] Such vehicle shall be the property of the occupant, have a
current year's license, and be stored within a garage or in
the nonrequired side or nonrequired rear yards for
accessory buildings (i.e., not within required accessory
building setbacks) when not in use.
285-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.3
1:647
[2] There shall be no parking of recreational vehicles and
commercial vehicles over one ton within a public street
right-of-way or private road access easement for a period
of time exceeding four hours in any given day, except as
provided for in Subsection B(4)(a)[4] below.
[3] A stored, parked or placed recreational vehicle may only
be occupied or used for living purposes for a total of one
week during any one calendar year. Occupancy of a
recreational vehicle may only be permitted if the occupant
of the recreational vehicle is the occupant of such lot or
permanent residence, or a relative of the occupant of such
lot or permanent residence, and the recreational vehicle is
parked in such a manner that it complies with all other
parking ordinances and regulations in effect at that
location. At no time shall any such recreational vehicle
have connections to water, gas or a sanitary sewer.
[4] Commercial vehicles over one ton parked on the site are
permitted only in conjunction with a valid building permit.
(b) Boats shall be permitted, provided that they are the property of
the occupant with current license. Any such boat shall be
stored in a garage or in the nonrequired side or rear yard (i.e.;
not within the required setbacks) and on a trailer.
(c) Operable passenger vehicles owned by the occupant and
licensed for the current year shall be permitted.
(5) Waterfront uses shall be permitted in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Article 17, Waterfront Provisions.
(6) Fences or walls shall be permitted, subject to conditions contained
in Chapter 103, Fences and Walls of the Municipal Code.
(7) Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth
in Article 16, Signs.
(8) Home occupations within a residential dwelling, where all
employees reside in the residence, and in accordance with Article
19, General Provisions.
(9) Reception antennas (including satellite dishes and shortwave radio
antennas) for noncommercial use shall be permitted in the rear
yards of single-family residential districts, provided that such
antennas conform to the standards set forth in Article 19, General
Provisions.
C. Special land uses.
(1) In accordance with the following schedule, the uses identified shall
be permitted as special land uses in the single-family residential
districts, subject to the standards and requirements set forth
285-3.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.3
1:648
herein and subject to the standards and approval requirements
set forth in Article 22, Special Land Use Review. [Amended
4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
Use R-1-A R-1-B R-1-C R-1-D R-1-E R-1-F
Schools Yes Yes No Yes 1 No
Churches Yes Yes No Yes 1 No
Child-care centers or
day-care centers
Yes Yes No Yes 1 No
Golf clubs Yes Yes No Yes 1 Yes
Boat clubs Yes Yes No Yes 1 Yes
Cemeteries Yes Yes No No 1 No
Public utility
buildings
Yes Yes Yes Yes 1 Yes
Adult foster care
small group (7 to 12
adults)
Yes Yes Yes Yes 1 Yes
Group day care (7 to
12 unrelated
children/private
residence)
Yes Yes Yes Yes 1 Yes
NOTES:
1. The special land uses allowed in the R-1-E Overlay Zoning
District shall be the same as the underlying district.
(2) Special land uses shall be subject to the following provisions:
(a) Schools shall include public, parochial, and private elementary,
intermediate, and/or high schools offering courses in general
education, and shall be subject to the following provisions:
[1] Minimum setback for principal and accessory structures
shall be 40 feet.
[2] A continuous obscuring wall or landscaped screen shall be
provided to screen off-street parking from any adjacent
land used for residential purposes meeting the
requirements of Article 13, Landscape, Screening and
Walls.
[3] A school shall have direct access to a collector or arterial
road.
(b) Churches shall be subject to the following provisions:
[1] Minimum setback for principal and accessory structures
shall be 40 feet.
285-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.3
1:649
[2] A continuous obscuring wall or landscaped screen shall be
provided to screen off-street parking from any adjacent
land used for residential purposes meeting the
requirements of Article 13, Landscape, Screening and
Walls.
[3] Churches shall have direct access to a collector or arterial
street.
[4] Day-care facilities and schools operated as part of a
church, excluding child-care facilities during religious
services, are subject to the specific standards and
requirements for these uses.
(c) Child-care centers or day-care centers shall be subject to the
following provisions:
[1] The minimum property size shall be one acre for each 40
children, or fraction thereof, that the facility is licensed to
care for. The lot shall have a minimum road frontage of 150
feet.
[2] The site shall be on the perimeter of a single-family
residential zoning district, abut an institutional use or a
nonsingle-family zoning district, and have direct access to
a paved public road.
[3] There shall be at least 150 square feet of outdoor play area
per child for whom care is being provided; but in no
instance shall the total outdoor play area be less than
5,000 square feet in size. All required outdoor play areas
shall be fenced in accordance with the regulations of this
chapter, provided that no fence shall be located in a front
yard (including both front yards on a corner lot).
[4] There shall be at least 50 square feet of indoor classroom,
crib or play area per child for whom care is provided.
[5] Parking lots and dropoff/pickup areas shall be set back at
least 30 feet from any side or rear lot line abutting
residentially zoned land that is vacant or includes a
dwelling unit, and 10 feet from any side or rear lot line
abutting nonresidential uses or zoning districts. Parking
lots shall be located in the rear or side yard; the Planning
Commission shall determine the appropriate location of
the parking lot to minimize the impact on adjacent
residential districts. A dropoff/pickup loop drive may be in
the front yard, provided that the dropoff/pickup spaces are
set back 40 feet from the front lot line and provided that on
corner lots, the drive shall be in the front yard that
minimizes impact on adjacent residential districts, as
determined by the Planning Commission.
285-3.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.3
1:650
[6] Minimum setback for principal and accessory structures
shall be 40 feet.
[7] Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article
13. The landscape buffer shall be a twenty-foot wide
landscape buffer adjacent to a residential district and
along the exterior of any fence that includes a minimum of
one deciduous tree, one evergreen tree and four shrubs
per each 30 linear feet along the property line, rounded
upward. Parking lot screening shall be as described for a
nonresidential use abutting a single-family residential
zoning district, in accordance with Article 13.
[8] The building shall have an appearance which is
nonintrusive and consistent in color, materials, roofline
and architecture with the single-family residential district
in which it is located, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
[9] Where child care is the principal use, hours of operation
shall be Monday through Friday and not begin before 6:30
a.m. or end later than 8:00 p.m.
[10] One sign shall be allowed as an institutional use under
§ 285-16.6.
[11] Any exterior lighting shall be limited to a maximum
intensity of 0.1 footcandle at all property lines.
[12] The facility shall continually have on file with the Township
documentation of a valid license as required by the state.
(d) Cemeteries shall be subject to the following provisions:
[1] Minimum property size shall be 20 acres.
[2] All grave sites, buildings and structures shall be set back
at least 100 feet from all property lines.
[3] The Planning Commission shall determine that the
cemetery will have a park-like setting through
preservation or provision of woodlands, landscaping and
open spaces.
[4] At least one property line of the site shall abut an arterial
roadway which provides all vehicular access to the site;
[5] The perimeter of the site shall be enclosed by a decorative
wall or decorative fence. The fence material shall be
subject to approval by the Planning Commission in relation
to surrounding area;
285-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.3
1:651
285-3.4. Required conditions.
[6] A landscaped greenbelt at least 10 feet in width, meeting
the requirements of Article 13, Landscaping, Screening
and Walls, shall be provided along the entire perimeter of
the site, except where ingress and egress drives are
located.
[7] Uses such as crematoriums, mausoleums, casket sales and
monument sales are not permitted as an accessory use,
but require a separate special land use review. Setbacks
shall be compatible with adjacent uses, as determined by
the Planning Commission. If these uses are proposed, the
applicant shall describe the use and storage of all
potentially hazardous materials, secondary containment
measures and provide a pollution incidence prevention
plan (PIPP) for approval by the Planning Commission and
the Fire Department.
(e) Boat clubs shall provide a continuous obscuring wall or
landscaped screen to screen off-street parking and boat drydock
storage from any adjacent land used for residential
purposes meeting the requirements of Article 13, Landscape,
Screening and Walls.
(f) Group day-care centers shall be subject to the following
provisions:
[1] Group day-care centers shall provide at least 150 square
feet of outdoor play area per child for whom care is being
provided; the total outdoor play area shall not be less than
5,000 square feet in size. All outdoor play areas shall be
fenced.
[2] Three pickup parking spaces and one parking space for
each employee shall be provided on the site.
[3] Group day-care centers shall be properly licensed as
required by the state.
[4] Group day-care centers shall be separated at least 1,500
feet from any other state-licensed care facility (measured
in any direction from the property line).
(g) State-licensed adult foster care small and large group homes
(seven to 12 adults) separated at least 1,500 feet from any
other state-licensed care facility (measured in any direction
from the property line).59
59.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(2)(h), regarding home occupations in residential
dwellings employing no more than one outside employee, was repealed 4-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-02.
285-3.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.4
1:652
A. Off-street parking and loading requirements. Parking and loading shall
be provided as required in Article 12, Parking and Loading
Requirements.
B. Grading requirements. Any grading, excavating, filling, land balancing,
or similar activity shall require a grading permit and shall conform to
the grading regulations set forth in Article 15, Grading Regulations,
and Chapter 124, Grading, of the Municipal Code.
C. Waterfront regulations. All development along the Detroit River and
interior canals shall conform to the regulations set forth in Article 17,
Waterfront Provisions.
D. Lighting requirements. Outdoor lighting shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article 19, General Provisions.
E. Residential design standards. All structures used as principal
residences shall comply with the following standards, including any
new dwellings or additions to any existing dwellings:
(1) Any residential structure shall be placed on a permanent
foundation to form a complete enclosure under the exterior walls.
The foundation shall be constructed in accordance with the
adopted Building Code of the Township.60 Any residential structure
shall be securely anchored to its foundation in order to prevent
displacement during windstorms.
(2) Residential structures shall be constructed in compliance with
applicable state, federal, or local laws or ordinances. Additionally,
all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and
strength requirements. Where there are conflicting applicable
regulations, the more stringent shall apply.
(3) If the dwelling unit is a manufactured home, the manufactured
home must either be:
(a) New and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate
inspection agency as meeting the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Mobile Home Construction
and Safety Standards (24 CFR 3280), as amended, or any
similar successor or replacement standards which may be
promulgated; or
(b) Used and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate
inspection agency as meeting the standards referenced in
Subsection E(3)(a) above, and found, on inspection by the
Zoning Administrator or designee, to be in excellent condition
and safe and fit for residential occupancy.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.4
1:653
(4) The exterior siding of a dwelling shall consist of materials that are
generally acceptable for site-built housing, provided that the
reflection from such exterior surface shall be no greater than from
white semi-gloss exterior enamel, and provided further that any
such exterior is comparable in composition, appearance, and
durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard
residential construction in Grosse Ile Township.
(5) All dwelling units shall be located on the lot so that the minimum
width of the front elevation is no less than 28 feet and the minimum
dimension along any side or rear elevation is no less than 24 feet.
Such dimensions shall be measured from the outer extremities and
shall include additions to the main body of the dwelling, such as
living or recreation rooms, garages, carports, utility rooms, and the
like, the front portions of which are within 10 feet of the front of the
main body of the dwelling.
(6) All dwelling units shall have a minimum roof pitch of 4:12. The
Planning Commission may approve a residential building with a
roof pitch of less than 4:12 based upon a review of the proposed
architecture under Subsection E(8)(d). All dwellings shall be
designed with either a roof overhang of not less than six inches on
all sides or with windowsills and roof drainage systems to
concentrate roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the
dwelling.
(7) The front facade of dwellings shall not be dominated by garage
doors. Garage doors facing the street shall not consist of more than
50% of the linear facade length facing the street.
285-3.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.4
1:654
(8) The floor area ratio and percent lot coverage ratio of any proposed
single-family dwelling unit shall not exceed the following limits
unless approved by the Planning Commission.
(a) The floor area ratio (FAR) of any proposed single-family
dwelling shall not exceed 22% except in the R-1-C and R-1-F
Zoning Districts where the FAR shall not exceed 25%. In
addition, the FAR of the proposed dwelling shall not exceed
150% of the average FAR of other surrounding single-family
dwellings as described in Subsection E(8)(c) below. The FAR
shall be calculated as the ratio of the usable floor area of the
principal building to the net area of the lot, not including
basements, garages and detached accessory structures.
285-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.4
1:655
(b) The lot coverage ratio (LCR) of any proposed single-family
dwelling, including attached and detached accessory
structures, shall not exceed 20%, except in the R-1-F Zoning
District where the LCR shall not exceed 25% and the R-1-C
Zoning District where the LCR shall not exceed 35%. In
addition, the LCR of the proposed dwelling shall not exceed
150% of the average LCR of other surrounding single-family
dwellings as described in Subsection E(8)(c) below. The LCR
shall be calculated as the ratio of the ground area covered by
the principal building and all accessory structures to the net lot
area.
285-3.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.4
1:656
(c) The average FAR and LCR of other surrounding single-family
dwellings shall be calculated as the opposing lot, two closest
lots in each direction along both sides of the street that the
subject lot fronts and all lots abutting the rear and side lot lines
of the subject lot, except under the following conditions:
285-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.4
1:657
[1] Only lots in the same zoning district as the subject lot shall
be included.
[2] Where there are not existing dwellings on all sides of the
proposed dwelling, then the 10 closet dwellings, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall be utilized.
[3] Where there are individual lots in the surrounding area
that are significantly dissimilar from the other lots utilized
in calculating the average FAR or LCR for surrounding
dwellings by virtue of significantly larger lot area or
smaller building size, the Zoning Administrator may
eliminate up to two such dissimilar lots in the average FAR
and LCR calculation and substitute the next two closest
285-3.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.4
1:658
similar lots. "Significantly dissimilar" shall mean a lot that
is at least 100% larger than the subject lot or a lot that
has a fifty-percent greater or smaller FAR or LCR than the
other lots used in the calculation.
[4] Where a lot is located at the boundary of a subdivision that
is adjacent to a separate subdivision with significantly
dissimilar lots, the Zoning Administrator may utilize the 10
closest lots within the same subdivision as the subject lot
for the average FAR and LCR calculations.
[5] Where the average of other surrounding dwellings would
limit the floor area of a proposed dwelling to less than
2,500 square feet, a dwelling of up to 2,500 square feet
with up to 900 square feet of total detached, and attached
accessory building floor area shall be permitted without
Planning Commission approval.
(d) The Planning Commission may grant approval to allow
dwellings larger than the limits in Subsection E(8)(a) and (b)
above based upon the following, provided that such increase
shall not be greater than an additional 5% (i.e., increased from
20% to 25%).
[1] A sketch plan, including building footprint with building
size, setback dimensions and lot coverage calculations,
elevations for all sides of the building and details on
building materials shall be provided for Planning
Commission approval. The Planning Commission may also
require that the applicant provide additional information
to demonstrate that the requested construction meets the
standards of this section. Such information may include a
photographic inventory of nearby homes, cross sections or
plan views that illustrate the relationship to adjacent
homes or a report by an architect.
[2] Notice of the Planning Commission hearing to consider the
sketch plan shall be provided to the surrounding dwellings
described in Subsection E(8)(c) above.
[3] The Planning Commission shall utilize the following
standards in review and approval of dwellings larger than
the limits in Subsection E(8)(a) and (b) above:
[a] The proposed building appearance shall be similar
and compatible with the general character of the area
and reflect a continuity of design with surrounding
buildings by maintaining the architectural styles,
details, building materials, roof pitch, building
massing, height, garage orientation and design
themes of surrounding dwelling units.
285-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.4
1:659
285-3.5. Area and bulk regulations.
[b] The proposed building shall be in accordance with the
area and bulk regulations of § 285-3.5; however, if
dimensional variances are requested, they shall be
considered the minimum number and amount deemed
reasonable by the Planning Commission and the ZBA.
[c] The building massing, height and orientation shall not
unreasonably impact adjacent property privacy, views
and access to light.
[4] For a new subdivision or site condominium, the Planning
Commission may set the maximum lot coverage and floor
area ratio that will be applicable to all dwellings to be
constructed in such development. Items required under
Subsection E(8)(d)[1] above shall be submitted for typical
model floor plans with the final preliminary plat and
reviewed by the Planning Commission based upon the
standards of Subsection E(8)(d)[2] above.

Table 3.5

Zone Standards
Use R-1-A R-1-B R-1-C R-1-D R-1-E R-1-F
Minimum lot area per
dwelling unit (square
feet)
30,000 16,000 6,500 20,000 30,000 10,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 80 80 40 100 125 40
On corner lots 100 100 75 100 125 40
Minimum setbacks (feet)
Front yard(3) (4) 40(5) 40 30 40 40 50
Side yard 6(6) 6(6) 5 12 12 5(7)
Combination of both side
yards
18 18 10 28 28 10(7)
Rear yard(10) 40 40 30 40 40 30
For accessory
buildings
6(8) 6(8) 6(8) 12(8) 12(8) 3(7)
Natural feature(9) 25 25 25 25 25 25
61.Editor's Notes: Notes to this table are included as Subsection B.
285-3.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.5
1:660
Table 3.5
Area and Bulk Regulations For Single-Family Residential Districts
Requirement R-1-A(2) R-1-B(2) R-1-C(2) R-1-D(2)R-1-E(2) R-1-F(2),(11)
Minimum usable floor area
per dwelling unit (square
feet)
1,500 1,200 1,000 1,800 1,800 1,000
Maximum height (feet) 35 30 30 30 30 30
B. Notes pertaining to development regulations:
(1) The minimum net lot area shall be calculated exclusive of any
submerged area or area occupied by a public street right-of-way or
an access easement. Every newly created lot must have a sufficient
building envelope, exclusive of any regulated wetlands, to meet
required zoning district setbacks, greenbelt buffers, off-street
parking requirements and accessory uses as specified in the Zoning
Ordinance.
(2) The R-1-E Single-Family Residential Overlay Zoning District shall
apply to all land areas of the Township that are zoned R-1-A, R-1-B,
R-1-C, R-1-D and R-1-F, as follows:
(a) Existing lots of record: Any lot of record in the R-1-A, R-1-B,
R-1-C, R-1-D or R-1-F Zoning Districts created prior to the
establishment of the R-1-E Single-Family Residential Overlay
Zoning District (July 16, 2000) shall equal or exceed the lot size
indicated in Table 3.5 above for the respective R-1-A, R-1-B,
R-1-C, R-1-D or R-1-F underlying zoning district. Any lot of
record that fails to meet the R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-D or R-1-F
minimum lot area indicated in Table 3.5 above shall be subject
to the nonconforming lot provisions of Article 18,
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses. The adjustment of a
lot line between two adjoining lots of record where an
additional buildable lot is not created (simultaneous splitcombination)
may be permitted, subject to the land division
provisions of Article 19, General Provisions, provided that such
resulting parcels equal or exceed the lot size indicated in Table
3.5 above or, in the case of nonconforming lots of record, such
adjustment will decrease nonconformity with the minimum lot
size requirement.
(b) Creation of new buildable lots: Any lot created in the R-1-A,
R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-D or R-1-F Zoning Districts after the
establishment of the R-1-E Single-Family Residential Overlay
Zoning District (July 16, 2000) by means of a land division,
replat, subdivision or site condominium shall meet the
standards of the R-1-E Single-Family Residential Overlay
Zoning District. Within the R-1-E Overlay Zoning District a site
may be developed as an open space development as provided
285-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.5
1:661
for in Subsection B(11) below. All newly created lots shall have
frontage on a public road meeting the requirements of Article
19, General Provisions.
(3) Buildings on corner lots or through lots shall meet the front yard
setback on all sides abutting a public street, private road or
waterfront.
(4) In the case of a lot which fronts on both a road and on a shoreline.
The setbacks of any building subsequently erected shall not be less
and need not be greater than the average road and shoreline
setbacks. (See Figure 4, Article 1, Rules of Construction and
Definitions.) The minimum required setback from the shoreline in
the R-1-F District shall be the more restrictive between the average
shoreline setback and a line that is parallel to the street at a
distance of 215 feet from the street front lot line.
(5) Except as permitted by the Waterfront Regulations set forth in
Article 17, no dwelling unit, building, or structure shall be erected
or constructed on land lying between East River Road and the
bulkhead line of the Detroit River between Horsemill Road and
Manchester Road, and on land lying between West River Road and
the bulkhead line of the Detroit River between Horsemill Road and
Groh Road.
(6) Within the R-1-A and R-1-B Zoning Districts, principal and
permitted uses on adjoining lots shall have a minimum spacing of
18 feet between principal structures, measured perpendicular to
the common lot line.
(7) Within the R-1-F District, the minimum spacing between principal
dwellings units shall be 10 feet, provided that architectural
features listed in § 285-19.6 shall not be permitted to project within
five feet of the lot line. Any new principal dwellings or additions to
existing principal structures shall provide a minimum spacing of 12
feet from adjacent dwellings.
285-3.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.5
1:662
(8) For accessory buildings and structure standards, see Article 19,
General Provisions.
(9) Natural feature setback shall be maintained in relation to the
ordinary high-water mark of any pond, river or channel, and to the
edge of any drainageway or regulated wetland. Only waterfront
structures and appurtenances, as permitted in Article 17,
Waterfront Provisions, may be located within the natural feature
setback. This setback may be reduced by the Planning Commission
upon a determination that it is clearly in the public interest. In
determining whether the setback reduction is in the public interest,
the benefit which would reasonably be expected to accrue from the
proposed development shall be balanced against the reasonably
foreseeable detriments to the natural feature. The following
general criteria shall be applied in undertaking this balancing test:
(a) The relative extent of the public and private need for the
proposed activity.
(b) The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations
and methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the
activity, including alternatives which are off-site or on other
commercially available properties.
(c) The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental
effects which the proposed activity may have on the public and
private use to which the area is suited, including the benefits
the wetland provides.
(d) The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the
cumulative effect created by other existing and anticipated
activities in the watershed.
(e) The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic,
ecological, or recreational values and on the public health or
fish or wildlife.
(f) The size and quality of the wetland.
(g) Proximity to any waterway.
(h) Extent to which upland soil erosion adjacent to protected
wetlands or drainageways is controlled.
(i) Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed land
change to the general area.
(j) Findings of necessity for the proposed project which have been
made by other state or local agencies.
(10)On a double frontage lot the required rear yard setback shall be
provided from the greenbelt required by § 285-13.3B.
285-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.5
1:663
(11)Within the R-1-E Single-Family Residential Overlay Zoning District
a site may be developed as an open space development, subject to
the following:
(a) An open space development may be approved by the Township
Board, based upon a recommendation by the Planning
Commission following the review procedures and approval
standards for special land uses contained in Article 22, Special
Land Use, in addition to the review and approval procedures
for subdivision plats contained in Chapter 238, of the
Municipal Code, Subdivision Control, or site condominiums
contained in Chapter 71, of the Municipal Code, Condominium
Projects. The process followed in review of the plat or site
condominium and the open space development shall be as
follows:
Step
Stage of
Review
Item(s)
Reviewed Action
1 Pre-preliminary
review
R-1-E parallel
plan and open
space
development plan
Planing
Commission
public hearing
2 Preliminary plat,
tentative
approval
R-1-E parallel
plan
Planning
Commission
approval of
parallel plan
3 Preliminary plat,
tentative
approval and
special land use
approval
Open space
development plan
Planing
Commission
public hearing
and
recommendation
to Township
Board
4 Preliminary plat,
tentative
approval and
special land use
approval
Open space
development plan
Township Board
approval
5 Preliminary plat,
final approval
Open space
development plan
Planing
Commission
recommendation
to Township
Board
6 Preliminary plat,
final approval
Open space
development plan
Township Board
approval
7 Final plat
approval
Open space
development plan
Township Board
approval
285-3.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.5
1:664
(b) To be eligible for open space development consideration, the
applicant must present a proposal for residential development
that meets each of the following:
[1] An open space development shall result in a recognizable
and substantial benefit, both to the residents of the
property and to the overall quality of life in the Township.
The benefits can be provided through site design elements
in excess of the requirements of this chapter, such as
extensive landscaping, unique site design features,
preservation of woodlands and open space, particularly
along major thoroughfares or waterways, buffering
development from wetlands and shorelines, and provision
of buffers from adjacent residential.
[2] The site shall contain significant natural assets, such as
woodlands, significant views, natural drainageways,
regulated or nonregulated wetlands, or natural corridors
that connect quality wildlife habitats which would be in the
best interest of the Township to preserve and which might
be negatively impacted by conventional residential
development.
[3] The proposed development shall be designed to create a
cohesive neighborhood through a network of spaces such
as parks and common open space areas for recreation and
resident interaction. All open space areas shall be equally
available to all residents of the development or the public.
[4] The site must be large enough to provide a minimum of 15
lots on the parallel plan.
[5] The site shall be under single ownership or control, such
that there is a single person or entity having proprietary
responsibility for the full completion of the project. The
applicant shall provide sufficient documentation of
ownership or control in the form of agreements, contracts,
covenants, and/or deed restrictions that indicate that the
development will be completed in its entirety as proposed.
[6] The proposed development shall be consistent with and
further the implementation of the Township Master Plan.
[7] The Planning Commission shall find that the proposed
open space development meets all of the approval
standards for special land uses contained in Article 22,
Special Land Use Review.
(c) Residential density shall be determined by a parallel plan that
illustrates how the site could be developed as a conventional
R-1-E subdivision, meeting all applicable Township and county
zoning and subdivision requirements. The parallel plan shall be
285-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.5
1:665
submitted with the open space development at each stage
of review and shall contain all information required for a
preliminary plat. The Township shall review the design and
determine the number of lots that could be feasibly
constructed. This number shall be the maximum number of
dwelling units allowable for the open space development,
provided that this amount may be reduced based upon design
requirements for an open space development.
(d) All lots shall comply with the dimensional standards of the
R-1-E Zoning District, provided that the lot area may be
reduced in order to preserve a minimum of 50% of the total site
area as common open space meeting the requirements of
Subsection B(11)(e) below and the lot width may be reduced to
100 feet. Lot width may be further reduced by the Planning
Commission to a minimum of 80 feet where such reduction is
clearly demonstrated to preserves natural features. The road
frontage requirements of Article 19 shall be complied with. All
setback and other dimensional standards of the R-1-E Zoning
District shall be complied with. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall have no authority to grant variances within an open space
development. The layout of the open space development shall
comply with the requirements Chapter 238 of the Municipal
Code, Subdivision Control.
(e) A minimum of 50% of the total site area shall be preserved as
common open space for recreation or conservation and shall be
exclusive of residential lots, road rights-of-way, utilities or
other improvements. Such open space shall be arranged on the
site to meet all of the following requirements, provided that the
Planning Commission may modify these standards where it is
demonstrated that additional natural features will be
preserved elsewhere on the site:
[1] Common open space shall be planned in locations that are
visible and accessible from a roadway with a minimum
roadway frontage of 50 feet.
[2] Landscape greenbelts shall be maintained between the
rear yards of lots.
[3] All wetlands and areas within 50 feet of a wetland or
shoreline shall be preserved as open space.
[4] A one-hundred-foot deep open space area shall be
preserved along road frontages bordering the open space
development and adjacent to existing residential lots.
[5] Open space shall be located to minimize removal of
woodlands regulated under the Woodlands Protection
Ordinance. The open space development shall preserve a
285-3.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.5
1:666
minimum of 60% of the woodlands on the site. Any
landmark tree shall be located within open space.
[6] Open space may include recreational trails, picnic areas,
parks and greenways, but shall not include a golf course or
utility easements. The Planning Commission may permit
recreational buildings within the open space.
(f) The applicant shall provide a detailed habitat and floristic
quality assessment for the site with the initial application. Such
assessment shall be prepared by a qualified professional, such
as a biologist or landscape architect, following methods
recommended by the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality. As an alternative, the Township may have the
Township's consultant perform the assessment at the
applicant's cost. If animal or plant habitats of significant value
exist on the site, the Township, as a condition of approval, may
require that the site plan preserve these areas in a natural
state and adequately protect them as nature preserves.
(g) A landscape plan shall be prepared for the open space as part
of the preliminary plat that will provide for the establishment
of a woodland. Trees of a species native to Michigan shall be
provided to equal the total amount of DBH for each six-inch or
larger tree that is proposed to be removed within the
construction zone of the site. A range of sizes shall be provided
with the minimum size of one-inch caliper and the average size
of two-inch caliper. This shall apply in addition to all
landscaping requirements of the Subdivision Control
Ordinance and Article 13, Landscaping, Screening and Walls.
(h) Prior to any development or clearing, barrier fencing shall be
installed at the perimeter of the root zone of woodlands to be
preserved. Barrier fencing shall be a minimum of four feet in
height. The fencing shall be inspected and approved by the
Township prior to site clearing and shall remain in place in
good condition until it is authorized to be removed by the
Community Development Department. As part of the final open
space plan, the Planning Commission may require permanent
ornamental fencing, such as split rail fencing, or other
measures to delineate the open space from individual lots.
(i) A preservation and maintenance plan for the open space shall
be submitted with the final preliminary plat and shall include
mechanisms for the long-term funding of open space
preservation. The Township may require bonds or other
funding mechanisms to ensure long-term maintenance of open
space.
(j) The dedicated open space shall be set aside by the developer
through an irrevocable conveyance that is found acceptable to
285-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-3.5
1:667
the Township, such as recorded deed restrictions, covenants
that run perpetually with the land, or conservation easements.
Such conveyance shall assure that the open space will be
protected from all forms of development and shall never be
changed to another use. Where deed restrictions are utilized
for the protection of open space, the Township shall be made a
party to the deed restrictions and such restrictions applicable
to the open space shall not be amended. Building permits
for home construction shall not be granted until copies of
recorded deeds are filed with the Township. The developer may
dedicate the open space to a conservation organization or the
Township for rezoning to O-1 Open Space District, provided
that such dedication shall be subject to approval by the
Township Board.
(k) The deed restrictions or master deed and bylaws shall be
submitted as part of the application for final approval of the
preliminary plat and shall outline measures to protect the open
space and shall specify restrictions on the development of
individual lots. The Planning Commission may require
additional limitations be placed on accessory structures based
upon the reduced sizes of the clustered lots.
(l) Reasonable conditions may be required with the special
approval of an open space development for the purpose of
ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a
proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating
increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or
activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving
natural resources, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of
land, promoting the use of land in a socially and economically
desirable manner, and further the implementation of the
Township Master Plan.
285-3.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-3.5
1:668
ARTICLE 4
Multiple-Family Residential Districts
[Ord. No. 210, effective 9-25-1994]
285-4.1. Intent.
The regulations concerning multiple-family districts provide for a variety
of single-family and multiple-family residential land uses. This district is
intended to meet the housing needs of people who choose to live in
residential areas with higher density than single-family districts, generally
in multiple-family attached units. This district also provides for a limited
range of other uses that are considered necessary or appropriate to
enhance the quality of life within Grosse Ile's multiple-family residential
neighborhoods. Specifically, the regulations set forth herein are intended to
provide for the following:
285-4.2. Permitted uses.
In multiple-family residential districts, no building shall be erected and
no building or land shall be used except for the following uses, unless
otherwise permitted in this chapter, or by state or federal law, subject to the
standards and requirements set forth herein:
A. Common types of housing include various forms of multiple-family
residential units and single-family residential units.
B. The allocation of land for multiple-family residential uses shall be based
on the determination of need, the availability and adequacy of public
facilities and services, and compatibility with the environment and
surrounding uses. Multiple-family residential districts, in some cases,
can be used to provide a transition between nonresidential districts and
nearby single-family residential districts.
C. Multiple-family uses are classified into two districts. The R-2 Multiple-
Family Residential District permits attached dwelling units in settings
characterized by abundant open space, at a density, as defined in
Article 1, of up to 5.8 units per acre, subject to site conditions and all
ordinance standards. The R-3 Multiple-Family Residential District
permits attached dwelling units at a density, as defined in Article 1, of
up to 8.7 units per acre, subject to site conditions and all ordinance
standards. This provides the opportunity for development of more
affordable housing and meet the needs of individuals and families
needing less space that is compatible with the predominant
surrounding single-family development.
A. Principal uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling units meeting the residential
design standards of § 285-3.4E and the R-1-B District standards.
Single-family subdivisions and site condominium projects must also
comply with Municipal Code requirements, including Chapter 71,
285-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-4.2
1:669
Condominium Projects, and Chapter 238, Subdivision Control, as
appropriate.
(2) Multiple-family dwelling units. Multiple-family units which are
reached off of a common stair landing or entryway are only
permitted in the R-3 District.
(3) Land designated as public parks, public/private open space, bike
paths and lands designated for preservation as part of the natural
drainage system.
(4) State-licensed adult foster care family home (six or fewer adults) in
a single-family residence.
(5) State-licensed adult foster care family home (six or fewer adults;
foster care five or more days/week) in a single-family residence.
(6) State-licensed family day-care (one to six children, less than
twenty-four-hour care) in a single-family residence.
(7) State-licensed foster family homes (one to four children, twentyfour-
hour care).
(8) Essential services not including buildings or storage yards, when
operating requirements necessitate their location within the
district to serve the immediate vicinity as determined by the
Planning Commission.
B. Accessory uses, buildings and structures. The following accessory
buildings, structures and uses, customarily incidental to any of the
principal uses, located on the same parcel and not involving any
business, profession, or trade except as provided for herein shall be
permitted, subject also to the provisions set forth in Article 19, General
Provisions:
(1) Garage or carport facilities designed and used for the storage of
vehicles owned and customarily used as part of residential life-style
by the occupants;
(2) A private swimming pool and tennis courts for the exclusive use of
the occupants of the property on which they are located and their
gratuitous guests, provided that swimming pools shall be
constructed and fenced in accordance with Chapter 241,
Swimming Pools, of the Municipal Code;
(3) Off-street parking and storage on lots with principal structure(s) as
follows:
(a) One recreational vehicle, small utility trailer or truck per
housing unit, with a maximum capacity of one ton, shall be
permitted, subject to the following:
285-4.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-4.2
1:670
[1] Such vehicle shall be the property of an occupant of a unit,
have a current license, and be stored within a garage or
within a designated outside storage area, meeting the
requirements of § 285-4.3E, when not in use.
[2] There shall be no parking of recreational vehicles and
commercial vehicles over one ton within a public street
right-of-way or private road access easement for a period
of time exceeding four hours in any given day, except as
provided for in Subsection B(3)(a)[4] below.
[3] A stored, parked or placed recreational vehicle may only
be occupied or used for living purposes for a total of one
week during any one calendar year. Occupancy of a
recreational vehicle may only be permitted if the occupant
of the recreational vehicle is an occupant of a unit, or a
relative of an occupant of a unit, and the recreational
vehicle is parked in such a manner that it complies with all
other parking ordinances and regulations in effect at that
location. At no time shall any such recreational vehicle
have connections to water, gas or a sanitary sewer.
[4] Commercial vehicles over one ton parked on the site are
permitted only in conjunction with a valid building permit.
(b) Boats, provided any such boats are stored within a designated
outside storage area, meeting the requirements of § 285-4.3E,
or in a garage, and on a trailer. Any such boat shall be owned
by an occupant of a unit with current license.
(c) Operable passenger vehicles owned by an occupant of a unit
and licensed for the current year;
(4) Waterfront uses in accordance with the provisions set forth in
Article 17, Waterfront Provisions;
(5) Fences or walls in accordance with Chapter 103, Fences and Walls,
of the Municipal Code;
(6) Signs in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 16, Sign
Regulations;
(7) Home occupations within a residential dwelling, where all
employees reside in the residence, and in accordance with Article
19, General Provisions;
(8) Reception antennas (including satellite dishes and shortwave radio
antennas) for noncommercial use in the rear yards of multiplefamily
residential districts, provided that such antennas conform to
the standards set forth in Article 19, General Provisions; and
(9) A building containing recreation facilities, meeting rooms, and
other services for the exclusive use of occupants of the multiple-
285-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-4.2
1:671
285-4.3. Required conditions.
family development of which it is a part and their gratuitous guests,
when separated a minimum separation of 50 feet from any
residential structures, and in conformance with all applicable bulk
and area requirements, off-street parking requirements and
loading requirements.
C. Special land uses. The following uses shall be permitted as special land
uses in the multiple-family residential districts subject to the standards
and requirements set forth herein and subject to the standards and
approval requirements set forth in Article 22, Special Land Use Review.
(1) Housing for the elderly shall be subject to the following provisions:
(a) Minimum parcel size shall be five acres.
(b) Minimum dwelling unit size shall be 350 square feet of usable
floor area, not including kitchen, bathroom and storage areas.
(2) Convalescent or nursing homes shall be subject to the following
provisions:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(b) A continuous obscuring wall or landscaped screen shall be
provided to screen off-street parking from any adjacent land
zoned for residential purposes, including land across the
street.
(3) Boat clubs shall provide a continuous obscuring wall or landscaped
screen to buffer off-street parking and boat dry dock storage from
any adjacent land used for residential purposes meeting the
requirements of Article 13, Landscaping, Screening and Walls.
(4) State-licensed adult foster care small and large group homes
(seven to 12 adults) separated at least 1,500 feet from any other
state-licensed care facility (measured in any direction from the
property line).
(5) State-licensed group child day-care homes (seven to 12 unrelated
children/private residence) subject to the following:
(a) Such facility shall be separated at least 1,500 feet from any
other state-licensed care facility (measured in any direction
from the property line).
(b) Such facility shall operate for not more than 16 hours per day.
(6) Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above
special land uses.
A. Public access and vehicular circulation.
285-4.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-4.3
1:672
(1) All multiple-family developments shall have direct access onto a
public street, unless the Planning Commission approves indirect
access. Indirect access onto a public street may be permitted
where the Planning Commission finds that emergency access would
be adequate, traffic safety would not be compromised, the traffic
would not cause undue disruption to adjacent single-family
neighborhoods and adequate provisions have been made regarding
maintenance of the access.
(2) Each residential building within a multiple-family development
shall have convenient access to a public street or private road
meeting the standards of Chapter 205, Roads and Driveways, of the
Municipal Code, or access drive. Such streets and drives shall
provide adequate access for emergency and safety vehicles.
[Amended 2-22-2002
(3) All streets, roads and access drives shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards of the Wayne County
Office of Public Services and approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Architectural standards. All multiple-family developments shall meet
the following architectural standards. In determining the
appropriateness of buildings, design elements shall be evaluated in
relation to existing and proposed surrounding buildings and uses.
(1) Building mass, height, bulk and width-to-height ratio shall be
similar in scale and proportionate to surrounding structures within
500 feet.
(2) Buildings shall possess architectural variety but enhance the
overall cohesive neighborhood character. All buildings shall
provide architectural features, details and ornaments such as
arches, colonnades, cornices or porches. Location, size and types of
architectural projections such as porches or awnings shall be
compatible with other structures within 500 feet.
(3) Rooflines and materials shall be consistent with the surrounding
neighborhood character. Building materials on the front facade
shall be primarily brick, glass, stone or wood. The approximate
size, orientation and spacing shall match that of buildings on
adjacent lots.
(4) Signs and other site features shall be designed and located on the
site so that the proposed development is aesthetically pleasing and
harmonious with nearby developments. Developments are required
to provide site features such as decorative entry signs, ornamental
lighting and/or pedestrian furniture.
(5) At least 25% of individual garages on residential units shall be side
entry or recessed at least 10 feet behind the front building line
(living area).
285-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-4.3
1:673
C. Common open space.
(1) Not less than 500 square feet of common open space shall be
provided per dwelling unit. Such open space shall not include
unusable land, such as regulated wetlands. It may include land in a
designated floodplain.
(2) Common open space shall be located conveniently in relation to the
dwelling units it is intended to serve.
(3) Recreational uses within the required open space shall be provided
in consideration of the age and life-style of expected occupants.
Open space may include playground and park space, play
equipment, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, basketball courts,
and similar facilities. Automobile parking for these recreational
uses may not be counted towards the total required open space
area for a development.
(4) Location and design of landscaping and pedestrian areas shall
contribute to the continuation of the pedestrian and open space
network within the immediate vicinity.
D. Sidewalks. Hard-surfaced sidewalks shall be provided throughout every
multiple-family development so as to provide a complete pedestrian
circulation system. Such sidewalks shall not be less than four feet in
width nor less than four inches in thickness. All developments shall
provide pedestrian linkages between public sidewalks and the building
entrances.
E. Outside storage. The outside storage of materials, equipment and
supplies customarily incidental to the principal use shall be allowed
only when such storage areas are identified and approved during site
plan review. Such storage areas shall be located in the non-required
rear yard and screened from view from all roadways and adjacent uses.
Screening shall consist of six-foot-high opaque screening or evergreen
landscape screening in accordance with Article 13, Landscaping,
Screening and Walls.
F. Site plan review. Submission of a site plan for review and approval by
the Planning Commission shall be required, in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Article 21, for all uses except a single-family
residence or a subdivision plat. All single-family residential subdivision
plats require review and approval under Chapter 238, Subdivision
Control, of the Municipal Code.
G. Off-street parking and loading requirements. Parking and loading shall
be provided as required in Article 12, Parking and Loading
Requirements.
H. Landscaping and buffering.
285-4.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-4.3
1:674
285-4.4. Area and bulk regulations. [Amended by Ord. No. 258,
effective 4-18-1999; 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-04]
Any structure or use of the land in a multiple-family residential district shall
be subject to the following area and bulk regulations (subject to Notes 1
through 9):
Requirement R-2 R-3
Minimum net land area per dwelling
unit1,2 (square feet)
10,000 5,000
Minimum total lot area3 (square
feet)
16,000 16,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100 100
Minimum setbacks from lot lines
(feet)
Front yard 40 40
Side yard4,5 50 50
Rear yard 50 50
Minimum internal setbacks (feet)
(1) Submission of a landscape plan, as part of or accompanying the site
plan, to the Planning Commission for review and approval shall be
required. The landscape plan shall specify plant materials and
landscape treatments, based on requirements set forth in Article
13, Landscaping, Screening and Walls.
(2) A landscaped greenbelt at least 25 feet wide shall be provided
along the entire perimeter of any multiple-family site, except where
ingress and egress drives are located, based on requirements set
forth in Article 13, Landscaping, Screening and Walls.
I. Grading requirements. Any grading, excavating, filling, land balancing,
or similar activity shall require a grading permit and shall conform to
the grading regulations set forth in Chapter 124, Grading, of the
Municipal Code. [Amended 2-22-2002
J. Sign regulations. All signs shall conform to the regulations set forth in
Article 16, Sign Regulations.
K. Waterfront regulations. All development along the Detroit River and
interior canals shall conform to the waterfront regulations set forth in
Article 17, Waterfront Provisions.
L. Covered trash receptacles. All trash receptacles shall conform to the
trash receptacle regulations set forth in Article 19, General Provisions.
M. Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting shall conform to the regulations set
forth in Article 19, General Provisions.
285-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-4.4
1:675
Requirement R-2 R-3
From internal road6 25 25
From parking lot7 15 15
Between buildings 308 308
Natural feature setback9 (feet) 25 25
Minimum usable floor area per
dwelling unit (square feet)
1,000 900
Maximum building length (feet) 175 200
Maximum height
Feet 35 35
Stories 2 2
Notes pertaining to development regulations:
1 Density shall be calculated as the number of dwelling units situated
on or to be developed per net acre of land. For purposes of
calculating maximum density, only 25% of the acreage determined to
be wetlands protected by the Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection
Act, PA 203 of 1979, as amended, or the Township of Grosse Ile, shall
be calculated toward the total site acreage. All open bodies of water,
land within the one-hundred-year floodplain, public rights-of-way and
areas within overhead utility line easements are excluded from
calculation.
2 All units shall have at least one living room, one bedroom, kitchen
facilities, a storage closet and sanitary facilities.
3 Every newly created lot must have a sufficient building envelope,
exclusive of any regulated wetlands, to meet required zoning district
setbacks, greenbelt buffers, off-street parking requirements and
accessory uses as specified in this chapter.
4 The minimum side yard shall be increased by one foot for each 10
feet or part thereof by which the length of the multiple-family
building facing the side lot line exceeds 30 feet.
5 The minimum side yard on a side facing a street shall not be less than
the required minimum front yard setback.
6 Setback from internal road shall be 25 feet or the height of the
building whichever is greater.
7 Parking lot setbacks are measured from the edge of a common
parking lot, utilized for the parking of more than two vehicles, to the
nearest line of the building. Parking lot setbacks do not apply to
driveway approaches entering garages.
285-4.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-4.4
1:676
8 For multiple-family developments where there are two or more
buildings on the same parcel, the minimum required distance
between two buildings shall be 30 feet or the combined height of the
two buildings, whichever is greater.
9 Natural feature setback shall be maintained in relation to the
ordinary high-water mark of any pond, river or channel, and to the
edge of any drainageway or regulated wetland. Only waterfront
structures and appurtenances, as permitted in Article 17, Waterfront
Provisions, may be located within the natural feature setback. This
setback may be reduced by Planning Commission approval upon a
determination that it is clearly in the public interest. In determining
whether the setback reduction is in the public interest, the benefit
which would reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposed
development shall be balanced against the reasonably foreseeable
detriments to the natural feature. The following general criteria shall
be applied in undertaking this balancing test:
a. The relative extent of the public and private need for the
proposed activity.
b. The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations and
methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity,
including alternatives which are off-site or on other commercially
available properties.
c. The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental
effects which the proposed activity may have on the public and
private use to which the area is suited, including the benefits the
wetland provides.
d. The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the cumulative
effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the
watershed.
e. The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic,
ecological, or recreational values and on the public health or fish
or wildlife.
f. The size and quality of the wetland.
g. Proximity to any waterway.
h. Extent to which upland soil erosion adjacent to protected
wetlands or drainageways is controlled.
i. Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed land
change to the general area.
j. Findings of necessity for the proposed project which have been
made by other state or local agencies.
285-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-4.4
1:677

ARTICLE 5
R-4 Mobile Home Park District
[Ord. No. 286, effective 4-16-2000]
285-5.1. Intent.
285-5.2. Permitted uses.
A. The Mobile Home Park District is intended to provide standards to
permit the location of mobile homes in a planned park setting. It is
intended that, at minimum, such districts shall have the following
characteristics:
(1) Facilities for continual, long-term, permanent residential use,
rather than for recreational and/or transient travel trailer use;
(2) Adequate space and facilities so as to provide healthy living
conditions for the occupants; and
(3) An interior road system that provides safe and adequate access to
each mobile home site.
B. Criteria for land allocation. It is intended that the allocation of land for
mobile home park uses be based on the determination of need, the
availability of public facilities and services, and in consideration of the
impact on the environment and surrounding properties. Mobile home
park districts are typically located so as to provide a transition between
nonresidential districts and nearby single-family districts.
A. Principal uses. In the Mobile Home Park District no building shall be
erected and no building or land shall be used except for the following
uses, unless otherwise permitted in this chapter, and subject to the
standards and requirements set forth herein and in Michigan Public Act
419 of 1976, as amended:
(1) Mobile home parks containing sites for the permanent location of
mobile homes.
(2) Essential services.
(3) Land designated for the following specific public uses:
(a) Land designated by the Planning Commission for preservation
as open space;
(b) Bicycle, pedestrian, and horse trails;
(c) Lands designated for preservation as part of the natural
drainage system; and
(d) Use of buildings as public polling places.
285-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-5.2
1:679
B. Accessory buildings and uses. The following accessory buildings and
uses shall be permitted, subject to the provisions set forth in
§ 285-19.11:
(1) Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to
any of the principal uses, when located on the same property and
not involving any business, profession, trade or occupation other
than those specifically permitted in the Mobile Home Park District
in accordance with Michigan Public Act 419 of 1976, as amended,
shall be permitted.
(2) Garage or carport facilities designed and used for the storage of
vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the primary residence
shall be permitted.
(3) A private swimming pool and tennis courts, for the exclusive use of
the residents of the mobile home park and their gratuitous guests,
shall be permitted. Swimming pools shall be constructed and
fenced in accordance with Chapter 241, Swimming Pools.
(4) Off-street parking and storage shall be permitted as follows:
(a) One unoccupied house trailer, small utility trailer, or service
truck with a maximum capacity of one ton, provided such
vehicle is the property of the occupant, has a current year's
license, and is stored within a garage or within a designated
area in the approved site plan;
(b) Boats, provided any such boat is either stored in a garage or
within a designated area in the approved site plan and on a
trailer or cradle, and provided further that any such boat is
protected so as to prevent children from playing on or around
it; and
(c) Passenger vehicles which are the property of the residents of
the mobile home park, provided all such vehicles are licensed
for the current year.
(5) Fences or walls shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 103,
Fences and Walls.
(6) Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth
in Article 16.
(7) Satellite dish antennas for noncommercial use shall be permitted in
the rear yards of mobile home park districts, subject to the
following provisions:
(a) Only one dish antenna shall be permitted on each R-4 parcel;
(b) Dish antennas shall not be located where they will block fire
lanes or utility easements or obstruct the view from windows in
existing adjoining buildings;
285-5.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-5.2
1:680
285-5.3. Required conditions.
(c) A clearance of at least six feet shall be maintained between a
satellite dish antenna and side lot line; and
(d) A building permit shall be obtained prior to construction or
installation of a satellite dish antenna.
(8) A building containing recreation facilities, meeting rooms, and
other services for the exclusive use of residents of the mobile home
park and their gratuitous guests, in accordance with the following
provisions, shall be permitted:
(a) A minimum separation of 50 feet shall be provided between
any such building and any residential structures.
(b) All applicable development regulations, including bulk and
area requirements, off-street parking requirements, and
loading requirements, shall be met.
(9) Each mobile home may have one outdoor utility building which
shall not exceed eight feet in width, eight feet in depth, and six feet
in height.
(10) State-licensed residential facilities shall be subject to special land
use review and approval wherever applicable state laws provide for
local zoning approval.
C. Uses not permitted. Nonresidential uses shall not be permitted in any
mobile home or building or on the premises of a mobile home park.
However, the operation of the park and its incidental services, such as
the in-park sale of a mobile home by a tenant or licensed dealer or
broker, shall not be denied by the Township.
A. Site plan review. Submission of a site plan for review and approval by
the Planning Commission shall be required, in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Article 21 and Michigan Public Act 419 of 1976,
as amended, prior to issuance of a building permit and development in
the Mobile Home Park District.
B. Public access and vehicular circulation.
(1) All mobile home parks shall have direct access onto a public hardsurfaced
road, except that indirect access onto a public hardsurfaced
road may be permitted where the Planning Commission
determines that such an alternative would promote traffic safety
and would not cause undue disruption to adjacent uses.
(2) The street system in the mobile home park shall provide convenient
vehicular circulation from the public road to every mobile home
park site and to all other facilities in the mobile home park.
285-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-5.3
1:681
(3) All streets in the mobile home park shall conform to the
construction, design, and lighting standards set forth in the
Michigan Department of Commerce, Mobile Home Commission
Rules.
(4) The internal roadway, driveways, and parking areas shall be curbed
and consist of hard-surfaced concrete, blacktop, or equivalent in
accordance with current Mobile Home Commission Rules.
Mountable or integral curbs may be used.
C. Common open space.
(1) Common open space shall be provided and shall cover a total area
of not less than 500 square feet per dwelling unit or a minimum of
25,000 square feet per development, whichever is greater. In order
to attain this standard, the developer may use the area obtained
through lot reduction, as set forth in § 285-5.4B(1) herein and Rule
946 of the Mobile Home Commission Rules.
(2) All optional improvements for open space shall comply with the
current Mobile Home Commission Rules published by the Michigan
Department of Commerce.
D. Off-street parking and loading area requirements.
(1) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
each mobile home site.
(2) Off-street parking for visitors at the rate of one parking space for
every three mobile home sites shall also be provided.
(3) One parking space for each 200 square feet of building area shall
be provided for accessory buildings, structures, or buildings.
(4) Required parking shall be located no farther than 200 feet from the
structures it is intended to serve.
(5) Parking areas shall be designed in accordance with current Mobile
Home Commission Rules. The internal roadway, driveways, and
parking areas shall be curbed and consist of hard-surfaced
concrete, blacktop, or equivalent in accordance with current
Mobile Home Commission Rules. Mountable or integral curbs may
be used.
(6) If provided, loading areas shall be located only at the rear of a
building. In no instance shall loading areas be located where they
will interfere with parking or ingress and egress to any building.
E. Outside storage.
(1) The outside storage of materials, equipment, and supplies shall be
allowed only when such storage areas are shown on the site plan.
Such storage areas shall be located in the rear yard and shall be
285-5.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-5.3
1:682
screened from view from all roadways. Screening shall consist of
opaque screening or evergreen landscape screening in accordance
with Article 13.
(2) No storage of any kind of combustible material shall be permitted
beneath a mobile home.
F. Landscaping and buffering.
(1) Submission of a landscape plan to the Planning Commission for
review and approval shall be required. The landscape plan shall
specify plant materials and landscape treatment, based on
requirements set forth in Article 13. The landscape plan shall be a
part of or accompany the site plan.
(2) A landscaped greenbelt at least 10 feet in width shall be provided
along the entire perimeter of any mobile home park, except where
ingress and egress drives are located.
(3) Mobile home parks shall be screened from view from any adjoining
residentially zoned or used property.
(4) Each mobile home site, except for the area designated for the
mobile home pad, shall be planted with sod or other suitable
ground cover or plant materials.
G. Grading requirements. Any grading, excavating, filling, land balancing,
or similar activity shall require a grading permit and shall conform to
the grading regulations set forth in Chapter 124, Grading. [Amended
7-22-2002]
H. Sign regulations. All signs shall conform to the regulations set forth in
Article 16.
(1) Individual mobile homes shall conform to the sign regulations that
are applicable to single-family residences.
(2) Accessory buildings, such as a management office or common
buildings, are permitted to have two identification signs, each of
which may be up to five square feet in area.
(3) One identification sign is permitted at each entrance to the mobile
home park. Each such sign shall be set back at least 10 feet from
the road right-of-way and shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.
I. Covered trash receptacles. All mobile home park refuse storage and
disposal shall be in accordance with Rules 325.3351 through 325.3354
of the Michigan Department of Public Health Mobile Home Park
Standards. If outside trash receptacles are proposed, such receptacles
must be surrounded on three sides by wood or masonry screen walls
which shall be at least one foot higher than the height of the trash
receptacle. The fourth side of the trash receptacle enclosure shall be
285-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-5.3
1:683
equipped with an opaque lockable gate at the same height as the screen
wall.
J. Sidewalks.
(1) Hard-surfaced sidewalks shall be provided throughout every
mobile home park so as to provide a complete pedestrian
circulation system. Such sidewalks shall not be less than four feet
in width nor less than four inches in thickness.
(2) Secondary walkways, such as walkways from each mobile home
entrance to the primary walkway system, shall not be less than
three feet in width and four inches thick of hard-surface material.
K. Lighting. All lighting used to illuminate buildings, signs, off-street
parking, and other parts of a mobile home park shall conform to Rules
929 and 932 of the Mobile Home Commission Rules. Such lighting shall
be shielded or installed so the light is directed away from adjoining
properties or traffic.
L. Utilities.
(1) Water systems and sanitary sewers shall comply with the current
Michigan Department of Public Health Mobile Home Park
Standards.
(2) Mobile home parks shall be provided with fire hydrants as required
to meet the standards of the Grosse Ile Fire Department.
(3) Electrical and telephone distribution lines shall be installed
underground pursuant to Rules 603(d), 932, 933 and 940 of the
Mobile Home Commission Rules.
M. Mobile home installations.
(1) Each mobile home site shall be provided with appropriate pillars
and each mobile home shall be anchored with an approved
anchoring system in accordance with current Mobile Home
Commission Rules.
(2) Skirting shall be required on all mobile homes. Such skirting shall
be vented, fire-resistant, and equipped with access panels and
comply with current Mobile Home Commission Rules.
N. Patio area. If a mobile home is provided with an outdoor patio, such
patio shall be at least 150 square feet in area, conveniently located near
an entrance to the mobile home, and placed in a location that provides a
usable outdoor living space to supplement the interior space of the
mobile home.
O. Inspection by the Township. Prior to initial occupancy, each mobile
home site shall be inspected by the appropriate Township officials to
285-5.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-5.3
1:684
285-5.4. Area and bulk regulations.
determine compliance with the standards set forth in this article and in
the current Mobile Home Commission Rules.
A. The minimum parcel size for the mobile home park as a whole shall be
15 acres with a minimum of 60 pads.
B. Sites for individual mobile home units shall average 6,500 square feet
in size. This standard may be reduced in accordance with the following
provisions:
(1) For each square foot of land gained through the reduction of a site
below 6,500 square feet, at least an equal amount of land shall be
dedicated as open space, provided that in no instance shall the
open space and distance requirements be less than required under
R 125.1946, Rule 946, and R 125.1941 and R 125.1944, Rules 941
and 944 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
(2) In no instance shall an individual site be reduced below 5,500
square feet in size.
(3) Minimum lot width shall be 40 feet.
(4) Setbacks.
(a) The following minimum setbacks shall be complied with in
relation to the exterior boundaries of the mobile home park:
[1] Front yard setback: 50 feet.
[2] Rear yard setback: 50 feet.
[3] Side yard setback: 50 feet.
(b) Required screening, greenbelts, and landscaping may be
located in the setback area. All setbacks shall be measured
from the park boundary line, except where the park is adjacent
to a street or road, in which case the street or road right-of-way
shall be considered the same as the park boundary line.
(5) Mobile homes and other structures shall be set back a minimum of
30 feet from the edge of all internal roadways in the mobile home
park.
(6) A minimum distance of 60 feet shall be provided from the rear of
one mobile home to the rear of adjacent mobile homes.
(7) A minimum distance of 20 feet shall be provided from the side of
one mobile home to the side of adjacent mobile homes.
(8) No structure in a mobile home park shall exceed 20 feet or one
story in height.
285-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-5.4
1:685

ARTICLE 6
C-1 Convenience Commercial District
[Ord. No. 286, effective 4-16-2000]
285-6.1. Intent.
The C-1 Convenience Commercial District is intended to provide for the
day-to-day shopping and service needs of residents of the Township. It is
intended that only low-intensity uses which produce low volumes of traffic
and low noise levels be permitted in this district. It is intended that C-1 uses
be developed at a relatively small scale so as to be compatible with adjacent
and nearby residential uses. C-1 uses should not involve any manufacturing,
processing, or packaging of goods for wholesale distribution or for sale at
other retail outlets off the premises.
285-6.2. Permitted uses.
A. Principal uses. In the C-1 Convenience Commercial District no building
shall be erected and no building or land shall be used except for the
following uses, and subject to the standards and requirements set forth
in this chapter and the review procedures in Article 21, Site Plan
Review. The following shall apply to each individual use which may be
located on a lot with other uses.
(1) Any generally recognized retail business up to 10,000 square feet
gross floor area which supplies commodities on the premises to
serve the day-to-day shopping needs of residents, including but not
limited to businesses that sell groceries, meats, dairy products,
drugs, dry goods and notions (a dry-cleaning outlet is also
permitted with no cleaning operations on the premises);
(2) Restaurants;
(3) Essential services; and
(4) Other uses similar to the above uses not specifically addressed
elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the Planning
Commission following the process outlined in Article 19.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory buildings are not permitted.
(2) The following accessory uses shall be permitted, subject to the
provisions set forth in § 285-19.11:
(a) Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements
outlined in Article 12 herein shall be permitted.
(b) Signs in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 16
herein shall be permitted, except no sign may project above
the roofline.
285-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-6.3
1:687
285-6.3. Required conditions.
A. Site plan review. Submission of a site plan for review and approval by
the Planning Commission shall be required, in accordance with the
provisions set forth in § 285-21.2, prior to issuance of a building permit
and development in the C-1 Convenience Commercial District.
B. Development site. For uses located within the C-1 District, the
standards that are contained in this chapter shall be applied to the
zoning lot, as defined. This may include a combination of lots under
unified ownership and control or a site that contains multiple uses or
principal structures. The Planning Commission shall have the discretion
to determine what constitutes a zoning lot during site plan review.
C. Public access.
(1) All C-1 Convenience Commercial District uses shall have direct
access onto a public hard-surfaced street, except that indirect
access onto a public street may be permitted where the Planning
Commission determines that such an alternative would promote
traffic safety and would not cause undue disruption to surrounding
single-family neighborhoods.
(2) All streets, roads and access drives shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards of the Wayne County
Office of Public Services and the Township Engineer.
D. Outside storage. Outside storage of materials, supplies, equipment, or
other goods is prohibited in this district.
E. Landscaping and buffering. Submission of a landscape plan to the
Planning Commission for review and approval shall be required, based
on requirements set forth in Article 13. Landscaping shall include the
following requirements:
(1) General site landscaping to meet the requirements of § 285-13.3A.
(2) Greenbelts along all abutting public road rights-of-way or private
road easements to meet the requirements of § 285-13.3B.
(3) Buffer zones from all abutting land uses to meet the requirements
of § 285-13.3C.
(4) Off-street parking landscaped in accordance with the requirements
of § 285-13.3F.
(5) Landscaping shall comply with all specifications and requirements
of Article 13.
F. Parking requirements. Convenience Commercial District uses shall
provide parking and loading in accordance with the provisions set forth
in Article 12.
285-6.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-6.3
1:688
(1) For those C-1 uses where required off-street parking cannot be met
on site, parking requirements can be met through on-street parallel
parking or off-street parking on another site where a shared
parking easement is permitted or supplied by the Township.
(2) Off-street parking shall be located in the side or rear yard. On lots
where parking requirements cannot be met in the side and rear
yards, the Planning Commission may permit off-street parking in a
portion of the front yard, provided that such parking lot meets the
minimum front yard setback requirement.
(3) Where off-street parking is visible from the public right-of-way,
screening shall be provided between the parking lot and the public
right-of-way. Screening shall consist of a hedgerow or a three-foottall
earth-tone brick wall. If a hedgerow is provided, it shall be
planted with two-foot-tall shrubs, spaced 2 1/2 feet on center.
(4) Off-street parking shall be landscaped in accordance with the
requirements of Article 13.
G. Storm sewer. All uses located within the C-1 District shall be connected
to a storm sewer. Where a storm sewer is not available, then a
stormwater detention pond may be allowed by the Planning
Commission, provided that the site is designed to connect to the storm
sewer when it is made available to the site and such connection is made
when it becomes available.
H. Exterior building treatment. The exterior building materials and
treatment shall be of finished quality, consistent with the quality of
exterior treatment on surrounding buildings. Examples of finished
quality exterior materials include brick, wood siding, and glass.
Examples of materials that are not typically considered finished quality
in commercial districts include cement block and cinder block.
I. Additional requirements. All permitted and special land uses shall
comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter, including those
listed below as a reference guide:
(1) Article 12, Parking and Loading Requirements.
(2) Article 15, Grading Regulations.62
(3) Article 16, Sign Regulations.
(4) Article 18, Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses, for
redevelopment or expansion of nonconforming conditions.
(5) Article 19, General Provisions, including regulations for covered
trash receptacles and site lighting.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Grading.
285-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-6.4
1:689
285-6.4. Area and bulk regulations.
Any structure or use of the land in a C-1 Convenience Commercial District
shall be subject to the following area and bulk regulations:
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
25,000
Minimum setbacks (feet)
Front yard 40
Side yard 251
Rear yard 25
Parking lot See 2
Natural feature 253
Maximum lot coverage
Buildings 30%
Impervious surfaces 80%
Maximum height
Feet 20
Stories 1
Notes pertaining to area and bulk regulations:
1 The minimum side yard on a side facing a street shall not be less than the
minimum front yard required in the district in which it is located.
2 See Article 12, Parking and Loading Requirements, for parking lot setback
requirements.
3 Natural feature setback shall be maintained in relation to the ordinary
high water mark of any pond, river or channel and to the edge of any
drainageway or regulated wetland. Only waterfront structures and
appurtenances, as permitted in Article 17, Waterfront Provisions, may be
located within the natural feature setback. This setback may be reduced
by the Planning Commission upon a determination that it is clearly in the
public interest. In determining whether the setback reduction is in the
public interest, the benefit which would reasonably be expected to accrue
from the proposed development shall be balanced against the reasonably
foreseeable detriments to the natural feature. The following general
criteria shall be applied in undertaking this balancing test:
a. The relative extent of the public and private need for the proposed
activity.
b. The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations and
methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity,
including alternatives which are off site or on other commercially
available properties.
285-6.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-6.4
1:690
Notes pertaining to area and bulk regulations:
c. The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects
which the proposed activity may have on the public and private
use to which the area is suited, including the benefits the wetland
provides.
d. The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the cumulative
effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the
watershed.
e. The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic,
ecological, or recreational values and on the public health or fish or
wildlife.
f. The size and quality of the wetland.
g. Proximity to any waterway.
h. Extent to which upland soil erosion adjacent to protected wetlands
or drainageways is controlled.
i. Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed land
change to the general area.
j. Findings of necessity for the proposed project which have been
made by other state or local agencies.
285-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-6.4
1:691

ARTICLE 7
Macomb Street District
[Ord. No. 232, effective 1-5-1997; Ord. No. 276, effective 8-29-1999;
by Ord. No. 303, effective 11-21-2001; 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 05-08]
285-7.1. Intent.
The Macomb Street District (MSD) is the mixed-use central business district
of the Township, offering a diverse range of businesses and services to
the community, intermixed with residential dwellings. This district includes
retail businesses, restaurants and entertainment establishments, offices,
public institutions and facilities, and residential dwellings. Specifically, the
regulations set forth herein provide for the following:
A. Macomb Street is intended to be a distinct community center and focal
point in the Township with a complementary and integrated mixture of
uses that create a walkable, traditional small town environment.
Development and redevelopment consistent with the historic
architecture of the Township, mixture of uses and layout of a traditional
small town is encouraged for this district.
B. The Macomb Street District regulations include design standards that
are intended to promote quality site design and building architecture
consistent with the predominant residential character of the Township
and the strong historic heritage of Grosse Ile. Macomb Street
development and redevelopment is to be orderly and planned, to
complement adjoining uses and harmonize with the surrounding area in
terms of the physical site layout, access, building design, pedestrian/
bike facilities, landscaping, signs, parking arrangements and lighting.
C. Macomb Street uses may generate more activity than other uses within
the Township in terms of traffic, noise and pedestrians. Therefore, uses
directly adjacent to residential uses, where permitted, are required to
provide ample setbacks, buffering and sensitive site design.
D. The intimate character of the portion of the Macomb Street corridor
located east of Parke Lane is desired to be preserved. This portion of
the Macomb Street corridor is characterized by the modest size of the
buildings, the sensitive treatment of the storefronts and residences, the
closeness of the buildings to each other and to the road, and the layout
and design of the streetscape to encourage pedestrian traffic. To
maintain a pedestrian-oriented environment and minimize the
dominance of automobiles, parking is encouraged to be located to the
side or rear of buildings.
E. Development and redevelopment of sites within the MSD District shall
be consistent with the recommendations of the Township Master Plan
and the Downtown Development Authority Macomb Streetscape Design
Plan and the Macomb Street Design Standards adopted by the
Township.
285-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.2
1:693
285-7.2. Permitted uses. [Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
A. Principal uses. In the MSD District no building shall be erected and no
building or land shall be used except for the following uses, and subject
to the standards and requirements set forth in this chapter and the
review procedures in Article 21, Site Plan Review. The following shall
apply to each individual use which may be located on a lot with other
uses:
(1) Any generally recognized retail use up to 10,000 square feet gross
floor area which supplies commodities on the premises such as
baked goods, groceries, meats, dairy products, drugs, apparel, dry
goods and notions, hardware, vehicle parts, appliances, crafts,
greeting cards, home furnishings, sporting goods, rental and sales
of videos, recorded music and books.
(2) Banks, credit unions and similar financial institutions with up to
three drive-through teller windows or automatic teller windows;
and stand-alone automatic bank teller machines.
(3) Child day-care centers, preschool and commercial day-care
centers, provided that the following regulations are complied with:
(a) There shall be at least 150 square feet of outdoor play area per
child for whom care is being provided; but in no instance shall
the total outdoor play area be less than 5,000 square feet in
size. All required outdoor play areas shall be fenced in
accordance with the regulations of this chapter, provided that
no fence shall be located in a front yard (including both front
yards on a corner lot).
(b) There shall be at least 50 square feet of indoor classroom, crib
or play area per child for whom care is provided.
(c) The facility shall continually have on file with the Township
documentation of a valid license as required by the state.
(4) Commercial schools and studios for photography, art, dance, music,
theater, ballet and martial arts.
(5) Personal service establishments which perform services on the
premises, including, but not limited to, dressmaker and tailor
shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, tanning salons, laundries, dry
cleaners, mailing, and copying.
(6) Professional offices up to 10,000 square feet gross floor area of
architects, engineers, and lawyers; insurance and real estate
agents, financial consultants and brokers; advertising offices;
accounting and bookkeeping services; clerical and stenographic
services; sales offices; executive or administrative offices; and
medical offices of physicians, dentists, optometrists, chiropractors,
psychiatrists, psychologists and similar or allied professions,
285-7.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-7.2
1:694
including outpatient services but excluding inpatient services and
urgent care centers.
(7) Restaurants and banquet halls which serve food and alcoholic or
nonalcoholic beverages for consumption within the building or for
carry-out; but not having a drive-in or drive-through facility.
Accessory outdoor seating is permitted, provided that noise levels
do not disturb adjacent uses.
(8) Retail businesses in which both a workshop or service facility and a
retail outlet are combined, including, but not limited to, the
business of an electrician, interior decorator, shoe repair, radio,
computer and home appliance repair service, photographic
processor, provided that no more than 50% of the total usable floor
area of the establishment shall be used for servicing, repairing, or
processing activities.
(9) Shopping centers up to a total of 20,000 square feet that contain a
combination of those uses specifically permitted in the MSD
District.
(10) Public or quasi-public uses, including governmental administrative
buildings; post offices; educational, religious, or cultural facilities;
and social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations and clubs.
(11) Single-family detached dwelling units meeting the residential
design standards of § 285-3.4E on lots with a minimum width of 50
feet and a minimum area of 6,000 square feet, except that the
maximum floor area ratio and lot coverage ratio shall be 22% and
20%, respectively. [Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
(12) One single-family dwelling unit on the same lot as any
nonresidential uses specifically permitted in the MSD District
(including a single apartment above a business) meeting the area
and bulk regulations of § 285-7.4 and providing at least 1,000
square feet of usable floor area.
(13) Multiple-family townhouse dwelling units meeting the following
requirements:
(a) One dwelling unit shall be permitted for each 4,000 square feet
of lot area. Each unit shall have a minimum floor area of 1,000
square feet and a minimum of two bedrooms.
(b) Such units shall be designed as townhouses, each having a
separate entryway with direct access to the outdoors and
defined front and rear yards. The front entrance shall be
accessed by a porch or stoop with the front entrance between
two feet and four feet above grade.
(c) The maximum length of buildings shall be 160 feet with a
minimum twenty-foot spacing between buildings.
285-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.2
1:695
(d) Parking shall not be permitted in the front yard, and garages
shall not face the front lot line. All units shall provide individual
garages accessed from the rear of the building. This may be
accommodated by an attached rear-entry garage, a belowgrade
garage or a detached garage located in the rear yard.
Where a garage is below the unit with the garage floor at least
three feet below grade, the lower level of the garage shall not
count towards the allowable two stories, provided the total
building height does not exceed 35 feet.
(e) All buildings shall utilize traditional styles of architecture
consistent with the Macomb Street design standards and
compatible with other nearby residences. All walls of the
buildings shall be at least ninety-percent brick or stone, with
other accent materials permitted by the Planning Commission
under § 285-7.3F(2). The use of wood or fiber cement siding
may be permitted on buildings that are designed with a
traditional style that the Planning Commission determines will
be consistent with the traditional architecture of historic
buildings on Grosse Ile and in accordance with the Macomb
Street design standards in the Township Master Plan.
(f) Buildings shall be oriented towards the street with the primary
pedestrian access facing the street. The facade of buildings
facing the public street shall include doors, windows, porches,
stoops and other architectural detailing consistent with the
front facade of a traditional dwelling. Buildings shall be
designed with at least one of the following features on the front
street-facing elevation:
[1] Roof dormer;
[2] A porch roof with a gable end facing the street; or
[3] A gable end facing the front lot line with a window or
trimmed vent in the gable area above the eave line:
(g) All windows shall have vertical proportions. The sides of end
units shall include windows to break up any blank walls.
(h) The area and bulk requirements of § 285-7.4 shall be complied
with; except where the site adjoins a single-family residential
use, a minimum twenty-foot setback shall be provided from the
adjacent single-family residential lot.
(i) Required conditions of § 285-4.3 shall be complied with, in
addition to the requirements of this article.
285-7.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-7.2
1:696
Townhouses with individual entrances and front porch 3 feet
above grade.
Pedestrian orientation towards street with garages to rear.
Traditional architecture with brick as primary material.
285-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.2
1:697
(14) Resale and consignment shops.
(15) Essential services.
(16) Other uses similar to the above uses not specifically addressed
elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the Planning
Commission following the process outlined in Article 19.
B. Accessory buildings and uses. The following accessory buildings and
uses shall be permitted, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Accessory buildings and uses which are customarily incidental to
the principal use on the lot, including an approved special land use,
subject to the same required conditions that are applicable to the
principal or special land use.
(2) Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements outlined in
Article 12.
285-7.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-7.2
1:698
(3) Signs in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 16.
(4) Outdoor sales and display, provided it is within 20 feet of the
principal commercial structure and that material is stored indoors
after the establishment closes each day.
(5) Tent sales, provided that the following regulations are complied
with:
(a) The tent shall be no greater than 1,000 square feet in area.
(b) The tent shall be located on the same lot or combination of lots,
owned and operated by the proprietor of a permanent principal
commercial establishment.
(c) Retail operation shall be only during daylight hours.
(d) The operation shall be limited to 45 days per year.
(e) One unlit sign is permitted.
(f) No new exterior lighting is permitted.
(g) The tent and any electrical power to the tent must be approved
by the Building Department, and must comply with building
and electrical code standards.63
(h) Parking shall be limited to paved parking lots on the same site.
Adequate parking shall be provided, and the tent shall be
located such that it will not disrupt parking lot access and
traffic circulation.
(i) The site shall be restored to its original condition after the tent
is removed, and a performance guarantee shall be provided to
ensure such restoration.
(6) Off-street parking and storage of small utility trailers or service
trucks with a maximum capacity of 1 1/2 tons, provided such
vehicles are the property of the occupant, have a current year's
license, and are stored within a garage or in the rear yard where it
is not visible from the public right-of-way. If the rear yard is visible
from the public right-of-way, then a screening wall meeting the
requirements of Article 13, Landscaping, Screening and Walls,
shall be required. The parking or storage of trucks that exceed oneand-
one-half-ton capacity, truck trailers, truck tractors, moving
vans, automobile trailers, and licensed or unlicensed vehicles
which are wrecked, disabled, or incapable of movement under their
own power is prohibited in this district.
C. Special land uses. The following uses shall be permitted as special land
uses in the MSD District subject to the following requirements and
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.2
1:699
subject to the review procedures in Article 22, Special Land Use
Review. The following shall apply to each individual use which may be
located on a lot with other uses:
(1) Any generally recognized retail use equal to or greater than 10,000
square feet gross floor area which supplies commodities on the
premises such as baked goods, groceries, meats, dairy products,
drugs, apparel, dry goods and notions, hardware, vehicle parts,
appliances, crafts, greeting cards, home furnishings, sporting
goods, rental and sales of videos, recorded music and books.
(2) Automobile, boat or recreational vehicle sales, new and used.
(3) Automobile or vehicle service stations, provided that the following
regulations are complied with:
(a) The minimum lot area for a service station in the MSD District
shall be 15,000 square feet, except that the minimum lot area
for service stations which have no facilities for repair or
servicing of vehicles shall be 10,000 square feet.
(b) Edge of parking areas and driveways shall be at least 25 feet
from an adjacent property line.
(c) Three off-street car storage spaces shall be provided for each
car repair bay. Outdoor storage of wrecked, partially
dismantled, or vehicles without current license is prohibited.
An individual vehicle shall not be stored outdoors for more
than seven days in any thirty-day period.
(d) Outside storage of oil drums, trailers, tires, equipment for rent,
or other materials shall not be permitted in the MSD District.
(e) Engine rebuilding, vehicle dismantling, upholstering, and
other types of major repair work shall not be permitted in the
MSD District.
(f) The proposed clearance of any canopy shall be noted on the
site plan. Any signs, logo or identifying paint scheme on the
canopy shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and
considered part of the maximum wall sign permitted. Details
on the canopy lighting shall be provided to ensure that there is
no glare on the public streets or adjacent property. Lighting
levels will not exceed 0.1 footcandle (measured at the ground
surface) at a residential property line and 1.0 footcandle at a
nonresidential property line.
(g) The applicant shall submit a pollution incidence protection
plan, prepared by a qualified professional, which shall describe
measures to prevent groundwater, soil or surface water
contamination caused by accidental gasoline spills or leakage,
285-7.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-7.2
1:700
such as special check valves, drain back catch basins and
automatic shutoff valves.
(h) In the event that an automobile service station use has been
abandoned or terminated for a period of more than one year,
all underground gasoline storage tanks shall be removed from
the premises.
(i) A combination service station/convenience store shall be
permitted only if there is adequate space for safe and efficient
pedestrian and vehicular circulation, sufficient parking for
each use added collectively, and required landscaping and
buffering. The applicant shall provide a parking and circulation
plan that demonstrates the means of separating convenience
store traffic from service station traffic. The Planning
Commission shall examine this plan and the impact of
anticipated traffic on adjoining properties in making its
determination.
(4) Automobile washes that are automatic, self-service or accessory to
a service station, provided the following regulations are complied
with:
(a) Access shall be limited to one access point per street.
(b) Where adjoining a residential district, a solid fence or wall six
feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such
fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good
condition. The Planning Commission may require landscaping,
including a berm, as an alternative.
(c) All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed
building.
(d) Vacuuming and drying may be located outside the building, but
shall not be in the required front, side or rear yards and shall
be set back at least 50 feet from any lot that is zoned or used as
residential.
(e) All vehicles required to wait for access to the facilities shall be
provided stacking spaces off the street right-of-way which do
not conflict with driveway access or vehicle maneuvering areas
to access gasoline pumps or vacuums.
(5) Bed-and-breakfast inns; hotels, motels including accessory
convention/meeting facilities and restaurants. Bed-and-breakfast
inns shall meet the special land use standards of Article 19.
(6) Banks, credit unions and similar financial institutions with more
than three drive-through teller windows or automatic teller
windows.
(7) Convenience stores.
285-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.2
1:701
(8) Funeral homes or mortuaries.
(9) Hospitals, urgent-care facilities and medical centers.
(10) Indoor theaters, video arcades, bowling establishments, bars with
live musical entertainment or dancing, dance halls, health and
fitness centers, and similar places of assembly or entertainment.
(11) Shopping centers equal to or greater than 20,000 square feet that
contain a combination of those uses specifically permitted in the
Macomb Street District.
(12) Pawnshops, provided the following regulations are complied with:
(a) Outdoor display shall be prohibited.
(b) Hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(c) Security measures shall be provided which are not visible from
the exterior of the building.
(13) Professional offices equal to or greater than 10,000 square feet
gross floor area of architects, engineers, and lawyers; insurance
and real estate agents, financial consultants and brokers;
advertising offices; accounting and bookkeeping services; clerical
and stenographic services; sales offices; executive or
administrative offices; and medical offices of physicians, dentists,
optometrists, chiropractors, psychiatrists, psychologists and
similar or allied professions.
(14) Restaurants with a drive-in or drive-through facility. The applicant
shall prepare a traffic impact assessment.
(15) Senior housing, provided that the following regulations are
complied with:
(a) The minimum senior housing lot area shall be three acres.
(b) Setbacks from the lot lines which surround the perimeter of
the site shall meet the standards of § 285-7.4. Internal setbacks
between buildings shall be 20 feet. Minimum setbacks between
buildings and the internal road or common access drives shall
be 15 feet.
(c) The maximum building height shall be one story. If an elevator
is provided, then the building may be two stories. The
minimum building width in any dimension shall be 14 feet.
(d) Minimum unit size shall be 350 square feet of usable floor area,
not including kitchen, bathroom and storage areas. The
interior of each unit shall be designed to provide ease of
mobility by seniors who may have mobility limitations. The
following standards shall be met for all units:
285-7.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-7.2
1:702
[1] All doors shall be at least 40 inches wide so as to provide a
minimum thirty-six-inch clear opening when the door is
standing 90° open.
[2] All hallways or passageways shall be at least three feet, six
inches in width.
[3] There shall be no raised thresholds in the units. Floors
shall continue through door openings at the same level.
[4] All bathroom and kitchen features shall be designed in
accordance with the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI), Specifications for Making Buildings and
Facilities Accessible to and Usable by Physically
Handicapped People, Section 4.34, Dwelling Units, of
ANSI A117.1 (1980), or structurally designed and laid out
to be easily modified to accommodate these standards.
(e) All pedestrian circulation walkways and sidewalks shall be
hard-surfaced with either asphalt, concrete, brick paving or
boardwalk and be accessible to the handicapped according to
the standards set forth in the Americans With Disabilities Act.64
Handicapped access ramp structures may encroach into any
required setback space.
(f) At least 15% of the total site area shall be reserved as open
space. This open space shall be utilized for recreation facilities
such as picnic areas, walking trails or other open space uses
which provide elderly residents the opportunity to enjoy the
natural features of the site. The open space shall be configured
to be integrated with the individual units and maximize the
proximity of each housing unit to natural open space.
(g) Deed restrictions shall limit occupancy of units to senior
citizens by requiring that each unit be occupied by at least one
person over 55 years of age. Documents shall be presented
that bind all successors and future owners in fee title to
commitments made as a part of the initial special land use
approval. This provision shall not prohibit a transfer of
ownership or control, provided notice of such transfer is
provided to the Township and the land uses continue as
approved.
(16) Veterinary clinics, veterinary hospitals and related offices,
provided that the following regulations are complied with:
(a) The use shall be operated by a licensed or registered
veterinarian.
64.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
285-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.2
1:703
(b) All principal use activities shall be conducted within a totally
enclosed principal building; no outdoor pet enclosures or runs
are permitted.
(c) Any indoor boarding shall be limited to that incidental to
treatment or surgery.
(d) Any veterinary building or structure which is used for the
treatment or holding of animals and which is adjacent to a
residential district shall have the following construction
features:
[1] Walls are soundproofed to allow a maximum transmission
of 65 decibels measured at any point on the outside of the
exterior wall.
[2] Doors must be solid core.
[3] Ventilation must be forced air.
(e) Outdoor exercising is allowed when the pet is accompanied by
an employee, provided no animals shall be permitted outside of
the buildings between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(17) Multiple-family dwelling units; provided all R-3 area and bulk
regulations of § 285-4.4 are complied with in addition to the
requirements of this article.
(18) Multiple-family dwelling units on the same site as nonresidential
uses; provided the following conditions are met:
(a) Designated residential parking is provided on the site meeting
the requirements for multiple-family, in addition to parking
requirements for commercial uses.
(b) The R-3 minimum usable floor area per dwelling unit standard
of § 285-4.4 is provided.
(c) The Planning Commission shall determine that the site and
buildings are designed to allow a complementary mixture of
uses on the site with minimal conflict, based upon the special
land use standards contained in Article 22.
(19) Boarding homes subject to the following:
(a) A boarding home shall be located on a lot that has frontage on
Macomb Street and is a minimum of 1,500 feet from any of the
following:
[1] Another boarding home.
[2] A state-licensed adult foster care facility.
[3] A school.
285-7.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-7.2
1:704
[4] A nursery or day care.
(b) The boarding home shall be the only use on the lot, and the site
shall meet the minimum requirements of the R-1-B District
applicable to single-family dwellings.
(c) The dwelling shall be single-family residential in character,
shall not be cause for a change in character of the
neighborhood and shall have a facade style consistent with
other single-family residences within the Township. A boarding
home shall not be established in a structure that is commercial
or multiple-family in character.
(d) A boarding home operation shall be confined to the singlefamily
dwelling unit that is the principal dwelling unit on the
property. The dwelling shall be the permanent residence of the
boarding home owner. The boarding home owner's living area
shall be a minimum of 900 square feet (not including storage,
utilities, hallways, and the bedroom and bathroom facilities of
the boarding home tenants). The boarding home shall employ
only those living in the house or up to one additional employee.
(e) Floor plans and site plans drawn to scale of the entire boarding
home facility shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.
(f) The dwelling shall be a single-family detached dwelling with
not more than six sleeping rooms available for boarders. No
premises shall be utilized for a boarding home operation unless
the following conditions are met:
[1] Such dwelling shall meet all applicable Township building
and fire codes.65
[2] The building shall meet requirements of the Americans
with Disabilities Act for accessibility. This shall include
wheelchair accessibility to the common living and dining
areas and at least one tenant room and one full bathroom
facility.
[3] There shall be at least two exits to the outdoors from such
premises on the main floor. There shall also be a safe
means of egressing the second floor that meets Township
fire code requirements.
[4] Rooms utilized for sleeping shall have a minimum size of
120 square feet, excluding closet area, and there shall be
no more than one occupant per room.
[5] Each sleeping room shall have a separate smoke detector
alarm, installed in accordance with the applicable
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction, and Ch. 110, Fire Prevention.
285-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.2
1:705
Township building code requirements. Such smoke
detector shall be interconnected with a building-wide fire
detection system.
[6] Lavatory and bathing facilities shall be available to all
persons using any boarding home operation, provided a
minimum of one full bathroom shall be provided for each
three boarders, in addition to the full bathroom for the
owner.
[7] There shall be no cooking facilities provided for the
boarders. Meals shall be served only to occupants of the
boarding home facility. There shall be common dining and
social areas provided with a minimum total usable floor
area of 350 square feet.
[8] All boarders shall secure leases from the owner, the term
of which shall be no less than one month.
(g) Off-street parking shall be provided based upon one space for
each rental room and two spaces for the owner of the facility. It
is the Township's intent to discourage the alteration to yards,
removing of landscaping or the intruding upon the integrity of
the neighborhood altered in order to provide parking.
Therefore parking shall be located within the rear yard or
within the front yard, provided parking shall not be within 20
feet of the front lot line. Side and rear yard screening of the
parking lot shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article 13, Landscaping, Screening and Walls.
(h) Upon granting special land use approval, a boarding home
shall be provided a license from the Township. Such license
shall be renewed every six months by the Zoning Administrator
based upon demonstration of compliance with the
requirements of Township ordinances and conditions of
approval. Copies of all current leases shall be provided to the
Township at the time of license renewal. A boarding home
dwelling establishment shall be considered to have ceased
operation when active rental of the facility lapses for six
months or more.
(20) Household tool and equipment rental, excluding vehicles, trailers
and construction equipment and machinery. Any outdoor storage
shall be located in the rear yard within a screened enclosure.
Outdoor display may also be permitted, provided any such items:
(a) Shall be displayed only during regular business hours;
(b) Shall not block motorized or nonmotorized access;
(c) Shall be located within five feet of the principal building; and
285-7.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-7.2
1:706
285-7.3. Required conditions.
(d) Shall be placed inside the building each day at the end of
business.
(21) Other uses similar to the above uses not specifically addressed
elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the Planning
Commission following the process outlined in Article 19.
A. Site plan review. Submission of a site plan for review and approval by
the Planning Commission shall be required, in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Article 21, Site Plan Review, prior to issuance of a
building permit and development in the MSD District.
B. Development site. For uses located within the MSD District, the
standards that are contained in this chapter shall be applied to the
zoning lot, as defined. This may include a combination of lots under
unified ownership and control, or a site that contains multiple uses or
principal structures. The Planning Commission shall have the discretion
to determine what constitutes a zoning lot during site plan review.
C. Public access.
(1) All MSD commercial uses shall have direct access onto a public
hard-surfaced street, except that indirect access onto a public
street may be permitted where the Planning Commission
determines that such an alternative would promote traffic safety
and would not cause undue disruption to surrounding uses.
(2) All streets, roads and access drives shall be concrete or asphalt and
be designed and constructed in accordance with the Township
Roads and Driveways Ordinance66 and the standards of the Wayne
County Department of Public Services and the Township Engineer.
(3) Sidewalks or bike paths shall be provided along all abutting public
streets. Sidewalks shall be located and designed to meet the
standards of the Downtown Development Authority Macomb
Streetscape Design Plan. In locations where this plan does not
prescribe sidewalk standards, sidewalks shall be provided one foot
inside the dedicated street right-of-way, be a minimum five feet
wide, concrete and constructed to the specifications of the Wayne
County Department of Public Services and the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO).
D. Outside storage. Outside storage of materials, supplies, equipment, or
other goods, other than temporary outdoor sales and display as
provided for in § 285-7.2B, is prohibited in this district.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Roads and Driveways.
285-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.3
1:707
E. Landscaping and buffering. Submission of a landscape plan to the
Planning Commission for review and approval shall be required, based
on requirements set forth in Article 13. Landscaping shall include the
following requirements:
(1) General site landscaping to meet the requirements of § 285-13.3A.
(2) Greenbelts along all abutting public road right-of-ways or private
road easements to meet the requirements of § 285-13.3B.
(3) Buffer zones from all abutting land uses to meet the requirements
of § 285-13.3C.
(4) Off-street parking landscaped in accordance with the requirements
of § 285-13D.
(5) Landscaping shall comply with all specifications and requirements
of Article 13.
F. Architectural standards.
(1) All proposed development within the MSD District shall utilize
quality architecture to ensure that buildings are compatible with
surrounding uses, protect the investment of adjacent landowners
and blend harmoniously into the streetscape. Single-family
detached dwelling units shall meet the residential design standards
of § 285-3.4E.
(2) Non-single-family detached residential, including new buildings,
additions and renovations, shall be designed to preserve or
complement the design character of existing development, provide
visual harmony between old and new buildings, and create a
positive image for the Township's Macomb Street business district.
Proposed non-single-family detached residential structures shall
comply with the Macomb Street Design Standards adopted by the
Township and shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission under
the following criteria:
(a) Buildings shall front towards and have their primary
pedestrian entrance facing onto the public street. Blank walls
may not face a public street and buildings must have windows
and architectural features commonly associated with the front
facade of a building, such as awnings, cornice work, edge
detailing or other decorative finish materials, on walls that face
the public street. The Planning Commission may permit
buildings which face towards a side yard, provided that defined
pedestrian access routes are provided to the public street and
features such as those described above are provided along
walls that face the public street.
(b) Buildings shall be located to create a defined streetscape
through uniform setbacks and proper relationship to adjacent
285-7.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-7.3
1:708
structures. Proper relationship to existing structures in the
area shall be maintained through building mass, proportion,
scale, roofline shapes and rhythm of windows and doors. The
Planning Commission may require a perspective drawing or a
scale model of the proposed structure.
(c) The exterior building materials and treatment shall be of
finished quality, consistent with the quality of exterior
treatment on surrounding buildings. Building materials and
colors shall relate well and be harmonious with the
surrounding area. Roof shape and materials shall be
architecturally compatible with adjacent buildings and
enhance the predominant streetscape. For any side of a
principal building, at least 90% of the facade shall be
constructed of, or covered with, one or more of the following
materials:
[1] Brick;
[2] Cut stone;
[3] Vinyl siding or fiber cement siding, such as hardplank;
[4] Wood siding;
[5] Stucco in Tudor style buildings;
[6] Nonreflective glass; or,
[7] Other materials similar to the above as determined by the
Planning Commission.
(d) All buildings shall have pitched roofs, except the Planning
Commission may allow commercial structures with flat roofs
where the design of the structure complies with the Macomb
Street Design Standards adopted by the Township.
(e) Buildings shall possess architectural variety, but the
architecture shall enhance the overall cohesive community
character, as demonstrated by the applicant in terms of the
following:
[1] The type and color of materials shall not be contrary to the
existing or intended character of Macomb Street.
[2] The orientation of entrances and proposed flow of
pedestrians will contribute towards pedestrian activity
along Macomb Street and, where possible, coordinate with
adjacent uses.
[3] The location, size and number of windows shall be oriented
towards Macomb Street and maintain similar proportions
and rhythms with existing buildings along the same block.
285-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.3
1:709
[4] The building's setback will be consistent with adjacent lots
and contribute to creating a defined streetscape.
[5] The mass of the building shall relate and be proportional to
the existing buildings along the same block.
[6] Corner buildings should be designed as more significant
structures related to their prominent location.
(f) Buildings shall provide architectural features, details and
ornaments, such as archways, colonnades, towers, cornices or
peaked rooflines. Building entrances shall utilize windows,
canopies and awnings; provide unity of scale, texture, and
color; and provide a sense of place.
(g) The predominating surface plane of all building walls over 50
feet in length shall be varied through the use of one or more of
the following: varying building lines, windows, architectural
accents or landscaping.
(h) Where the side or rear facade(s) of a building will be visible
from a residential zoning district or public land, or the rear or
side of the site will be used for public access or parking, such
facade(s) shall be constructed to a finished quality comparable
to the front facade.
(i) Signs, landscaping, walls, lighting and other site elements
shall be coordinated and compatible with the building design,
as well as harmonious with other nearby developments. All
rooftop-mounted equipment shall be screened from view.
G. Parking requirements: Macomb Street uses shall provide parking and
loading in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 12.
(1) For those MSD uses east of Parke Lane where required off-street
parking cannot be met on site, parking requirements can be met
through on-street parallel parking or off-street parking on another
site where a shared parking easement is permitted or supplied by
the Township.
(2) Off-street parking shall be located in the side or rear yard. On lots
where parking requirements cannot be met in the side and rear
yards, the Planning Commission may permit off-street parking in a
portion of the front yard, provided that such parking lot meets the
minimum front yard setback requirement.
(3) Where off-street parking is visible from the public right-of-way,
screening shall be provided between the parking lot and the public
right-of-way. Screening shall consist of a hedgerow or a three-foot
tall earth-tone brick wall. If a hedgerow is provided, it shall be
planted with two-foot tall shrubs, spaced 2 1/2 feet on center.
285-7.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-7.3
1:710
285-7.4. Area and bulk regulations.
Any structure or use of the land in the MSD District shall be subject to the
following area and bulk regulations:
Requirement MSD
Minimum lot area Variable1
Minimum setbacks (feet)
Front yard 252,3
Side yard 104,5,8
Rear yard 20
Parking lot See 6
Natural feature 257
Maximum lot coverage
Buildings 30%
Impervious surfaces 80%
Maximum height
Feet 35
(4) Off-street parking shall be landscaped in accordance with the
requirements of Article 13.
H. Storm sewer. All uses located within the MSD District shall be
connected to a storm sewer. Where a storm sewer is not available, then
a stormwater detention pond may be allowed by the Planning
Commission, provided that the site is designed to connect to the storm
sewer when it is made available to the site and such connection is made
when it becomes available.
I. Additional requirements: All permitted and special land uses shall
comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter, including those
listed below as a reference guide:
(1) Article 12, Parking and Loading.
(2) Article 15, Grading Regulations.67
(3) Article 16, Signs Regulations.
(4) Article 18, Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses, for
redevelopment or expansion of nonconforming conditions.
(5) Article 19, General Provisions, including regulations for covered
trash receptacles and site lighting.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Grading.
285-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.4
1:711
Requirement MSD
Stories 2
Notes pertaining to area and bulk regulations:
1 The minimum lot area shall be based on the requirements for parking,
landscaping, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, maximum lot
coverage, and other conditions set forth herein, unless otherwise
specified.
2 Off-street parking shall meet the required minimum front yard setback
for principal structures. This setback shall be maintained as a
landscaped setback. Neither parking, nor structures shall be located
within the front yard.
3 East of Parke Lane, the minimum front yard setback shall be equal to
the average of the front yard setbacks for the adjacent buildings on
either side of the proposed use. The Planning Commission may permit
a reduced front yard setback in all areas of the MSD where parking is
not located in the front yard, a pedestrian entrance is provided facing
Macomb Street and the setback is not less than that of adjacent
principal structures.
4 The minimum side yard on a side facing a street shall not be less than
the minimum front yard required in the district. If parking is provided
in a side yard facing a street, then the minimum side yard shall be 50
feet.
5 East of Parke Lane, an interior side yard shall not be required,
provided that the side wall of the building does not have windows or
other openings, and provided further that the side wall is of fireproof
construction, as defined by the Building Code. The minimum side yard
setback shall be 10 feet on interior side lots where the building does
not meet both of these conditions.
6 Parking lot setback requirements of Article 12, Parking and Loading
Requirements, shall be complied with, provided that the Planning
Commission may reduce the side or rear yard parking lot setback in
consideration of the size of the site, the configuration of the parking
lot, circulation on the site, adequacy of screening, compatibility with
adjacent land uses and relationship to structures, or parking lots on
adjacent lots.
285-7.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-7.4
1:712
7 Natural feature setback shall be maintained in relation to the ordinary
high-water mark of any pond, river or channel, and to the edge of any
drainageway or regulated wetland. Only waterfront structures and
appurtenances, as permitted in Article 17, Waterfront Provisions, may
be located within the natural feature setback. This setback may be
reduced by the Planning Commission upon a determination that it is
clearly in the public interest. In determining whether the setback
reduction is in the public interest, the benefit which would reasonably
be expected to accrue from the proposed development shall be
balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments to the natural
feature. The following general criteria shall be applied in undertaking
this balancing test:
a. The relative extent of the public and private need for the
proposed activity.
b. The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations and
methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity,
including alternatives which are off-site or on other commercially
available properties.
c. The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental
effects which the proposed activity may have on the public and
private use to which the area is suited, including the benefits the
wetland provides.
d. The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the cumulative
effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the
watershed.
e. The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic,
ecological, or recreational values and on the public health or fish
or wildlife.
f. The size and quality of the wetland.
g. Proximity to any waterway.
h. Extent to which upland soil erosion adjacent to protected
wetlands or drainageways is controlled.
i. Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed land
change to the general area.
j. Findings of necessity for the proposed project which have been
made by other state or local agencies.
8 Minimum side yard setbacks for single-family detached dwelling units
shall be five feet for one side yard and 15 feet for the combination of
both side yards.
285-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-7.4
1:713

ARTICLE 8
SE Special Environmental District
[Ord. No. 286, effective 4-16-2000]
285-8.1. Intent.
The purpose of this district is to require that no changes in use or new
development occur on Point Hennepin until all necessary federal, state, and
local environmental studies and clearances are completed. Point Hennepin
is a fill area built up over a period of years by the distribution of disposal
materials from chemical manufacturing operations on the nearby mainland.
285-8.2. Permitted uses.
This district permits only the presently existing unused chemical disposal
site on Hennepin Island. Reactivation of chemical disposal functions,
further development, or changes in land use may be permitted only upon
application to the Township. An agreement between the BASF Corporation
and Grosse Ile Township executed on September 26, 1977, provides for
the filling of existing Point Hennepin brine field sinkholes with dredging
spoils, demolition rubble and similar inert material (containing no toxic
matter, refuse, garbage, rubbish, or ashes) in accordance with State of
Michigan Department of Natural Resources permit standards and Wayne
County Health Department environmental health standards.
285-8.3. Required conditions.
The Grosse Ile Township Planning Commission must be consulted with
respect to any proposed changes in land use on Point Hennepin or any
physical changes involving the present use of the land. The Planning
Commission, in consultation with requisite Wayne County, State of
Michigan, and federal agencies, shall inform the applicant of all required
environmental and development studies, analyses, clearances, approvals,
and permits.
285-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-8.3
1:715

ARTICLE 9
A-1 Airport and Light Industrial District
[Ord. No. 259B, effective 4-11-1999; amended 7-22-2002; 1-22-2007
by Ord. No. 07-01]
285-9.1. Intent.
285-9.2. Aeronautical uses.
The following aeronautical uses shall be permitted in the A-1 Airport and
Light Industrial District, subject to the standards and requirements set forth
in this chapter, and the review procedures in Article 21, Site Plan Review.
A. This article regulates the use of the land formerly occupied by the
United States Naval Air Station in conformity with the terms and
conditions of the deed from the United States of America and the lease
from the State of Michigan to the Township of Grosse Ile.
B. The A-1 Airport and Light Industrial District permits those uses,
activities, facilities and structures necessary for the safe and efficient
operation of aircraft for the use and benefit of the public, and for
providing the services and facilities required to accommodate airport
patrons and employees.
C. The A-1 Airport and Light Industrial District provides locations that will
accommodate complementary commercial, research and light
industrial operations, such as light manufacturing, fabricating, or
processing; warehousing; research laboratories; computer-related
high-technology businesses; aerial survey businesses; and other types
of light industrial uses.
D. The A-1 Airport and Light Industrial District protects the delicate island
environment from harmful impacts on natural resources, the road
network and residential uses often associated with heavy industrial
operations. Accordingly, the regulations permit development that is
free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation
and other hazards, noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other
objectionable impacts. The regulations further permit development that
is complementary to, and not in conflict with, the safe and efficient
operation of the airport and that will not adversely impact the
surrounding residential uses.
A. Principal use, Aeronautical: airport landing areas, runways, taxiways,
control towers, tie-down areas, aircraft hangars, aircraft maintenance,
aircraft fuel farms, and similar airport related facilities and structures
that are consistent with § 285-9.1, Intent.
B. Accessory use, Aeronautical: accessory uses shall include any uses
customarily incidental to the principal use that are consistent with
§ 285-9.1, Intent, provided that the storage of fuels and hazardous
materials shall comply with the standards of § 285-9.3B(2).
285-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-9.3
1:717
285-9.3. Nonaeronautical uses. [Amended 9-12-2011 by Ord. No.
11-03]
A. Principal uses, nonaeronautical. The following nonaviation uses shall be
permitted within fully enclosed buildings, provided such uses are
consistent with the terms and conditions of the deed from the United
States of America, or amendments thereto, and subject to the standards
and requirements set forth in this chapter and the review procedures in
Article 21, Site Plan Review. The Declaration of Covenants and
Restrictions as adopted by the Township Board on October 25, 1984, as
amended, shall apply to the use of land situated in the Grosse Ile
Industrial Park.
(1) Air freight transportation facilities.
(2) Automobile or vehicle repair establishments, subject to the
following requirements:
(a) All repair work shall be conducted completely within an
enclosed building.
(b) Vehicles stored outdoors shall be stored in the rear yard.
Vehicles shall not be stored outdoors for more than seven days
in any thirty-day period. Storage of wrecked, partially
dismantled, or other derelict vehicles is prohibited.
(3) Boat and RV sales, storage and maintenance.
(4) Building/home improvement contractors, including office,
showroom, storage and outdoor storage yards.
(5) Business services (mailing, copying, data processing,
telecommunications, etc.).
(6) Convenience stores of up to 5,000 square feet.
(7) Dry cleaner dropoff stations.
(8) General offices, corporate offices and aviation-related offices.
(9) Government offices and facilities, including storage yards for
government vehicles, and public works maintenance equipment
and facilities for law enforcement, customs, homeland security, and
emergency services training.
(10) Hotels, motels, bed-and-breakfast inns, restaurants without drivethrough,
parking lots, automobile rental, or other similar
nonaviation businesses directly related to the development,
improvement, maintenance and operation of the airport and mixeduse
industrial park.
(11) Indoor commercial or self-storage, including boat storage.
285-9.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-9.3
1:718
(12) The manufacturing, compounding, assembling, fabricating,
processing, heat treating, coating, bonding, packaging or
improving of the following products using previously prepared
materials within a completely enclosed building:
(a) Textile mill products;
(b) Apparel and other finished fabric products;
(c) Lumber and wood products;
(d) Furniture and fixtures;
(e) Leather products;
(f) Stone, clay and glass, using previously pulverized clay and
kilns fired only by electricity or gas;
(g) Fabricated rubber, plastic and metal products, but excluding
the following: steel foundries, and smelting and refining of
nonferrous metals;
(h) Machinery, tools, dies, robotics and assembly systems;
(i) Electrical and electronic machinery, computers and
communication equipment and supplies;
(j) Transportation equipment;
(k) Measuring, imaging, testing, simulation, sensing, analyzing
and controlling instruments, equipment, parts and supplies,
photographic, medical and optical goods, pharmaceutical
products, diagnostic devices, watches and clocks; and
(l) Miscellaneous manufacturing, including jewelry, silverware
and plated ware, musical instruments, toys, amusement,
sporting and athletic goods, and office and artists' materials.
(13) Medical centers and urgent-care facilities.
(14) Printing, publishing and allied industries.
(15) Recreational facilities, including health and fitness clubs, ice
arenas, racquet sport courts, other indoor recreational facilities,
outdoor athletic fields and parks.
(16) Research, design, and pilot or experimental product development
when conducted within a completely enclosed building.
(17) Tool and equipment rental, including vehicles or trailers; provided
any outdoor storage shall require special land use approval under
Subsection C for outdoor sales or storage.
285-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-9.3
1:719
(18) Trade or industrial schools, training facilities and conference
centers, including schools for pilots, aircraft maintenance and
operations.
(19)Warehousing and wholesale establishments, storage and transfer
facilities with a total usable floor area of not more than 200,000
square feet. A floor area greater than 200,000 square feet shall
require a special land use permit.
(20) Essential services.
(21) Other uses similar to the above uses not specifically addressed
elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the Planning
Commission following the process outlined in Article 19.
B. Accessory uses, nonaeronautical. Accessory uses shall include any
buildings and uses which are customarily incidental to the principal
use, subject to the same required conditions that are applicable to the
principal uses as approved following Planning Commission site plan
review.
(1) Accessory buildings and uses which are customarily incidental to
the principal use on the lot, subject to the same required conditions
that are applicable to the principal uses.
(2) Accessory use or storage of hazardous materials. When total
quantities of hazardous materials on site will equal or exceed 200
gallons, documentation for the following shall be included with the
site plan application, with appropriate correspondence from the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Michigan State
Police, Fire Marshal and Grosse Ile Township Fire Department:
(a) Description of any discharge of any type of wastewater to a
storm sewer, drain, lake, stream, wetland, other surface water
body or into the groundwater.
(b) Description of storage of any salt, oil or other potentially
hazardous materials, including common name, name of
chemical components, location, maximum quantity expected
on hand at any time, type of storage containers or base
material, and anticipated procedure for use and handling.
(c) Description of any generation, on-site treatment, storage,
transportation, or disposal of hazardous waste, including a
description of waste chemicals and hazard classes.
(d) Description of any secondary containment measures proposed,
including design, construction materials and specifications,
volume and security measures.
(e) Name and phone number(s) of person(s) responsible for
materials and available 24 hours, in case of detected spill.
285-9.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-9.3
1:720
(3) Accessory outdoor storage shall be permitted as accessory to a
permitted use, subject to the following requirements:
(a) The area for outdoor storage shall not exceed 25% of the gross
building floor area. A greater amount of outdoor storage shall
require a special land use permit under § 285-9.3C(5) below.
(b) Proposed outside storage of materials, supplies or equipment
shall be shown on the site plan.
(c) Any stockpiles of soils, fertilizer or similar loosely packaged
materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained to prevent
blowing of materials off site.
(d) Outdoor storage shall be limited to the rear yard of the site or
the side yard where it is screened by a wall or continuous row
of evergreen landscaping.
(e) The height of all material stored in an outdoor storage area
shall not exceed the height of any landscape screening, wall or
fence; provided, however, that the stored materials may be
increased in height one foot above the screening for every four
feet of distance from the screening.
(f) All outside storage areas shall be completely accessible to fire
and emergency vehicles. All proposed outside storage areas
shall be reviewed and approved by the Fire Marshal.
(g) Outside storage areas shall be completely screened from view
from adjoining properties and from the road, in accordance
with the requirements set forth in Article 13, Landscaping,
Screening and Walls, and the buffer zone requirements of
§ 285-9.4E.
C. Special land uses. The following uses shall be permitted as special land
uses in the A-1 Airport and Light Industrial District subject to the
following requirements and subject to the review procedures in Article
22, Special Land Use. The following shall apply to each individual use
which may be located on a lot with other uses:
(1) Central dry-cleaning plants.
(2) Electric power stations, heating plants and major
telecommunication facilities that do not include structures that
exceed the permitted building height.
(3) Freezer locker plants and cold storage.
(4) Kennels, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Buildings wherein dogs are kept, dog runs, and/or exercise
areas shall not be located nearer than 150 feet to any lot line
and 200 feet from the public road right-of-way.
285-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-9.3
1:721
(b) Such facilities shall be subject to other conditions and
requirements necessary to ensure against the occurrence of
any possible nuisance (i.e., fencing, soundproofing, sanitary
requirements).
(c) All enclosures for breeding, rearing, shelter, or other uses in
connection with harboring of animals shall be hard surfaces
and provided with proper drains for washing with water
pressure.
(d) All animals shall be kept indoors between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(e) All dog kennels shall be operated in conformance with all
applicable county and state regulations.
(5) Outdoor sales or storage, which may include building/lumber
supplies, greenhouses, landscaping/nursery stock, outdoor
commercial and self storage and outdoor storage of equipment or
materials accessory to a principal use that occupies a greater area
than allowed by § 285-9.3B(3), above (i.e., outdoor storage area
that is more than 25% of the area of the building), subject to the
following conditions:
(a) The area used for outdoor storage shall be fenced and meet all
of the setback requirements for principal buildings. Outdoor
storage shall not be permitted in a front yard.
(b) Proposed outside storage of materials, supplies or equipment
shall be shown on the site plan.
(c) Any stockpiles of soils, fertilizer or similar loosely packaged
materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained to prevent
dust or blowing of materials.
(d) The height of all material and equipment stored in an outdoor
storage area shall not exceed the height of any landscape
screening, wall or fence; provided, however, that the stored
materials may be increased in height one foot above the
screening for every four feet of distance from the screening.
(e) All outside storage areas shall be completely accessible to fire
and emergency vehicles. All proposed outside storage areas
shall be reviewed and approved by the Fire Marshal.
(f) Outside storage areas shall be completely screened from view
from adjoining properties and from the road, in accordance
with the requirements set forth in Article 13, Landscaping,
Screening and Walls.
(6) Municipal recycling centers, subject to the following conditions:
285-9.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-9.3
1:722
(a) The recycling center may accept previously sorted nonfood
items, such as glass, newspaper, cardboard, metal,
construction and demolition debris, or other similar materials.
The center shall not handle or store putrescible waste or
wastes that would attract birds or wildlife. Sewage, other
liquids or dangerous substances in quantities considered to be
detrimental to the operation of the transfer facility shall also be
excluded.
(b) All activities and storage shall be conducted within a
completely enclosed building. Doors shall remain closed during
operations, and there shall be no outdoor storage.
(c) The entire site shall be fully landscaped, screened, bermed
with a six-foot berm, and fenced. The perimeter of the site shall
be screened with a landscape buffer zone A in accordance with
§ 285-9.4E(2).
(d) All areas intended for use by heavy trucks, trailers or
equipment shall be paved with concrete.
(e) Adequate standing and parking facilities shall be provided on
the site so that no packers or other collection vehicles at any
time stand on a public right-of-way waiting entrance to the site.
The standing and parking facilities shall be paved with
concrete. Vehicles shall not remain on the standing or parking
facility for longer than a single twenty-four-hour period.
(7) Senior citizen congregate housing and assisted-living facilities.
(8) Stamping plants, subject to providing design and operational
details with the special land use application that demonstrate that
the type of equipment and sound insulation measures shall comply
with the industrial performance standards of § 285-9.6. Noise
reduction measures shall detail proposed soundproofing or sound
insulation schemes, such as acoustical enclosures, soundproofing,
acoustical wall panels, ceiling baffles and exhaust fan noise control.
(9) Warehousing and wholesale establishments, storage and transfer
facilities with a total usable floor area of more than 200,000 square
feet. The special land use application shall include a traffic impact
study that demonstrates that the truck and automobile traffic will
be within the capacity of the local roads and bridges.
(10) Other uses similar to the above uses not specifically addressed
elsewhere in this chapter, as determined by the Planning
Commission following the process outlined in Article 19.
D. Uses not permitted. The following uses shall not be permitted, because
these uses cannot be located within close proximity to residential areas,
require large land areas and need to be in close proximity to interstate
highways. Because Grosse Ile Township is primarily a residential
285-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-9.3
1:723
285-9.4. Required conditions.
community, there are no large land areas that can accommodate these
uses. The road network and the bridges to the island are not capable of
supporting a large amount of heavy truck traffic generated from these
uses. The Township's water and sewer systems have limited capacity to
accommodate these uses.
(1) Chemicals and allied products manufacturing.
(2) Concrete and asphalt production.
(3) Extractive uses, such as sand and gravel mining, but not including
excavation associated with construction of an approved
development.
(4) Food processing, including meat, dairy, canned and preserved
fruits and vegetables, grain mill, bakery, sugar and confectionery,
fats and oils and beverage products.
(5) Petroleum refining and related industries.
(6) Primary metal industries, including iron and steel foundries,
smelting and refining of nonferrous metals.
(7) Primary rubber and plastics manufacturing.
(8) Salvage yard, junk yard, waste disposal, transfer stations, waste
disposal, processing, storage, transfer or treatment facilities
(hazardous and nonhazardous), except recycling centers within an
enclosed building.
(9) Sawmills and planning mills, and paper and allied products.
(10) Stock yards or slaughtering houses.
(11) The processing of raw materials for shipment in bulk form to be
used in an industrial operation at a different location.
(12) Any use that has the potential to attract large numbers of wildlife
or birds, which could be hazardous to the airport operations.
(13) Other uses similar to the above uses not specifically permitted
elsewhere in this chapter or not found to be permitted as similar to
other uses, as determined by the Planning Commission following
the process outlined in Article 19.
A. Site plan review. Submission of a site plan for review and approval by
the Planning Commission shall be required, in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Article 21, Site Plan Review, prior to issuance of a
building permit and development in the A-1 Airport and Light Industrial
District.
285-9.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-9.4
1:724
B. Development site. For uses located within the A-1 Airport and Light
Industrial District, the standards that are contained in this chapter shall
be applied to the zoning lot, as defined. This may include a combination
of lots under unified ownership and control, a site that contains multiple
uses or principal structures, or a portion of a lot being allocated to an
individual use. The Planning Commission shall have the discretion to
determine what constitutes a zoning lot during site plan review.
C. Public access.
(1) All uses on the Airport property on the south side of Groh Road
shall have access to the system of service roads that interconnect
the airport, including the service road along the south side of Groh
Road. The Planning Commission may permit direct driveway access
to Groh Road where the access point is adequately spaced from
other existing driveways in accordance with the Township Roads
and Driveways Ordinance68 and the driveway is approved by Wayne
County.
(2) All uses on the Airport Commerce Park property on the north side
of Groh Road and west side of Meridian Road shall have access to
the system of internal roads within the Airport Commerce Park.
The Planning Commission may permit direct driveway access to
Groh Road where the access point is adequately spaced from other
existing driveways in accordance with the Township Roads and
Driveways Ordinance and the driveway is approved by Wayne
County.
(3) In no case shall an A-1 Airport and Light Industrial District use
have direct access to a local residential street.
(4) All roads, and service drives shall be concrete or asphalt, and be
designed and constructed in accordance with the Township Roads
and Driveways Ordinance and the standards of the Wayne County
Department of Public Services and the Township Engineer. The
road width requirements may be reduced for roads and service
drives on the Airport and the Airport Commerce Park property to
no less than 24 feet, measured back to back of curb. For
boulevards, the roadways on each side of the median shall be no
less than 20 feet, measured back to back of curb. Turning radii at
all driveways and intersections shall be a minimum of 30 feet to
accommodate trucks.
D. Architectural standards. All proposed nonaeronautical development
within the A-1 Airport and Light Industrial District shall utilize durable
materials that require little or no maintenance in order to retain their
original appearance.
(1) Metal siding with permanent finish may be used in exterior wall
application when utilized in conjunction with brick, split face or
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Roads and Driveways.
285-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-9.4
1:725
scored concrete block or other similar material, as approved by the
Planning Commission.
(2) The walls of the building, facing Groh Road, Midway or Intrepid
shall consist of at least 75% brick, split face or scored concrete
block or other similar material, excluding the facade area of any
door or widows.
(3) Metal siding shall only be utilized on the upper portion of the
building facade facing the streets noted in Subsection D(2) above,
but may be utilized for all of the side and rear facades not facing a
street noted in Subsection D(2) above.
(4) All exterior heating, ventilation, air conditioning, electrical or other
utility service or accessory equipment shall be located or screened
not to be visible from any adjacent site or public road right-of-way.
E. Landscaping and buffering. Submission of a landscape plan to the
Planning Commission for review and approval shall be required. The
landscape plan shall be a part of or accompany the site plan.
Landscaping shall be provided as follows within the A-1 Airport and
Light Industrial District.
(1) Greenbelts along all abutting roads shall meet the following
requirements, which apply in lieu of the requirements of
§ 285-13.3B:
Table 9.4.E(1)
Required Frontage Greenbelts
Frontage Greenbelt Width Minimum Plantings
Meridian Road 100 feet from rightof-
way
1 deciduous tree
every 30 feet
1 evergreen tree
every 30 feet
Groh Road 25 feet from rightof-
way
1 deciduous tree
every 30 feet
1 evergreen tree
every 60 feet
Midway and Intrepid 25 feet from road
curb1
1 deciduous tree
every 30 feet
Other service roads
within Commerce
Park
10 feet from road
curb
1 deciduous tree
every 60 feet
285-9.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-9.4
1:726
NOTES:
1 The twenty-five-foot buffer width will include a five-foot wide
sidewalk, with 10 feet of greenbelt between the curb and
sidewalk and 10 feet of greenbelt between the sidewalk and
building/parking setback line.
(2) In order to provide protective screening and buffers between
abutting land uses, a landscaped buffer zone shall be provided
between uses in accordance with the following. Table 9.4.E(3)(a)
identifies where and what type of buffer is required between land
uses. Table 9.4.E(3)(b) details the minimum landscape elements
that must be included in each type of buffer zone. The following
requirements are in lieu of the requirements of § 285-13.3C. Any
site that is along the perimeter of the A-1 District (not including
roads) shall be required to provide Buffer Zone A along the
perimeter of the zoning district. Buffer zone landscaping is not
required for the runway areas and clear zones of the airport.
Table 9.4.E(2)(a)
Required Buffer Zones
Proposed Use Will Be Adjacent To:
The
Proposed
Use Will
Be:
Assisted
living
or
other
form of
residential
Outdoor
recreation
Lodging
office
Commercial
retail,
services
and
indoor
recreationIndustrial
Outdoor
storage
Assisted
living or
other
form of
residential
— A C C A A
Outdoor
recreation
A — A C B B
Lodging
or office
C A — D A A
Commercial
retail,
services
and
indoor
recreation
C C D — C B
Industrial A B A C — C
Outdoor
storage
A B A B C —
285-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-9.4
1:727
Table 9.4.E(2)(b)
Description of Required Buffer Zones
Buffer
Zone
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Wall/
Berm Minimum Plant Materials
A 50 Wall,
fence or
berm
1 deciduous tree, 2 evergreen trees
and 4 shrubs per each 20 linear feet
along the adjoining site boundary
line
B 20 Wall,
fence or
berm
1 deciduous tree, 2 evergreen trees
and 4 shrubs per each 20 linear feet
along the adjoining site boundary
line
C 20 Berm 1 deciduous tree, 1 evergreen tree
and 4 shrubs per each 30 linear feet
along the adjoining site boundary
line
D 10 None
required
1 deciduous or evergreen tree or 4
shrubs per each 20 linear feet along
the adjoining site boundary line
(3) Off-street parking shall be landscaped with one landscape island
and one tree for every 10 parking spaces, except that parking
located within the rear yard shall be exempt from the parking lot
landscaping requirements.
(4) Landscaping shall comply with all specifications and requirements
of § 285-13.4.
(5) In addition to the standards contained in § 285-13.3J, Modification
of landscape requirements, the Planning Commission may also
reduce or modify the landscape requirements contained in Article
13, based upon a determination that the required landscaping will
encroach into runway approach, transitional, horizontal, and
conical zones, obscure navigational lighting or otherwise interfere
with airport operations. Areas within the fenced area of the airport
runway primary surface, clear zones, taxiways and hangars are
specifically exempt from landscaping requirements.
F. Parking and loading requirements. A-1 Airport and Light Industrial
District uses shall provide off-street parking and loading in accordance
with the provisions set forth in Article 12.
G. Lighting requirements. A-1 Airport and Light Industrial District uses
shall comply with the lighting requirements of § 285-19.19, provided
that navigational lighting necessary for safe airport operations and
meeting the standards of the Federal Aviation Administration shall be
exempt from the requirements of § 285-19.19.
285-9.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-9.4
1:728
285-9.5. Area and bulk regulations.
H. Grading requirements. Any grading, excavating, filling, land balancing,
or similar activity shall require a grading permit and shall conform to
the grading regulations set forth in the Township Grading Ordinance.69
I. Sign regulations. All signs shall conform to the regulations set forth in
Article 16.
J. Waterfront regulations. All development along the Detroit River and
interior canals shall conform to the waterfront regulations set forth in
Article 17.
K. Federal Aviation Administration regulations. All activities shall comply
with the requirements of the U.S. Department of Transportation Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA). Where there is an inconsistency between
the regulations of Grosse Ile Township and the FAA, the more strict
regulation shall be adhered to. All new construction or alteration to
existing structures shall be required to submit a notice of proposed
construction or alteration to the Administrator of the FAA, in
accordance with the requirements of federal regulations.
A. Any structure or use of the land in the District A-1 Airport and Light
Industrial District shall be subject to the following area and bulk
regulations:
Table 9.5A
Area and Bulk Regulations70
Requirement A-1
District
Minimum lot area Variable
(1)
Minimum setbacks for building and parking lots (feet) (2)
Meridian Road setback measured from right-of-way 100
Groh Road setback measured from right-of-way
North side 25
South side 50
Midway and Intrepid setback measured from back of
curb
25
Other service roads within Commerce Park measured
from back of curb
10
Spacing between buildings 20 (3)
A-1 District perimeter excluding road frontages 50
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 124, Grading.
70.Editor's Note: Notes to this table are included as Subsection B.
285-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-9.5
1:729
Table 9.5A
Area and Bulk Regulations
Requirement A-1
District
Natural feature 25(4)
Parking lot 10
Maximum building lot coverage 50% (5)
Maximum floor/area ratio 1.0 (6)
Maximum height (feet) 55 (7)
Figure 9.5.a
Airport Commerce Park Site and Dimensional Requirements
B. Notes pertaining to area and bulk regulations:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be based on the requirements for
parking, landscaping, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and
conditions set forth herein, unless otherwise specified.
(2) Setbacks shall be determined by the site's road frontage as
indicated in Table 9.5.B and the following figure:
Figure 9.5B A-1 Setback Requirements
(3) Greater spacing shall be provided between buildings where
required by the buffering between land uses under § 285-9.4E(2).
(4) Natural feature setback shall be maintained in relation to the
ordinary high-water mark of any pond, river or channel, and to the
edge of any drainageway or regulated wetland. Only waterfront
structures and appurtenances, as permitted in Article 17,
Waterfront Provisions, may be located within the natural feature
setback. This setback may be reduced by the Planning Commission
upon a determination that it is clearly in the public interest. In
285-9.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-9.5
1:730
determining whether the setback reduction is in the public interest,
the benefit which would reasonably be expected to accrue from the
proposed development shall be balanced against the reasonably
foreseeable detriments to the natural feature. The following
general criteria shall be applied in undertaking this balancing test:
(a) The relative extent of the public and private need for the
proposed activity.
(b) The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations
and methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the
activity, including alternatives which are off-site or on other
commercially available properties.
(c) The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental
effects which the proposed activity may have on the public and
private use to which the area is suited, including the benefits
the natural feature provides.
(d) The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the
cumulative effect created by other existing and anticipated
activities in the watershed.
(e) The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic,
ecological, or recreational values and on the public health or
fish or wildlife.
(f) The size and quality of the natural feature.
(g) Proximity to any waterway.
(h) Extent to which upland soil erosion adjacent to the natural
feature is controlled.
(i) Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed land
change to the general area.
(j) Findings of necessity for the proposed project which have been
made by other state or local agencies.
(5) The fifty-percent maximum lot coverage may be increased by the
Planning Commission upon submission and approval of a complete
landscape plan that provides at least 1 1/2 times the required
amount of greenbelt and buffer zone landscaping as required under
§ 285-13.3B and C.
(6) The floor area ratio is derived by dividing the total building floor
area of a building by the zoning lot area.
(7) All new construction or alteration to existing structures shall be
required to submit a notice of proposed construction or alteration
to the Administrator of the U.S. Department of Transportation
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), in accordance with the
285-9.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-9.5
1:731
285-9.6. Industrial performance standards.
requirements of federal regulations. The maximum height of any
structure shall be 55 feet, provided that this maximum allowable
height may be reduced if required by the FAA.
A. Noise.
(1) Noise shall not become objectionable due to intermittence, beat,
frequency, or shrillness and shall not exceed the maximum sound
pressure levels prescribed below, as measured at the street or
property line:
Table 1
Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Levels
Decibels
Octave Band
(cycles per
second)* Day** Night**
00 to 74 76 70
75 to 149 70 62
150 to 299 64 56
300 to 599 57 49
600 to 1,199 51 44
1,200 to 2,399 45 39
2,400 to 4,799 38 33
4,800 and above 36 31
Notes:
* Sound level meter set on the C or flat scale, slow response.
** Day: 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; night: between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
(2) A sound level meter and an octave band analyzer shall be used to
measure the level and frequency of the sound or noise during the
day and/or the night. Sounds of very short duration, which cannot
be measured accurately with the sound level meter, shall be
measured by an impact noise analyzer.
(3) Objectionable sounds, of an intermittent nature or characterized by
high frequencies, even if falling below the specified decibel levels,
shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
B. Vibration. No activity or operation of machines shall cause or create a
steady state vibration or an impact vibration at any point on any
property line, with a displacement in excess of the permitted vibration
285-9.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-9.6
1:732
displacement for the frequencies as set forth below. "Steady state
vibrations" shall be defined as earthborne oscillations that are
continuous discrete pulses which occur more frequently than 100 times
per minute. "Impact vibrations" shall be defined as earthborne
oscillations occurring in discrete pulses at less than 100 pulses per
minute.
Table 2
Maximum Permitted Steady State Vibration Displacement
Frequency
(cycles per second)
Displacement
(inches)
10 and below 0.0008
10-20 0.0005
20-30 0.0003
30-40 0.0002
40-50 0.0001
50-60 0.0001
60 and over 0.0001
Table 3
Maximum Permitted Impact Vibration Displacement
Frequency
(cycles per second)
Displacement
(inches)
10 and below 0.0016
10-20 0.0010
20-30 0.0006
30-40 0.0004
40-50 0.0002
50-60 0.0002
60 and over 0.0002
C. Industrial performance compliance procedures.
(1) The Township is hereby empowered to require the owner or
operator of the use in question to submit such data and evidence as
may be deemed essential to permit an objective determination of a
violation of performance standards. Failure to submit data required
shall constitute grounds for denying a permit for that use of land.
With any application for a site plan approval from the Planning
Commission for any use that has the potential to exceed the noise
or vibration limits of this section, the following information shall be
provided with the site plan application:
285-9.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-9.6
1:733
(a) A description of the machinery, process and products.
(b) Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques to be used in
restricting the possible emission of any of the dangerous and
objectionable elements as set forth in this article.
(c) Measurements of the amount or rate of emission of said
objectionable elements.
(2) Compliance with the performance standards shall be required as a
condition of approval for that use. Any violation of the performance
standards of this section shall be considered a violation of this
chapter under Article 20.
(3) Where determinations can reasonably be made by the Community
Development Department, using equipment and personnel
normally available to the Township or obtainable without
extraordinary expense, such determinations shall be so made
before notice of violation is issued. Where determination of
violation of performance standards will likely entail the use of
highly skilled personnel and expensive or unusual instrumentation
not ordinarily available to the Township and when, in the
considered judgment of the Community Development Department
a violation exists, costs of the determinations will be charged
against those responsible in addition to such other penalties as may
be appropriate.
285-9.6 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-9.6
1:734
ARTICLE 10
O-1 Open Space District
[Ord. No. 259, effective 4-11-1999]
285-10.1. Intent.
285-10.2. Permitted uses.
In the O-1 Open Space District no land shall be used except for the following
uses, and subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this chapter
and the review procedures in Article 21, Site Plan Review. The following
shall apply to each individual use which may be located on a lot with other
uses.
285-10.3. State and federal lands.
On lands owned by the State of Michigan or the United States government,
state and federal regulations shall supersede the regulations of this article
where there is a conflict.
A. The purpose of the O-1 Open Space District is to enhance the quality of
life in the community by preserving open space lands purchased by
Grosse Ile Township through the open space millage.
B. It is the further intent of this district that these public open space lands
be preserved for the enjoyment and benefit of all residents of the
Township, to be used as nature preserves and passive recreation areas.
This district is intended to preserve these natural areas for the
enjoyment of Township residents, provide buffers between development
and ecologically sensitive areas, maintain the ecological functions of
natural waterways and drainage networks, preserve natural habitat and
the islands' ability to support wildlife and preserve the Township's
forested areas and overall natural character.
A. Outdoor recreation activities which do not cause excessive noise or
impact on the environment, including but not limited to nature study,
hiking and horseback riding, fishing and cross-country skiing;
B. Forest preserves and natural areas;
C. Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish and wildlife; and
D. On-site driveways and roads where alternative means of access are
proven to be impractical.
285-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-10.3
1:735

ARTICLE 11
PRD Public Recreation District
[Ord. No. 245, effective 10-27-1997]
285-11.1. Intent.
285-11.2. Permitted uses.
A. The purpose of the PRD Public Recreation District is to enhance the
quality of life in the community by preserving certain public lands
characterized by distinctive natural features for the enjoyment and
benefit of all residents of the Township, to be used as passive recreation
areas. Distinctive natural features may include, but are not limited to,
woodlands, wildlife habitat, wetlands, or other ecologically significant
lands.
B. It is the further intent of this district to preserve certain open lands for
the enjoyment and benefit of all residents of the Township for use as
active recreation areas and facilities where playground and sports
activities may occur. Such active or passive recreation areas should be
located where the activities occurring thereon will minimize
disturbance to nearby residential uses.
A. Principal uses. In the PRD Public Recreation District no building shall
be erected and no building or land shall be used except for the following
uses, and subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this
chapter and the review procedures in Article 21, Site Plan Review. The
following shall apply to each individual use which may be located on a
lot with other uses.
(1) Outdoor recreation activities which do not cause excessive noise or
impact on the environment, including but not limited to nature
study, hiking and horseback riding, boating, fishing and crosscountry
skiing;
(2) Forest preserves and natural areas;
(3) Conservation of soil, vegetation, water, fish and wildlife; and
(4) On-site driveways and roads where alternative means of access are
proven to be impractical.
B. Accessory buildings and uses. The following accessory buildings and
uses shall be permitted, subject to the provisions set forth in Article 19:
(1) Accessory buildings and uses which are customarily incidental to
the principal use on the lot, subject to the same required conditions
that are applicable to the principal uses. Such accessory uses may
include, but are not limited to:
(a) Nature centers;
285-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-11.2
1:737
(b) Maintenance buildings;
(c) Pavilions;
(d) Play structures and park and picnic facilities;
(e) Nature trails, bike paths and boardwalks; and
(f) Rest room facilities.
(2) Outside storage, subject to the following standards:
(a) Proposed outside storage of materials, supplies, equipment, or
other goods shall be accessory to a permitted use and shall be
shown on the site plan.
(b) Outside storage areas shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet
from all property lines.
(c) All outside storage area(s) shall be completely accessible to
fire and emergency vehicles. All proposed outside storage
areas shall be reviewed and approved by the Fire Chief.
(d) Outside storage areas shall be completely screened from view
from adjoining properties and from the road, in accordance
with the requirements set forth in Article 13, Landscaping,
Screening and Walls.
C. Special land uses. The following uses shall be permitted as special land
uses in the PRD Public Recreation District subject to the following
requirements and subject to the review procedures in Article 22,
Special Land Use Review. The following shall apply to each individual
use which may be located on a lot with other uses.
(1) Parks and playgrounds;
(2) Fields for baseball, football, soccer, and similar sports;
(3) Ice rinks (indoor and outdoor);
(4) Community centers;
(5) Park or recreation administration buildings;
(6) Stables, kennels and structures for the keeping and raising of
livestock and other domesticated animals, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) The minimum lot area shall be five acres.
(b) The building wherein animals are kept shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from any lot line.
(c) Such facilities shall be subject to conditions and requirements
set forth by the Planning Commission during site plan review
285-11.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-11.2
1:738
285-11.3. Required conditions.
necessary to ensure against the occurrence of any possible
nuisance (i.e., fencing, soundproofing, and sanitary
requirements).
(d) All animals shall be kept indoors between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(e) Kennels shall be operated in conformance with all applicable
county and state regulations.
(f) An operations/management plan must be submitted as a part
of site plan review.
(7) Special event campsites, subject the following conditions:
(a) Minimum lot size shall be 10 acres.
(b) Development features, including accessory structures, shall be
located and related to minimize adverse effects on adjacent
properties. Minimum setbacks for any buildings, structures or
use areas shall be 200 feet from any property line abutting a
residential district.
(c) Accessory structures shall be set back 50 feet from the edge of
any wetland or the shoreline of any pond, river, stream or
drain.
(d) Each campsite shall be provided with water and sanitary
service approved by the Health Department or have convenient
access to approved service buildings.
D. Uses not permitted. Uses which generate excessive traffic or noise,
alter the natural terrain or features of the site, create noxious fumes or
other air pollutants, or disturb the peace shall not be permitted in the
PRD Public Recreation District because these uses typically have
characteristics which are incompatible with the intent and purposes of
the PRD Public Recreation District. Such uses may include, but are not
limited to:
(1) Motorcycle, snowmobile or other form of motorized off-road vehicle
trails or tracks;
(2) Camp lodges and recreational vehicle campgrounds; and
(3) Firing ranges.
A. Site plan review. Submission of a site plan for review and approval by
the Planning Commission shall be required, in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Article 21, Site Plan Review, prior to issuance of a
building permit and development in the PRD Public Recreation District.
285-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-11.3
1:739
B. Natural features standards. All PRD Public Recreation District uses
shall be developed to preserve the natural features of the site, in
accordance with the intent of the district, and shall comply with the
following standards:
(1) Building shall not be developed on areas with slopes greater than
13%, unless the Planning Commission determines that there is no
alternative to locating the building within the steeply sloped area.
Trails located in areas with slopes greater than 13% shall be
designed to minimize impact to slopes.
(2) Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to provide a naturalistic
appearance in terms of natural shape, shallow depth, minimum
side slopes and perimeter landscaping.
(3) There shall be no structures or fill material placed within the onehundred-
year floodplain, except that landscaping, trails and
passive recreation facilities that do not obstruct the flow of the
floodway may be allowed within the one-hundred-year floodplain by
the Planning Commission during site plan review.
(4) All site plans shall be designed to minimize impact to woodlands, as
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission
during site plan review.
(5) PRD Public Recreation District uses shall protect wetlands and
drainageways in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 275,
Wetlands and Drainageways, of the Municipal Code.
C. Public access.
(1) All PRD Public Recreation District uses shall have direct access
onto a public hard-surfaced street, except that indirect access onto
a public street may be permitted where the Planning Commission
determines that such an alternative would promote traffic safety
and would not cause undue disruption to surrounding properties.
(2) All street, roads, and access drives shall be concrete or asphalt and
be designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter 205,
Roads and Driveways, and the standards of the Wayne County
Department of Public Services and the Township Engineer. The
Planning Commission has the discretion to modify the design
standards for roads that are internal to the PRD Public Recreation
District where such modification will enhance preservation of
natural features.
D. Landscaping and buffering.
(1) Submission of a landscape plan to the Planning Commission for
review and approval shall be required; provided, however, the
Planning Commission may waive this requirement in consideration
of the proposed use, existing natural vegetation, and the need for
285-11.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-11.3
1:740
285-11.4. Area and bulk regulations.
Any structure or use of land in a PRD Public Recreation District shall be
subject to the following area and bulk regulations:
Minimum lot area See1
Minimum setback from all property
lines
50 feet
Natural feature setback See2
Maximum height of all structures 35 feet
additional landscaping. In the event a landscape plan is required,
it shall specify plant materials and landscape treatment, based on
requirements set forth in Article 13. The landscape plan shall be a
part of or accompany the site plan.
(2) Buildings, outside storage areas, and parking areas in the PRD
Public Recreation District shall be screened from view from any
adjoining residential property. Such screening shall consist of a
continuous obscuring wall or landscaped screen in accordance with
Article 13, Landscaping, Screening and Walls.
(3) During site plan review, the Planning Commission may require a
combination of trees, shrubs, fences or berms to buffer recreational
facilities from adjacent residential areas.
E. Off-street parking and loading requirements. PRD Public Recreation
District uses shall provide off-street parking and loading in accordance
with the provisions set forth in Article 12.
F. Grading requirements. Any grading, excavating, filling, land balancing,
or similar activity shall require a grading permit and shall conform to
the grading regulations set forth in Chapter 124, Grading. [Amended
7-22-2002]
G. Sign regulations. All signs shall conform to the regulations set forth in
Article 16.
H. Waterfront regulations. All development along the Detroit River and
interior canals shall conform to the waterfront regulations set forth in
Article 17.
I. Covered trash receptacle. The proposed method of trash collection and
disposal shall meet the requirements of Article 19 and be indicated on
the site plan.
J. Lighting requirements. Outdoor lighting shall be arranged and
designed to minimize impact on surrounding land uses in accordance
with the regulations set forth in Article 19.
285-11.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-11.4
1:741
Notes:
1 The minimum lot area shall be based on the requirements for parking,
landscaping, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and conditions set forth
herein, unless otherwise specified.
2 Natural feature setback shall be maintained in relation to the ordinary
high water mark of any pond, river or channel and to the edge of any
drainageway or regulated wetland. Only waterfront structures and
appurtenances, as permitted in Article 17, Waterfront Provisions, may be
located within the natural feature setback. This setback may be reduced
by the Planning Commission upon a determination that it is clearly in the
public interest. In determining whether the setback reduction is in the
public interest, the benefit which would reasonably be expected to accrue
from the proposed development shall be balanced against the reasonably
foreseeable detriments to the natural feature. The following general
criteria shall be applied in undertaking this balancing test:
a. The relative extent of the public and private need for the proposed
activity.
b. The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations and
methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity,
including alternatives which are off site or on other commercially
available properties.
c. The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects
which the proposed activity may have on the public and private use
to which the area is suited, including the benefits the natural feature
provides.
d. The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the cumulative
effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the
watershed.
e. The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic,
ecological, or recreational values and on the public health or fish or
wildlife.
f. The size and quality of the natural feature.
g. Proximity to any waterway.
h. Extent to which upland soil erosion adjacent to the natural feature
is controlled.
i. Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed land
change to the general area.
j. Findings of necessity for the proposed project which have been
made by other state or local agencies.
285-11.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-11.4
1:742
ARTICLE 12
Parking and Loading Requirements
[Ord. No. 287, effective 7-16-2000; Ord. No. 291, effective
7-16-2000; amended 7-22-2002; 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-05]
285-12.1. Off-street parking.
A. Intent and scope of application. Compliance with the off-street parking
regulations set forth herein shall be required as follows:
(1) General applicability. For all buildings and uses established after
the effective date of this chapter, off-street parking shall be
provided as required in this section prior to issuance of a land use
permit. However, where a building permit has been issued prior to
the effective date of the chapter and construction has been
diligently carried on, compliance with the parking requirements at
the time of issuance of the building permit shall be required.
(2) Change in use or intensity. Whenever use of a building, structure,
or lot is changed, parking facilities shall be provided as required by
this chapter for the new use, regardless of any variance which may
have been in effect prior to change of use. If the intensity of use of
any building, structure, or lot is increased through the addition of
dwelling units, increase in floor area, increase in seating capacity,
or through other means, additional off-street parking shall be
provided for such increase in intensity of use.
(3) Existing parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities in existence
on the effective date of this chapter shall not hereafter be reduced
below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below
the requirements for the use being served as set forth in this
chapter. An area designated as required off-street parking shall not
be changed to any other use unless equal facilities are provided
elsewhere in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(4) Additional off-street parking. Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to prevent voluntary establishment of off-street parking
facilities to serve an existing use of land or buildings, or to prevent
provision of additional parking facilities beyond what is required by
the chapter, provided that all such parking is in conformance with
the regulations set forth herein.
(5) Review and permit requirements. In the event that new off-street
parking is proposed as part of a development requiring site plan
review, said proposed parking shall be shown on the site plan
submitted to the Planning Commission for review. In the event that
proposed off-street parking is not part of a development requiring
site plan review, the applicant shall submit a site plan to the
Planning Commission for review and approval. The site plan shall
indicate the location of the proposed parking in relation to other
uses on the site and on adjoining sites, the proposed means of
285-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-12.1
1:743
ingress and egress, the number and dimensions of parking spaces,
and the method of surfacing.
B. General requirements. In all zoning districts, off-street vehicle parking
facilities shall be provided and maintained as herein prescribed:
(1) Location.
(a) Proximity to building or use being served. Required off-street
parking shall be located either on the same lot, or within 300
feet of the building or use it is intended to serve, measured
from the nearest point of the building or use to the nearest
point of the off-street parking lot.
(b) Within the Macomb Street District. The Planning Commission
may increase the three-hundred-foot distance up to 700 feet in
the MSD if land for the required parking is not available within
300 feet. Public parking may be counted for meeting the
existing floor area requirements of uses within the MSD,
provided that if the floor area of the use or the intensity of the
use is increased, the additional required parking for such
increase must be provided by means other than public parking.
(c) Within yards. Off-street parking may be located in required
yards, provided that all landscaping and berm requirements in
Article 13 are complied with. Further, off-street parking shall
be set back a minimum distance of 10 feet from all property
lines and shall neither be permitted in the front yard of R-2 or
R-3 Multiple-Family Residential Districts nor in front setback
area.
(2) Residential parking. Off-street parking spaces in single-family
residential districts shall consist of a parking strip, driveway,
garage, or combination thereof, and shall be located on the
premises they are intended to serve. No parking shall be permitted
on a regular basis on lawns or other unpaved areas on residential
lots, with the exception of approved gravel parking areas.
Commercial and recreational vehicle parking in residential districts
shall comply with the standards in Article 3.
(3) Control of off-site parking. It shall be unlawful to park or store any
motor vehicle on private property without the expressed or implied
consent of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of
said private property. Where required parking is permitted on land
other than on the same lot as the building or use being served, the
land on which the parking is located shall be under the same
ownership or control as the lot occupied by said building or use.
(4) Access to parking. Each off-street parking space shall open directly
onto an aisle or driveway of sufficient width and design as to
provide safe and efficient access to or from a public street or alley
in a manner that will least interfere with the smooth flow of traffic.
285-12.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-12.1
1:744
Access to off-street parking which serves a nonresidential use shall
not be permitted across land that is zoned or used for residential
purposes.
(5) Collective use of off-street parking. Off-street parking space for
separate buildings or uses may be provided collectively subject to
the following:
(a) The total number of spaces provided shall not be less than the
number which would be required if the spaces were provided
separately. However, the Planning Commission may reduce the
total number of spaces provided collectively by up to 25% upon
making the determination that the parking demands of the
uses being served do not overlap.
(b) Each use served by collective off-street parking shall have
direct access to the parking without crossing streets.
(c) The collective off-street parking shall not be located farther
than 500 feet from the building or use being served.
(d) Written easements which provide for continued use and
maintenance of the parking shall be submitted to the Township
for approval.
(6) Storage and repair prohibited. The use of required parking and
loading areas for refuse storage stations/dumpsters, storage or
display of merchandise, sale of motor vehicles, storage of
inoperable vehicles, or for vehicle or machinery repair or
maintenance is expressly prohibited. The use of semitrailers for
storage purposes on the premises for five or more consecutive days
is prohibited. Emergency service required to start vehicles shall be
permitted.
(7) Duration. Except when land is used as permitted storage space in
direct connection with a legitimate business, a twenty-four-hour
time limit for parking in nonresidential off-street parking areas
shall prevail, provided that it shall be unlawful to permit the
storage of wrecked, inoperable, or junked vehicles in any parking
area in any district for any period of time.
(8) Parking structures. Parking structures shall be permitted as a
special land use subject to the following standards:
(a) Any parking structure shall comply with the required setbacks
for the district in which it is located.
(b) Parking structures shall be designed as integral elements of
the overall site plan, taking into account the relationship to the
principal building and other structures on the site.
285-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-12.1
1:745
(c) The facade of the parking structure shall be compatible in
design, color, and type of material to the principal building(s)
on the site.
(d) Landscaping shall be placed around the parking structure in
accordance with an approved landscape plan. Any such
landscaping shall be compatible with the overall landscape
plan for the entire site.
C. Schedule of off-street parking requirements. The amount of required
off-street parking space shall be determined in accordance with the
following schedule: [Amended 1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
Use Number of Spaces
Residential:
Single- and two-family housing 2 per each dwelling unit
Multiple-family housing 2 for each dwelling unit, plus 1 per
300 square feet of floor area in
community buildings
Mobile homes In accordance with Michigan
Mobile Home Commission Rules
and Michigan Public Act 419 of
1976, as amended and Article 5 of
this chapter
NOTE: In addition, multiple family and attached single-family
developments shall be required to provide supplemental guest offstreet
parking equal to at least 20% of the space required by the
above standards.
Housing for the Elderly:
Senior independent units 1.5 per unit
Senior interim care and
intermediate care units,
retirement villages, etc
1 per each room or 2 beds,
whichever is less, plus 1 space per
each employee expected during
the peak shift
Congregate care and dependent
care (convalescent/nursing home
units)
1 per each 4 beds or 2 rooms,
whichever is less, plus 1 for each
employee during peak shift
NOTE: Should units revert to general occupancy, the requirements for
multiple-family housing shall be complied with.
Institutional or Public Uses:
Churches, temples, places of
worship
1 for each 3 seats or 6 linear feet
of pews in the main hall of worship
Hospitals 1 for every 2 beds plus 1 for each 5
outpatients plus 1 additional for
each employee
285-12.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-12.1
1:746
Use Number of Spaces
Municipal office buildings 1 per 250 square feet usable floor
area
Elementary and junior high
schools
1 for each teacher, administrator,
or other employee, plus additional
spaces as may be required for an
auditorium or other public meeting
spaces
Senior high schools 1 for each teacher, administrator,
or other employee, plus 1 for every
10 students, plus additional spaces
as may be required for an
auditorium, stadium, or other
public meeting spaces
Museum, library, post office,
cultural center, or similar facility
1 for each 300 square feet of
usable floor space, plus 1 per
employee
Group day-care homes, adult
foster care group homes, and
children's homes
1 per 4 clients plus 1 per each
employee plus designated dropoff
spaces
Theaters and auditoriums, with
fixed seating
1 for each 3 seats, or 1 per 6 linear
feet of benches, plus 1 per
employee
Community centers 1 for each 3 persons who may be
legally admitted at one time
according to the occupancy load
established by local, county and
state codes, plus 1 per employee
Public utility use 1 per every employee on the
maximum shift
Retail Uses:
Bookstores 1 per 200 square feet of usable
leasable area
Furniture and appliance sales,
household equipment repair
shops, showrooms of plumber,
electrician, or similar trade, or
similar uses
1 for each 800 square feet of
usable floor space, plus 1 for each
employee
General retail business/shopping
centers
1 per 250 square feet of usable
floor area
Grocery store/supermarket 1 per 200 square feet of usable
floor area
285-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-12.1
1:747
Use Number of Spaces
Lumberyards 2.5 for each employee, plus
additional spaces as may be
required for enclosed retail sales
area
Motor vehicle sales (new
vehicles)
1 for each 200 square feet of
usable floor area, exclusive of
service areas, plus 1 for each auto
service stall in the service area,
plus 1 for every 500 square feet of
outdoor sales area, plus 1 for each
employee
Motor vehicle sales (used
vehicles)
1 for each 500 square feet of
outdoor sales area, plus 1 for each
auto service stall, plus 1 for each
employee
Open air business 1 for each 800 square feet of land
area being used for display, plus 1
for each employee
Recreational vehicle, boat, mobile
home and similar sales
1 per 800 square feet of usable
floor area, plus 2 per each vehicle
sales service bay
Service Uses:
Auto and vehicle repair facilities 1 for each employee plus 3 for
each service or repair bay
Auto or vehicle service station 2 for each service or repair bay,
plus 1 for each gasoline pump, plus
1 for each employee. In addition,
convenience stores operated in
conjunction with an auto service
station shall provide 1 for every
250 square feet of store area
Auto wash, full-service 1 for each 2 employees, plus
stacking equal in number to 16
spaces for each wash lane
Auto wash, self-service 4 stacking spaces for each washing
stall in addition to the stall itself,
plus 2 drying spaces for each
washing stall
Banks, financial institutions 1 for every 200 square feet of
usable floor area. In addition,
financial institutions with drive-in
windows shall provide 4 stacking
spaces for the first window, plus 3
spaces for each additional window
285-12.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-12.1
1:748
Use Number of Spaces
Bars, lounges, taverns, nightclubs
(majority of sales consist of
alcoholic beverages)
1 per 70 square feet of usable floor
area or 0.5 per seat, whichever is
greater, plus any spaces required
for any banquet or meeting rooms
Beauty or barber shops 3 per beauty or barber chair plus 3
per chairs used for other services,
such as nail care and shoe shines
Child day-care centers, nursery
schools
At least 1 dropoff/pickup parking
space shall be provided for each 5
children for whom care is
provided, with a minimum of 3
dropoff/pickup parking spaces,
plus 1 parking space per employee
(defined as the maximum number
of staff on duty at a time). Each
dropoff/pickup space shall be a
minimum 8 by 20 feet.
Dry cleaners 1 per 500 square feet of usable
floor area
Laundromats and coin-operated
dry cleaners
1 for each 2 washing or drycleaning
machines
Mini- or self-storage warehouse Minimum of 6
Mortuaries, funeral homes 1 for each 50 square feet of usable
floor area plus 1 for each employee
Motel, hotel or other commercial
lodging establishments
1 per guest room, plus 1 per 100
square feet of lounge, restaurant,
conference or banquet rooms or
exhibit space
Personal service establishments
not otherwise specified
1 per 300 square feet of usable
floor area, plus 1 per employee
Restaurants, fast-food 1 per 75 square feet of eating area,
plus 1 for each employee
Restaurants, full-service 1 per 70 square feet of eating area
Restaurants, takeout 6 per service or counter station,
plus 1 for each employee
Video rental establishments 1 per 200 square feet of usable
floor area, with a minimum of 8
provided
Office Uses:
Business and professional offices,
except as otherwise specified
1 for each 250 square feet of
usable floor area plus 1 for each
employee
285-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-12.1
1:749
Use Number of Spaces
Professional offices of doctors,
dentists, and similar medical
professions
1 for each 200 square feet of
usable floor area with a minimum
of 4, plus 1 for each employee
Industrial Uses:
Manufacturing establishments or
establishments for industrial
production, processing, assembly,
compounding, preparation,
cleaning, servicing, testing,
repair, plus accessory business
offices and storage facilities
5 plus 1 per employee on the
largest working shift. Where the
number of employees is not known,
parking shall be provided at the
rate of 1 space per 500 square feet
of usable floor area.
Wholesale and warehouse
establishments
5 plus 1 per employee. Where the
number of employees is not known,
parking shall be provided at the
rate of 1 space for every 1,700
square feet of usable floor area.
Recreation Uses:
Batting cages 3 per cage
Bowling establishments 7 per lane, plus 1 for each
employee and additional spaces as
may be required for restaurants,
bars, or other affiliated uses
Commercial outdoor recreation
centers
1 per 200 square feet of usable
floor area
Dance halls, health spas, pool or
billiard parlors, skating rinks,
exhibition halls, and assembly
hall without fixed seats
1 for each 2 persons allowed by
the maximum occupancy load as
established by local, county, or
state fire, building, or health codes
Football and soccer fields 30 per field
Golf courses, public or private 6 for each golf hole, plus 1 for each
employee, plus parking space as
may be required for clubhouse,
restaurant, pro shop, or other
affiliated facilities
Health fitness centers without
swimming pool
1 per 200 square feet of usable
floor space
Ice/roller skating rink 1 per 150 square feet of usable
floor area
Marina/boat clubs 1 for each boat berth, not to
include area required for winter
boat storage, plus additional
spaces as may be required for
other uses, such as clubhouse
285-12.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-12.1
1:750
Use Number of Spaces
Miniature or par 3 golf 3 for each hole, plus 1 for each
employee
Private clubs and lodges 1 for each 2 persons who may be
legally admitted at one time
according to the occupancy load
established by local, county and
state codes, plus 1 per employee
Softball, baseball fields 25 per playing field
Stadium, sports arena, or similar
place of assembly
1 for each 3 seats or 1 for each 6
linear feet of benches
Swimming pool clubs 1 per 2 member families or
individual members, plus 1 for
each employee
Swimming pools 1 per 4 persons in accordance with
the occupancy load, plus 1 per
employee
Tennis clubs and court-type
recreation uses
1 per person permitted based on
the capacity of the courts, plus
such additional spaces as may be
required for affiliated uses such as
restaurants, bars, or pro shops,
plus 1 per employee
Theater, cinema 1 per each 4 seats, plus 4 per
screen or stage
Video arcades 2 per machine, plus, 1 for each
employee
D. Standards for parking space requirements. The following standards
shall be used in determining the required number of parking spaces:
(1) Definition of floor area. For the purposes of determining the
required number of parking spaces, "floor area" shall be measured
in accordance with the definition of “usable floor area” provided in
§ 285-1.3.
(2) Units of measurement.
(a) Fractional spaces. When calculations for determining the
required number of parking spaces results in a fractional
space, any fraction of less than 1/2 may be disregarded, while a
fraction of 1/2 or more shall be counted as one space.
(b) Employee parking. Parking spaces required for employees
shall be based on the maximum number of employees on the
premises at any one time.
285-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-12.1
1:751
(c) Bench seating. In calculating bench seating for places of
assembly, each 24 inches of benches, pews or other such
seating shall be counted as one seat.
(d) Stacking space. Each required drive-through waiting or
stacking space shall be 24 feet long and nine feet wide.
(3) Uses not cited. For those uses not specifically mentioned, the
requirements for off-street parking for a similar use shall apply,
subject to review by the Planning Commission.
(4) Parking during construction. Temporary off-street parking shall be
provided for workers during construction at a rate of one space per
employee. Gravel surfacing may be permitted for such temporary
parking.
(5) Accessible parking. Each parking lot that serves a building, except
single- and two-family dwelling units, shall have a number of
accessible parking spaces as set forth in the following table, and
identified by an above-grade sign which indicates the spaces are
reserved for physically handicapped persons. Parking for the
handicapped shall comply with the State of Michigan Barrier-Free
Rules, Michigan Public Act No. 1 of 1966, as amended, and the
adopted Township Building Code.71 The number of barrier-free
spaces required is as follows. For uses where there may be a higher
number of persons with disabilities, such as medical uses or senior
housing, the Planning Commission may require a larger proportion
of the parking spaces be barrier-free.
Total Spaces in Parking Lot
Required Number of Barrier-
Free Spaces
Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-12.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-12.1
1:752
(6) Parking deferment. Where the Planning Commission finds that the
required amount of parking is excessive, the Planning Commission
may approve a smaller parking area, provided that the area to meet
the full parking requirement is retained as open space. The site
plan shall note the area where parking is being deferred with a
dotted parking lot layout. If within a two-year period following
issuance of a certificate of occupancy the Zoning Administrator
determines based on observed usage that the deferred parking is
needed, then such parking shall be constructed by the applicant
within six months of being informed of such request in writing by
the Zoning Administrator. The Planning Commission may require
posting of a performance bond to cover the estimated construction
cost of the deferred parking with a refund in two years if the
additional parking is not found to be necessary.
(7) Limits on excessive parking. In order to minimize excessive areas
of pavement which depreciate aesthetic standards and contribute
to high rates of stormwater runoff, exceeding the minimum parking
space requirements shall only be allowed with approval by the
Planning Commission. In granting such additional space, the
Planning Commission shall determine that such parking will be
required, based on documented evidence, to accommodate the use
on a typical day.
(8) Carports and garages. Carports and garages for dwellings shall be
calculated as parking spaces on a one-to-one basis. Carports shall
be screened on the sides or front end facing any public or internal
street or drive by a minimum four-foot high wall or landscape
hedge.
E. Layout and construction. Off-street parking facilities shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements.
(1) Review and approval requirements.
(a) Plans for the construction of any parking lot in conjunction
with a new development shall be submitted for review and
approval according to the normal site plan review procedures.
Plans for expansion of an existing parking lot that is not
associated with other new development shall be submitted to
the Community Development Department for review and
approval prior to the start of construction. Upon completion of
construction, the parking lot must be inspected and approved
by the Community Development Department before a
certificate of occupancy can be issued for the parking lot and
for the building or use the parking is intended to serve.
(b) Plans shall be prepared at a scale of not less than 50 feet equal
to one inch. Plans shall indicate existing and proposed grades,
drainage, water mains and sewers, surfacing and base
285-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-12.1
1:753
materials, and the proposed parking layout. The plans shall
conform to the construction and design standards established
by the Township Engineer.
(c) In the event that required parking cannot be constructed
because of cold or inclement weather, a temporary certificate
of occupancy may be issued by the Building Official, provided
that the applicant first deposits a performance guarantee in
accordance with Article 20.
(2) Dimensions. Off-street parking shall be designed in conformance
with the dimensions in the following off-street parking chart. (See
parking layout diagram.)
Off-Street Parking Standards
Parking Angle
Stall Width
(feet)
Stall Depth1
(feet)
Aisle Width2
(feet)
0° (parallel) 9.0 23.0 12.03
45° 9.5 18.5 13.03
60° 9.5 18.5 15.03
75° 9.5 18.5 15.03
90° 9.5 18.5 24.0
Notes pertaining to off-street parking chart:
1 If parking lot is designed with a six-inch curb, deduct 1.5 feet
for angled parking and two feet for ninety-degree parking.
2 Measured between ends of stall lines limited by vehicle corner
positions.
3 Aisles shall be one-way.
(3) Ingress and egress. All spaces shall be provided with adequate
access by means of clearly defined maneuvering lanes or
driveways. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited.
Entrances and exits from off-street parking lots shall be located at
least 25 feet from the nearest point of any property zoned for
single-family residential use.
285-12.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-12.1
1:754
(4) Surfacing and drainage.
(a) Surfacing. All off-street parking areas, access lanes, driveways
and other vehicle maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced
with concrete, asphalt, or plant-mixed bituminous material.
Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall be subject to
review by the Township Engineer. Requirements for concrete
or asphalt may be modified by the Planning Commission upon
making the determination that such surfacing would not be
feasible or practical because of inadequate drainage in the
area or if the property owner provides sufficient evidence that
a paved surface could not support the heavy machinery
without being damaged.
(b) Drainage. Off-street parking areas, access lanes, and
driveways shall be graded and drained so as to drain away
from buildings in a manner that will not have a detrimental
impact on neighboring properties. The Planning Commission
shall require on-site underground detention unless it is not
feasible, as determined by the Township Engineer. The
drainage must tie into county drainage as approved by the
Wayne County Department of Public Services or other facilities
as approved by the Township Engineer.
(5) Curbs; wheel stops. Off-street parking shall be provided with curbs,
wheel stops, or bumper guards where necessary to protect
landscaped areas, sidewalks, buildings, or adjacent property from
vehicles that might otherwise extend beyond the edge of the
parking lot. Sidewalks abutting parking spaces shall be seven feet
wide. Plantings shall be set back a sufficient distance from curbs to
allow for bumper overhang.
(6) Striping. All parking spaces shall be demarcated with three-to-fourinch
wide painted striping. For any retail, commercial service or
office use, double (or looped) striping, spaced 18 inches to 24
inches apart, shall be utilized.
(7) Lighting. All parking areas, driveways and walkways shall be
illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of
persons using such areas, in accordance with the requirements set
forth in Article 19. Parking lot entrances shall be illuminated. The
Planning Commission may place limitations on lighting at night and
after business hours. Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking
areas shall be directed on the parking area only and away from
nearby residential properties and public streets.
(8) Buildings. No building or structure shall be permitted on an offstreet
parking lot, except for a maintenance building/attendant
shelter, which shall not be more than 50 square feet in area and not
more than 15 feet in height.
285-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-12.1
1:755
285-12.2. Loading space requirements.
(9) Signs. Accessory directional signs shall be permitted in parking
areas in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 16. For
parking lots which are not adjacent to the use being served, one
sign which identifies the intended users or operator of the parking
lot shall be permitted. Such sign shall not exceed 15 square feet in
area and 10 feet in height.
(10) Screening. All off-street parking areas, except those serving singleand
two-family residences, shall be screened from adjoining
residential property, unless otherwise indicated in the specific
requirements for each district. Such screening shall consist of a
continuous obscuring wall or landscaped screen in accordance with
Article 13, subject to approval by the Planning Commission.
(11) Landscaping. Landscaping requirements contained in Article 13
must be met.
(12) Maintenance. All parking areas shall be maintained free of dust,
trash, and debris by the property owner. Surfacing, curbing,
lighting fixtures, signage, and related appurtances shall be
maintained in good condition.
(13) Snowplowing. All parking areas shall be maintained in a safe
condition by the property owner, free of snow and ice. The parking
lot design shall provide a location for snow storage.
A. Intent and scope of application. Compliance with the loading space
regulations set forth herein shall be required in order to avoid
interference with the public use of streets, alleys, parking areas,
driveways, sidewalks, and other public areas.
(1) General applicability. For all buildings and structures established
after the effective date of this chapter, loading space shall be
provided as required in this section. However, where a building
permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter
and construction has been diligently carried on, compliance with
the loading space requirements at the time of issuance of the
building permit shall be required.
(2) Change in use or intensity. Whenever use of a building, structure,
or lot is changed, loading space shall be provided as required by
this chapter for the new use, regardless of any variance which may
have been in effect prior to change of use.
B. General requirements.
(1) Location. Required loading space shall be located in the side or
rear yard of the same zoning lot as the use being served such that it
is screened from view from adjoining roads. Loading space or
access thereto shall not be located where loading/unloading
285-12.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-12.2
1:756
operations will interfere with traffic on public streets or where it
will obstruct off-street parking unless arrangements are made for
deliveries to be limited to hours when there is low demand by
customers for parking or the business is not open to the general
public.
(2) Size. Unless otherwise specified, each required loading space shall
be a minimum of 10 feet in width and 50 feet in length, with a
vertical clearance of 14 feet. The Planning Commission may modify
size requirements for certain uses if smaller delivery vehicles or
larger semitrucks are expected.
(3) Surfacing and drainage. Loading spaces shall be hard-surfaced
with concrete, asphalt, or a plant-mixed bituminous material.
Thicker pavement may be required for truck use as determined by
the Township Engineer. Surface requirements may be modified by
the Planning Commission upon making the determination that such
surfacing would not be feasible or practical because of inadequate
drainage in the area. Loading areas shall be graded and drained so
as to dispose of surface waters. Surface water shall not be
permitted to drain onto adjoining property, unless in accordance
with an approved drainage plan. Grading, surfacing, and drainage
plans shall be subject to review and approval by the Township
Engineer.
(4) Storage and repair prohibited. The storage of merchandise, sale of
motor vehicles, storage of inoperable vehicles or repair of vehicles
is prohibited in required loading space.
(5) Use of loading space. Required loading space shall not be counted
or used for required parking unless arrangements are made for
deliveries to be limited to hours when the business is not open to
the general public.
(6) Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for
individual loading spaces serving businesses on separate lots,
provided that all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a) Each business served shall have direct access to the central
loading area without crossing streets or alleys.
(b) Total loading space provided shall meet the minimum
requirements specified herein, computed on the basis of total
floor area of all businesses served by the central loading space.
(c) No building served shall be more than 500 feet from the
central loading area.
C. Minimum loading space. The amount of required loading space shall be
determined in accordance with the schedule which follows. The
Planning Commission may modify these requirements upon making the
determination that another standard would be more appropriate
285-12.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-12.2
1:757
because of the number or type of deliveries experienced by a particular
business or use.
D. Schedule of loading space requirements.
(1) Nonresidential uses in a residential district and institutional, and
commercial uses.
Gross Floor Area in
Structure
(square feet) Number of Spaces
0 to 2,999 See1
3,000 to 19,999 1
20,000 or more 1 additional space for every 40,000
square feet or fraction thereof
(2) Industrial uses.
Gross Floor Area in
Structure
(square feet) Number of Spaces
0 to 2,999 See1
3,000 to 19,999 1
20,000 to 39,999 2
40,000 or more 1 additional space for every 40,000
Square feet or fraction thereof
Notes pertaining to schedule of loading space requirements:
1 Establishments containing less than 3,000 square feet of gross
floor area shall be provided with adequate off-street loading
space that is accessible by motor vehicle, but which does not
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The size of any
such loading space shall be based on the types of delivery
vehicles typically utilized by the establishment, provided that
in industrial districts sufficient land area must be available to
provide a space 10 feet by 50 feet in the event that the use of
the property changes.
285-12.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-12.2
1:758
ARTICLE 13
Landscaping, Screening and Walls
[Ord. No. 231, effective 1-5-1997]
285-13.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare
by establishing minimum standards for the design, installation and
maintenance of landscaping, greenbelts and buffer zones. Landscaping,
greenbelts, and buffer zones are necessary for the continued protection
and enhancement of all land uses. Landscaping and greenbelts enhance the
visual image of the Township, preserve natural features, improve property
values, and alleviate the impact of noise, traffic, and visual distraction.
Buffer zones protect less-intense uses from the noise, light, traffic, litter and
other impacts. Specifically, the intent of these provisions is to:
A. Improve the appearance of off-street parking areas, vehicular use
areas, and property abutting public rights-of-way;
B. Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the
neighborhoods which abut nonresidential areas, parking areas, and
other intensive use areas;
C. Integrate the various elements within a site and link a development
with the surrounding environment;
D. Reduce soil erosion and depletion;
E. Increase soil water retention, thereby helping to prevent flooding,
erosion and sedimentation;
F. Remove air pollutants and control glare and reflection;
G. Assist in directing safe and efficient traffic flow and prevent vehicular
and pedestrian circulation conflicts;
H. Create a more desirable microclimate; and
I. Provide natural green space to allow infiltration of stormwater,
minimize erosion and filter sediments from runoff.
285-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.1
1:759
285-13.2. Scope of application and definitions.
A. Scope of application.
(1) The requirements set forth herein shall apply to all lots, sites,
parcels and uses which are developed, expanded, or changed
following the effective date of this chapter. No site plan, subdivision
plat or land use permit shall be approved unless landscaping
consistent with the requirements of this article is provided.
(2) The landscaping requirements shall be met prior to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy and shall be continuously maintained in a
sound, healthy, and vigorous growing condition.
285-13.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.2
1:760
(3) The requirements set forth herein are minimum requirements, and
nothing herein shall preclude the applicant and the Township from
agreeing to more extensive landscaping.
(4) Creativity in landscape design is encouraged. The standards are
intentionally flexible to encourage adaptability and creative design.
Required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, at
random, or in groupings, depending on the designer's desired
visual effect and the intent of the Township to coordinate
landscaping on adjacent properties.
B. Definitions. Whenever used in this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall have the following meaning ascribed to them:
BERM — A continuous, raised earthen mound comprised of nontoxic
materials with a flattened top and sloped sides, capable of supporting
live landscaping materials.
BUFFER ZONE — A strip of land with landscaping, berms or walls
singularly or in combination required along mutual lot lines between
certain zoning districts based on the landscaping standards of this
chapter. The intent of the required buffer zones is to lessen the impact
to less-intensive uses from the noise, light, traffic, clutter and litter of
adjacent land uses.
GRASS — Any of a family of plants with narrow leaves normally grown
as permanent lawns in Wayne County, Michigan.
GREENBELT — A strip of land of definite width and location along
a public road right-of-way or private road easement reserved for the
planting of trees and ground cover to enhance the visual image of the
Township.
GROUND COVER — Low-growing plants that form a dense, extensive
growth after one complete growing season and tend to prevent weeds
and soil erosion.
LANDSCAPING — The treatment of the ground surface with live plant
materials such as, but not limited to, grass, ground cover, trees, shrubs,
vines, and other live plant material. In addition, a landscape design
may include other decorative nonliving materials, such as wood chips,
crushed stone, boulders or mulch. Structural features such as
fountains, pools, statues, and benches shall also be considered a part of
landscaping if provided in combination with live plant material. Various
landscaping related terms are defined below.
ORNAMENTAL TREE — A deciduous tree which is typically grown
because of its shape, flowering characteristics, or other attractive
features and which grows to a mature height of 25 feet or less.
PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING — Landscaped areas located in and
around (within 10 feet of the edge of the parking lot) a parking lot in
specified quantities to improve the safety of pedestrian and vehicular
285-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.2
1:761
285-13.3. Landscaping requirements.
traffic, guide traffic movement, improve the environment and improve
the appearance of the parking area and site.
PLANTING — A young tree, vine or shrub that would be placed on or in
the ground.
SCREEN OR SCREENING — A wall, wood fencing or combination
of plantings of sufficient height, length, and opacity to form a visual
barrier. If the screen is composed of nonliving material, such material
shall be compatible with materials used in construction of the main
building but in no case shall include wire fencing.
SHRUB — A self-supporting deciduous or evergreen woody plant,
normally branched near the base, bushy, and less than 15 feet in height.
TREE — A self-supporting woody, deciduous or evergreen plant with a
well-defined central trunk or stem which normally grows to a mature
height of 15 feet or more in Wayne County, Michigan.
A. General requirements. All developed portions of a site requiring site
plan approval shall conform to the following general landscaping
standards, except where specific landscape elements, such as a
greenbelt, berms, or screening, are required:
(1) Unpaved portions of the site shall be planted with grass, ground
cover, shrubbery, or other suitable live plant material. Areas around
plantings may be surrounded with stone or other appropriate
landscape cover.
(2) A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted at the
rate of one tree per 3,000 square feet or portion thereof of unpaved
open area. This open area is that area of the site that is not
occupied by buildings, parking, road rights-of-way, water bodies,
greenbelts or buffers required herein.
B. Greenbelts.
(1) Within all multiple-family residential, mobile home park and
industrial districts, a twenty-foot-wide greenbelt shall be planted
adjacent to and outside of the public right-of-way or private road
easement. Within the Macomb Street District and all commercial
districts, a ten-foot-wide greenbelt shall be planted adjacent to and
outside of the public right-of-way or private road easement. Where
a single-family subdivision or site condominium is proposed, a
twenty-foot-wide greenbelt shall be planted adjacent to and outside
of the public right-of-way or private road easement that bounds the
exterior of the subdivision. Greenbelts shall conform to the
following standards:
(a) A required greenbelt may be interrupted only to provide for
pedestrian or vehicular access.
285-13.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.3
1:762
(b) Grass, ground cover, or other suitable live plant material shall
be planted over the entire greenbelt area, except where paved
walkways are used.
(c) Within the Macomb Street District, a minimum of one
deciduous shade tree shall be planted for each 30 linear feet,
or portion thereof, of required greenbelt length. Trees may be
planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings. The
Planning Commission may approve substitution of evergreen
trees for up to 50% of the required trees.
(d) Within all zoning districts other than the Macomb Street
District, a minimum of one deciduous shade tree and one
evergreen tree shall be planted for each 30 linear feet, or
portion thereof, of required greenbelt length. Trees may be
planted at uniform intervals, at random, or in groupings.
(e) For the purpose of calculating required plant material,
greenbelt length shall be measured between side lot lines
along the parcel's frontage, following the public road right-ofway
or the private road easement.
(f) All existing trees six inches in diameter at breast height (dbh)
within the greenbelt shall be preserved, except where
necessary to install vehicular, pedestrian and utility access
points. The standards contained in § 285-13.4E shall be
complied with.
(g) A residential development that provides a greenbelt greater
than 20 feet wide may transfer the density that would be
normally be allowed within the greenbelt to another portion of
the development, with Planning Commission approval,
provided all other standards can be met. The amount of density
shall be the area of the greenbelt above and beyond the
normally required twenty-foot-wide greenbelt. Within a
development that contains lots, the greenbelt shall be set aside
as a common area and not included within the individual lots.
The greenbelt shall be set aside by the developer through an
irrevocable conveyance that is found acceptable to the
Planning Commission, such as recorded deed restrictions,
covenants that run perpetually with the land, or a conservation
easement. The dedicated greenbelt shall forever remain open
space, subject only to uses approved by the Township on the
approved site plan. Further subdivision of greenbelt land or its
use for other than recreation or conservation purposes shall be
strictly prohibited.
(2) All single- or two-family residential lots shall provide two canopy
trees within 20 feet of the front lot line. These trees shall be
indicated on the plot plan submittal for a building permit.
285-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.3
1:763
(3) All tree plantings within the greenbelt shall be located to avoid
overhead utility lines.
285-13.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.3
1:764
285-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.3
1:765
C. Required buffer zones. In order to provide protective screening and
buffers between abutting land uses, a landscaped buffer zone and wall,
fence or berm shall be provided by the applicant in accordance with the
following. This subsection applies to any application for site plan,
subdivision or condominium approval. Single- and two-family dwellings
located on individual lots of record are exempt from the regulations of
this subsection. These regulations do not apply along a lot line where
the abutting land use is separated by a public road right-of-way or
private road easement.
(1) Table 13.3.3.A identifies where and what type of buffer is required
between land uses. Table 13.3.3.B details the minimum landscape
elements that must be included in each type of buffer zone.
285-13.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.3
1:766
Table 13.3.3.A Required Buffer Zones
Proposed Use Will Be Adjacent To:
The Proposed
Use Will Be
Single-
Family
District
Multiple-
Family
District
Mobile
Home
Park
District
Macomb
Street
District
Industrial
or
Airport
District
Single-family
residential1
None B B B A
Multiple-family
residential
B C B B A
Mobile home park B B C B A
Commercial2 B B B C B
Industrial or
airport
A A A B None
NOTES:
1 Applies to applications for subdivision plat or condominium site plan
approval only.
2 Includes nonresidential special land uses in a residential district such
as boat clubs and churches.
Table 13.3.3.B Description of Required Buffer Zones
Buffer
Zone
Minimum
Width
(feet)
Minimum Wall/
Berm Minimum Plant Materials
A B 50 20 Continuous wall,
fence or required
berm Continuous
wall, fence or
required berm
1 deciduous tree, 2 evergreen
trees and 4 shrubs per each 20
linear feet along the property line,
rounded upward 1 deciduous tree,
1 evergreen tree and 4 shrubs per
each 30 linear feet along the
property line, rounded upward
C 10 None required 1 deciduous or evergreen tree or
4 shrubs per each 20 linear feet
along the property line, rounded
upward
(2) Minimum requirements for berms are outlined in Subsection D.
Minimum requirements for plant materials are outlined in
§ 285-13.4. Minimum requirements for walls and fences are
outlined in § 285-13.5.
285-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.3
1:767
285-13.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.3
1:768
D. Berms. Where required or provided, berms shall conform to the
following standards:
(1) Required berms shall be at least three feet above grade elevation
and shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one foot
vertical for each four feet horizontal (twenty-five-percent slope),
with at least a two-foot flat area on the top. The Planning
Commission may modify the height requirement in cases where
sufficient room does not exist to construct a three-foot-high berm.
(2) A required berm shall be planted with grass, ground cover, or other
suitable live plant material to protect it from erosion so that it
retains its height and shape.
(3) Required plantings.
285-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.3
1:769
(a) Berms located in the front yard of nonresidential parcels shall
be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for
required greenbelt along street frontage, Subsection B.
(b) Berms used for screening other than in the front yard shall be
landscaped in accordance with the requirements for required
buffer zones, Subsection C.
E. Landscaping in culs-de-sac at entrances and within medians. Culs-desac,
site entrances and boulevard medians shall be landscaped with
species tolerant of roadside conditions. The landscape plan shall be
approved by the Planning Commission in consideration of sight
distance, size of planting area, location of sidewalks, maintenance of
adequate overhead clearance, accessibility to fire hydrants, visibility to
approved signs and compatibility with the visual character of the
surrounding area. The landscape plan for public and private roads shall
comply with the Rules, Procedures and Standards for Landscaping and
Beautification Projects in Wayne County Road Rights-of-Way.
285-13.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.3
1:770
F. Landscaping of off-street parking areas.
(1) When off-street parking and loading of a non-single-family
detached residential use abuts a residential zoning district, the
parking lot and loading area shall be screened from such
contiguous residential district by a solid, ornamental masonry wall
at least six feet tall meeting the requirements of § 285-13.5, in
addition to the landscape plant materials required in Subsection E.
In lieu of a wall, the Planning Commission may permit or require
one evergreen tree planted every 15 feet along the mutual property
boundary, in addition to the landscape plant materials required in
§ Subsection C, Required buffer zones.
(2) In addition to screening which may be required around off-street
parking and loading areas, all off-street parking areas containing
greater than 20 spaces shall also provide the following landscaping
within the parking lot envelope, described as the area including the
parking lot surface and extending 18 feet from the edge of the
parking lot, as illustrated in Figure 13.3.6.A. A minimum of 1/3 of
the trees required shall be placed within landscape islands in the
interior of the parking lot.
285-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.3
1:771
(a) One canopy tree shall be required for each 3,000 square feet of
the total of the paved driveway and parking lot surface,
provided that in no case fewer than two trees shall be
provided.
(b) Landscaped areas in parking lots shall be no less than 10 feet
in any dimension and no less than 150 square feet in area.
Landscaped areas shall be protected with curbing or other
means to prevent overhang encroachment of vehicles. (See
Figure 13.3.6.A.)
(3) Required landscaping elsewhere on the parcel shall not be counted
in meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements, and the
parking lot landscaping required in this Subsection F cannot be
credited toward required greenbelts or buffers.
(4) Whenever possible, parking lot landscaping shall be designed to
improve the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, guide traffic
movement, and improve the appearance of the parking area.
285-13.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.3
1:772
Landscaping shall be installed such that, when mature, it does not
obscure traffic signs or lighting, obstruct access to fire hydrants,
interfere with adequate sight distance for motorists, or disrupt
drainage patterns on the site or adjacent properties.
(5) Landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot in order
to break up large expanses of pavement and help direct smooth
traffic flow within the lot.
(6) Landscaped areas shall be covered by grass or other living ground
cover. Wood chips or similar material a minimum depth of three
inches is permitted for planting beds immediately surrounding
plant material. Such material should be identified on the landscape
plan.
(7) Requirements for plant material shall be based on the location, size
and shape of the parking lot landscaped area. The landscape plan
shall indicate the types, sizes, and quantities of plant material
proposed for such areas.
(8) Under Article 7, Macomb Street District, off-street parking visible
from the public right-of-way must be screened by a hedgerow or a
three-foot-tall earth-tone brick wall.
G. Landscaping of rights-of-way. Public rights-of-way located adjacent to
required landscaped areas and greenbelts shall be planted with grass
or other suitable live ground cover and shall be maintained by the
owner or occupant of the adjacent property as if the rights-of-way were
part of the required landscaped areas or greenbelts. The landscape
plan for public and private roads shall comply with the Rules,
Procedures and Standards for Landscaping and Beautification Projects
in Wayne County Road Rights-of-Way.
H. Utility structures.
(1) Utility structures such as electrical transformers or sewer pump
stations shall be screened from view by landscaping. A minimum of
two evergreen trees shall be planted adjacent to the utility
structure to screen it from view.
(2) All landscape plantings shall be spaced a minimum of 15 feet from
any fire hydrant.
I. Maintenance of unobstructed visibility for drivers. Where a driveway
intersects a public right-of-way or private road or where a site abuts the
intersection of public rights-of-way or private roads, all landscaping
within the corner triangular areas described below shall permit
unobstructed cross-visibility for drivers. Shrubs and portions of
required berms located in the triangular area shall not be permitted to
grow to a height of more than 30 inches above the pavement grade at
the edge of the pavement. Trees may be maintained in this area
provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision to a
285-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.3
1:773
285-13.4. Plant material requirements.
height of eight feet above the pavement grade at the edge of the
pavement. The triangular areas referred to above are:
(1) The areas formed at the intersection of a public right-of-way or
private road and a driveway, two sides of each triangle being 10
feet in length measured along the right-of-way line and driveway
line from their points of intersection and the third side being a line
connecting these two sides; and
(2) The area(s) formed at the intersection of two public right-of-way
lines or private roads, the two sides of the triangular area being 30
feet in length measured along the intersecting public right-of-way
lines from their point of intersection and the third side being a line
connecting these two sides.
J. Modification of landscape requirements. The Planning Commission may
reduce or modify the location of the landscape requirements contained
in this section based upon a determination that the landscaping
required in this section will not be necessary or effective in meeting the
intent of this chapter. In making such a determination, the following
shall be considered:
(1) Topographic features or other unique features of the site create
conditions such that strict application of the landscape regulations
would result in a less effective screen than an alternative landscape
design.
(2) Parking, vehicular circulation, or existing or planned land use are
such that required landscaping would not enhance the site or result
in the desired screening effect.
(3) The public benefit intended by the landscape regulations could be
better achieved with a plan that varies from the strict requirements
of the chapter.
(4) The intent to comply with the standards has been demonstrated by
the applicant with alternatives considered by the applicant prior to
the Planning Commission consideration of modification to
requirements.
A. Standards for landscape materials. Unless otherwise specified, all
landscape materials shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Plant quality. Plant materials used in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be nursery grown, free of pests and
diseases, hardy in southern Wayne County, in conformance with the
standards of the American Association of Nurserymen and shall
have passed inspections required under state regulations.
285-13.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.4
1:774
(2) Nonliving plant material. Plastic and other nonliving plant
materials shall not be considered acceptable to meet the
landscaping requirements of this chapter.
(3) Plant material specifications. The following minimum specifications
shall apply to all plant material at the time of planting proposed in
accordance with the landscaping requirements of this chapter:
Minimum Plant Material Size
Plant Type
Minimum
Caliper1
(inches)
Minimum
Height
(feet)
Minimum
Spread
Deciduous shade
trees
3 42 first branch —
Ornamental trees 2 43 —
Evergreen trees4 — 6 2.2 feet
Shrubs — 2 15 inches
Hedges5 — 4 —
NOTES:
1 Measured 12 inches above grade. Refer to Chapter 282,
Woodland and Tree Preservation, for measurement of existing
trees.
2 Trees planted along pedestrian routes (i.e., sidewalks, plazas,
etc.) shall not have branches lower than six feet. Trees planted
within street line (curb) and sidewalk or along bikeways shall
maintain a vertical clearance to obstructions of a minimum of 10
feet.
3 Clumped trees (e.g., birch) shall have a minimum height of six
feet above grade.
4 The size of the burlapped root ball for evergreen trees shall be at
least 10 times the caliper measured six inches above grade.
5 Hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a
continuous, unbroken, visual screen within two years after
planting.
(4) Ground cover used in lieu of turf grasses in whole or in part shall be
planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and
reasonably complete coverage after one complete growing season.
(5) Grass area(s) shall be planted using species normally grown as
permanent lawns in southern Wayne County. Grass, sod, and seed
shall be clean and free of weeds, noxious pests, and diseases. Straw
or other mulch shall be used to protect newly seeded areas.
285-13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.4
1:775
(6) Mulch used around trees, shrubs, and vines shall be a minimum of
three inches deep and installed in a manner as to present a finished
appearance.
285-13.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.4
1:776
285-13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.4
1:777
B. Spacing. Planting in informal groupings to create a naturalistic
appearance is desirable. Wherever possible, plant materials shall not be
placed closer than four feet from the fence line or property line. Plant
materials used together in informal groupings should meet the
following on-center spacing guidelines:
Plant
Material
Types Evergreen
Narrow
Evergreen
Trees
Large
Deciduous
Trees
Small
Deciduous
Trees
Large
Shrubs
Small
Shrubs
Evergreen
trees
Min. 10'
Max. 20'
Narrow
evergreen
trees
Min. 12' Min. 5'
Max. 10'
Large
deciduous
trees
Min. 20' Min. 15' Min. 20'
Max. 30'
Small
deciduous
trees
Min. 12' Min. 10' Min. 15' Min. 8'
Max. 15'
285-13.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.4
1:778
Plant
Material
Types Evergreen
Narrow
Evergreen
Trees
Large
Deciduous
Trees
Small
Deciduous
Trees
Large
Shrubs
Small
Shrubs
Large shrubs Min. 6' Min. 5' Min. 5' Min. 6' Min. 4'
Max. 6'
Small shrubs Min. 5' Min. 4' Min. 3' Min. 3' Min. 5' Min. 3'
Max. 4'
C. Suggested plant material. The following table lists recommended plant
materials for required landscaping. Plant materials of equal or better
quality may be substituted for suggested plant materials.
Recommended Plant Materials
Common Name Genus
Deciduous Canopy Trees
1. Oaks* Quercus
2. Hard Maples (except Japanese)* Acer
3. Hackberry* Celtis
4. Planetree (Sycamore)* Platanus
5. Birch* Betula
6. Beech* Fagus
7. Gingko (male) Ginkgo
8. Honeylocust (Thornless Cultivars
only)*
Gleditsia
9. Hophornbeam (Ironwood)* Ostrya
10. Linden Tilia
11. Ashes* Faxinus
12. Hickory* Carya
13. Hornbeam (Blue Beech)* Carpinus
*Please note: Although the use of ashes is suggested, due to recent
disease and pest problems associated with ashes in the area, it is
recommended that more disease-resistant ash cultivars be used and
that no one cultivar be planted as the dominant tree type.
Common Name Genus
Deciduous Ornamental Trees
1. Amelanchier* Amelanchier
2. Redbud* Cercis
3. Dogwood (Tree Form)* Cornus
4. Hawthorn* Crataegus
285-13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.4
1:779
Common Name Genus
Deciduous Ornamental Trees
5. Flowering Crabapple (diseaseresistant
cultivars)
Malus
6. Flowering Plum (Tree Form) Prunus
7. Flowering Pear Pyrus
8. Magnolia Magnolia
9. Hornbeam* Carpinus
10. Rose of Sharon Hibiscus
Common Name Genus
Evergreen Trees
1. Fir Abies
2. Hemlock Tsuga
3. Spruce Picea
4. Pine* Pinus
5. Douglas Fir Pseudotsuga
*Please note: Dwarf, Globe, Pendulous Species/Cultivars are not
permitted.
Common Name Genus
Narrow Evergreens
1. Juniper* Juniperus
2. Arborvitae Thuja
*Please note: Dwarf, Globe, Spreading Species/Cultivars are not
permitted.
Common Name Genus
Large Shrubs
1. Deciduous
a. Dogwood (Shrub Form)* Cornus
b. Cotoneaster Cotoneaster
c. Forsythia Forsythia
d. Mock-Orange Philadelphus
e. Sumac* Rhus
f. Lilac Syringa
g. Viburnum* Viburnum
h. Witchhazel* Hamamelis
i. Euonymus Euonymus
285-13.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.4
1:780
Common Name Genus
Large Shrubs
j. Privet Ligustrum
k. Ninebark* Physocarpus
2. Evergreens
a. Juniper (Hetz, Pfitzer, Savin) Juniperus
b. Yew (Pyramidal Japanese) Taxus
Common Name Genus
Small Shrubs
1. Deciduous
a. Barberry Berberis
b. Boxwood Buxus
c. Quince Chaenomeles
d. Cotoneaster Cotoneaster
e. Euonymus* Euonymus
f. Forsythia Forsythia
g. Hydrangea Hydrangea
h. Holly* Ilex
i. Privet Ligustrum
j. Potentilla* Potentilla
k. Currant* Ribes
l. Lilac Syringa
m. Viburnum* Viburnum
n. Weigela Weigela
2. Evergreens
a. Fir Abies
b. False Cypress Chamaecyparis
c. Juniper (Low Spreading)* Juniperus
d. Spruce Picea
e. Pine Pinus
f. Yew (Globe, Spreading,
Upright)*
Taxus
g. Arborvitae (Globe/Dwarf) Thuja
*See § 285-13.4F, Undesirable plant material.
285-13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.4
1:781
D. Installation and maintenance. The following standards shall be
observed where installation and maintenance of landscape materials is
required:
(1) Installation. Landscaping shall be installed in a sound, professional
manner to ensure the continued growth of healthy plant material.
(2) Protection from vehicles. Landscaping shall be protected from
vehicles through use of wheel stops or other means. Landscape
areas shall be elevated above the pavement to a height adequate to
protect the plants from snow removal, salt, and other hazards.
(3) Maintenance. Required landscaping (including berms, greenbelts,
buffer zones, walls, wood lots, trees, lawns and ground cover) shall
be maintained in a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, free from
refuse and debris. All unhealthy and dead plant material shall be
replaced in the next appropriate planting period. The landscape
plan shall indicate the individual(s) or business(es) who or which
will be responsible for continued maintenance of the landscaping.
Those charged with this responsibility shall also be responsible for
maintenance of adjacent landscaped areas in public rights-of-way.
E. Treatment of existing plant material. The following regulations shall
apply to existing plant material:
(1) Utilization of existing elements in the landscape design. In
instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its
development, the Planning Commission may permit substitution of
such plant material in place of the requirements set forth
previously in this section, provided such substitution is in keeping
with the spirit and intent of this section and this chapter in general.
Existing hedges, berms, walls, or other landscape elements may be
used to satisfy the requirements set forth previously, provided that
such existing elements are in conformance with the requirements
of this section.
(2) Preservation of existing plant material.
(a) Site plans shall show all existing trees which are located in the
portions of the site that will be built upon or otherwise altered
and are six inches or greater in diameter at breast height
(dbh). Trees shall be labeled "To Be Removed" or "To Be Saved"
on the site plan. Removal of trees shall be undertaken in
compliance with Chapter 282, Woodland and Tree
Preservation. If existing plant material is labeled "To Be Saved"
on the site plan, the protective measures outlined in Chapter
282 shall be complied with.
(b) In the event that healthy plant materials which are intended to
meet the requirements of this chapter are cut down, damaged
or destroyed during construction, said plant material shall be
replaced in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 282.
285-13.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.4
1:782
285-13.5. Obscuring wall requirements.
Where permitted or required by this chapter, obscuring walls shall be
subject to the following regulations:
An occupancy permit shall not be issued until the applicant has
documented compliance with this requirement.
F. Undesirable plant material.
(1) Use of the following plant materials (or their clones and cultivars)
is not encouraged because of susceptibility to storm damage,
disease, or other undesirable characteristics:
Undesirable Plant Materials
Common Name Genus Species
Silver Maple Acer sacharinum
Box Elder Acer negundo
Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissima
European Barberry Berberis thunbergii
Northern Catalpa Catalpa speciosa
Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana
Poplar Populus deltoides
Willow Salix spp.
American Elm Ulmus americana
(2) The Planning Commission, however, may allow trees from this list
when associated with an appropriate ecosystem, such as a wetland
area.
A. Location. Required obscuring walls shall be placed on the lot line
except in the following instances:
(1) Where underground utilities interfere with placement of the wall
on the property line, the wall shall be placed on the utility easement
line located nearest the property line.
(2) Where located adjacent to a side street, the wall shall be set back
eight feet from the side property line. The area between the wall
and the property line shall be landscaped in accordance with the
greenbelt provisions set forth previously.
B. Openings for access. Required obscuring walls shall be continuous with
no interruptions except for vehicular and pedestrian access.
C. Corner clearance. Obscuring walls shall comply with the specifications
for maintenance of unobstructed visibility for drivers as set forth in
§ 285-13.3I.
285-13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.5
1:783
D. Substitution. As a substitute for a required obscuring wall, the Planning
Commission may, in its review of the site plan, approve the use of other
existing or proposed natural or man-made landscape features (such as
evergreens spaced 10 feet on center) that would produce substantially
the same results in terms of screening, durability, and permanence.
E. Wall specifications.
(1) Required obscuring walls shall be 6 1/2 feet in height and shall be
constructed of the materials that are architecturally compatible
with the materials used on the facade of the principal structure on
the site.
(2) Masonry walls shall be erected on a concrete foundation which
shall have a minimum depth of 42 inches and shall not be less than
four inches wider than the wall to be erected.
(3) The Planning Commission may require brick or decorative facing
with the same or complementary materials as the principal building
on one or both sides of the wall.
(4) All residential walls shall comply with Chapter 103, Fences and
Walls.
F. Fence specifications.
(1) Fences erected for screening purposes shall be a minimum of six
feet in height and shall be constructed of redwood, cedar, or No. 1
pressure-treated wood, with posts sunk into the ground at least
three feet.
(2) Chain link fences shall not be permitted for screening purposes.
(3) All residential fences shall comply with Chapter 103, Fences and
Walls.
285-13.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-13.5
1:784
ARTICLE 14
Reserved For Future Use
[Ord. No. 286, effective 4-16-2000]
GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.5
1:785

ARTICLE 15
Reserved For Future Use
[Ord. No. 288A, effective 7-16-2000]
GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-13.5
1:787

ARTICLE 16
Sign Regulations
[Ord. No. 286, effective 4-16-2000]
285-16.1. Intent.
The regulations contained herein are instituted to provide for the
establishment of signs, lighting, and displays that will promote viable
commercial and industrial activity but will not, by reason of their size,
location, spacing, construction, or manner of display, endanger life or limb,
confuse or mislead traffic, obstruct vision necessary for traffic safety, or
otherwise endanger the public health or safety. Furthermore, it is the
intent of these regulations to preserve and improve the appearance of the
Township by preventing placement of oversized signs that are out of scale
with surrounding buildings and structures or an excessive accumulation of
signs that would cause visual clutter. These regulations are further intended
to regulate permitted signs in such a way as to create land use patterns that
are compatible with major land use objectives and to prevent such signs
from causing annoyance or disturbance to the citizens and residents of the
Township.
285-16.2. Scope of application and permit requirements.
A. Scope of application. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to erect, construct, or alter any sign in the Township
without complying with the provisions of this chapter. Any sign already
established on the effective date of this chapter, and which is rendered
nonconforming by the provisions herein or subsequent amendments
hereto, shall be subject to the regulations concerning nonconforming
structures and uses set forth in Article 18 herein.
B. Permits. No new sign shall be erected, constructed, affixed, or painted
unless a sign permit shall first have been approved and issued in
accordance with the provisions set forth herein. The amount of the
permit fee shall be established by resolution of the Township Board.
C. Application for permit. Application for sign permits shall be made upon
forms provided for this purpose by the Community Development
Department and shall include:
(1) Plans and specifications showing the dimensions, materials and
required details of construction, including loads, stresses, and
anchorage;
(2) Plans indicating the location of the sign(s) on buildings, structures
or parcels of land;
(3) Written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which
the sign is to be erected;
285-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-16.2
1:789
285-16.3. Inspection and maintenance of signs.
(4) The name of the person, firm, or corporation owning, erecting,
maintaining, and operating such sign; and
(5) All other information required on the application form.
D. Review of application. The Community Development Department shall
review all applications for sign approval and shall issue sign permits for
each application which complies with all of the regulations set forth
herein.
E. Alterations. A sign shall not be enlarged, relocated or otherwise altered
unless a proper permit has been secured to ensure conformity with the
provisions set forth herein for new signs. The changing of movable
parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes (such as
lettering on a marquee or numbers on a gasoline price sign) or the
repainting or reposting of display matter shall not be deemed an
alteration and shall not require a new permit, provided the conditions of
the original approval and the requirements set forth herein are not
violated.
F. Permit not required. A permit shall not be required for the following
signs:
(1) Any sign listed as exempt under § 285-16.5B;
(2) Street address signs and signs denoting the name and address of
the occupants of the premises, including professional nameplates,
provided such signs do not exceed one square foot in area and four
feet in height. If such signs are freestanding, they shall be set back
a minimum distance of six feet from the property line;
(3) Temporary political signs, subject to the provisions set forth in
§ 285-16.6B;
(4) Real estate, open house, and model home signs, subject to the
provisions set forth in §§ 285-16.5, 285-16.6 and 285-16.7, but not
including § 285-16.7G, Temporary marketing signs in residential
subdivisions;
(5) Garage sale signs, subject to the provisions set forth in § 285-16.7;
(6) Nameplate and identification signs;
(7) Signs accessory to parking areas; and
(8) Temporary window signs.
A. Inspection of new signs. All signs for which a permit is required shall be
inspected by the Community Development Department when erected,
and if found to have been constructed, supported, braced, and painted
in accordance with the approved plans and the provisions of this
285-16.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-16.3
1:790
chapter, then a certificate of inspection shall be issued. In cases where
fasteners, anchorages, etc., are to be installed and bricked in or
encased in such a manner that the inspector would not be able to
inspect said fasteners or anchorages, the sign erector shall advise
the Department of Community Development when said fasteners or
anchorages are to be installed so that inspection may be completed
before enclosure; otherwise, the Building Official shall be empowered
to stop further construction or erection of said sign until any such
concealed fasteners or anchorages are inspected and approved.
B. Correction of defects with new signs. Should any new sign erection be
found unsafe, not secure, improperly constructed, or not in accordance
with the approved plans or requirements of this chapter, the sign
erector, owner of the sign, or owner of the land shall make such
erection safe, secure, and according to the requirements of this chapter
or entirely remove the sign in accordance with the following timetable:
(1) If the Community Development Department determines that the
sign is an immediate threat to the safety of persons nearby, all
required action to correct the defect shall be taken within 48 hours
(two working days) from the time of notification in writing from the
Department of Community Development, provided the sign can be
cordoned off or adequately secured during the intervening time so
as to remove any immediate threat to safety. If said sign cannot be
cordoned off or secured so as to eliminate any immediate threat to
safety, then all required action to correct the defects shall be made
without delay.
(2) If the Community Development Department determines that the
sign is not an immediate threat to the safety of persons nearby, all
required action to correct the defect shall be taken within seven
working days after notification in writing from the Department of
Community Development.
(3) If defects are not corrected within the specified time limits, the
Department of Community Development may remove such sign at
the expense of the sign owner or lessee.
C. Correction of defects with existing signs. If, upon inspection, an existing
sign is found to be unsafe, not secure, corroded, or subject to corrosion
or otherwise poorly maintained so that the sign may become unsafe or
not secure, then the owner shall make the sign safe and secure by
completing any necessary reconstruction, repairs, painting, or other
improvements in accordance with the timetable for correcting defects
with new signs, as outlined in Subsection B above, except as follows:
(1) If the Community Development Department determines that the
sign is not an immediate threat to the safety of persons nearby, all
required action to correct the defect shall be taken within 30 days
after notification in writing from the Department of Community
Development.
285-16.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-16.3
1:791
285-16.4. Appeal to Zoning Board of Appeals.
285-16.5. General limitations and provisions.
Any sign erected after the effective date of this chapter shall be subject to
the following limitations and provisions:
(2) The Community Development Department may extend the thirtyday
timetable if temperatures below 25° F. prevent painting or if
the defects are minor, not generally noticeable to the public, and
not a hazard to public safety.
A. Appeals process. Any party who has been refused a sign permit by the
Community Development Department for a proposed sign installation
may file a claim of appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall consider the appeal in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 285-23.4. The Zoning Board of Appeals may
grant such appeal and allow a variance to the sign provisions of this
chapter upon finding that:
(1) Because of extraordinary circumstances on the site, compliance
with the provisions of these sign regulations would result in a
particular hardship (as distinguished from mere inconvenience or a
desire to make more money);
(2) Strict enforcement of these sign regulations would serve no useful
purpose; and
(3) A variance would be in the best interests of the Township and not in
conflict with the spirit and intent of this chapter.
B. Permit process. Upon granting of a variance by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, the Community Development Department shall grant a sign
permit, provided that all other requirements of this chapter have been
met and all required permit fees have been paid. A sign that is
permitted by virtue of a variance shall be subject to all other applicable
requirements of this chapter which are not in conflict with the terms of
the variance.
A. Nonconforming or obsolete signs. Obsolete signs, which include all
signs that advertise a product that is no longer made or that advertise a
business that has closed, shall be removed within 30 days by the owner,
agent, or person having beneficial use of the building or structure.
Upon vacating a commercial or industrial establishment, the proprietor
shall be responsible for the removal of all signs used in conjunction with
the business. However, where a conforming sign structure and frame
are typically reused by the current occupant or business in a leased or
rented building, the building owner shall not be required to remove said
sign structure and frame in the interim period when the building is not
occupied, provided the sign structure and frame are maintained in
285-16.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-16.5
1:792
accordance with the standards of this chapter and the Township's
adopted Building Code.72
B. Exempt signs. The sign regulations set forth herein shall not apply to
the following signs, provided such signs are in compliance with all other
applicable regulations and ordinances:
(1) Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon
which they are situated or from any public thoroughfare or right-ofway;
(2) Miscellaneous traffic and other official signs of any public or
governmental agency, such as traffic control or directional signs,
legal notices, historic site designations, trespassing signs, signs
indicating danger, signs indicating the location of USGS
benchmarks, airfield signs, or signs used as aids to service or
safety;
(3) Any flag, emblem, or insignia of our nation, its governmental units,
or its schools;
(4) Any sign which is located completely within an enclosed building
and which is not visible from outside of the building;
(5) Tablets, grave markers, headstones, statuary, or similar
remembrances of persons or events;
(6) Temporary decorations or displays celebrating the occasion of
traditionally accepted patriotic or religious holidays and special
municipal and school activities;
(7) Public safety and routing signs used on construction sites; and
(8) Any sign on a bus, truck, trailer, or other vehicle while operated
and used for transport in the normal course of a business which is
not primarily the display of signs.
C. Prohibited signs. The following signs shall not be permitted or erected
in any district:
(1) Any sign which is not expressly permitted by the regulations set
forth herein;
(2) Signs which have flashing, blinking or moving lights or exposed
incandescent light bulbs;
(3) Cloth and banner signs, pennants, spinners, paper festoon signs,
and similar devices, except as specifically permitted herein;
(4) String lights used for advertising purposes other than Christmas or
other decorations;
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-16.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-16.5
1:793
(5) Any sign which has any visible moving parts, visible revolving
parts, visible mechanical movement of any description, or other
apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic, or
mechanical means, including intermittent electrical pulsations, or
by action of normal wind current;
(6) Any sign or sign structure which is structurally unsafe, or
constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment, or is not kept in good
repair or is capable of causing electrical shock to persons likely to
come in contact with it;
(7) Any sign which obstructs a window, door or other opening that
could be used for fire escape;
(8) Any sign which makes use of the words "Stop," "Look," or "Danger"
or any other words, phrases, symbols, or characters in such a
manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse drivers;
(9) Any sign or other advertising structure containing obscene,
indecent, or immoral matter;
(10) Any sign unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained;
(11) Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a
bona fide business conducted or product sold;
(12) Any sign erected so as to impair access to a roof;
(13) Any sign that projects above the parapet line or eaves of any roof,
except as specifically permitted herein;
(14) Any sign, other than an official notice of the Township, school
district, or other public entity, that is attached to a utility pole, tree,
or other object located or situated on public property;
(15) Portable or temporary signs except as specifically permitted by this
chapter;
(16) Signs painted on or attached to a parked vehicle, truck, trailer, or
van which is being used principally for advertising purposes rather
than for transportation purposes;
(17) Sandwich board signs;
(18) Signs on street furniture, such as benches, newspaper stands, and
trash receptacles; [Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-002]
(19) Any sign which projects into the public right-of-way; and
[Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-002]
(20) Electronic changeable message signs, except where expressly
allowed in this article. [Added 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-002]
285-16.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-16.5
1:794
D. Structural requirements. All signs shall be constructed and erected in a
safe and stable manner in accordance with provisions of the Township's
adopted Building Code,73 the National Electrical Code, and this section.
All electrical wiring associated with ground or freestanding signs shall
be installed underground. All signs must be mounted so that the backs
of the signs are screened from view.
E. Motorist visibility. No sign shall be located on or near any street corner
or near any right-of-way which would obscure vision of drivers using
said street, and no sign shall in any way conflict with traffic control
signals or signs at the intersection of any streets. No signs shall be
located so as to impair or impede the visibility of a vehicle entering into
or exiting from a parcel of property.
F. Illumination. The following provisions shall apply to the illumination of
all signs:
(1) Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded light
sources directed solely at the sign, or internal to it, without causing
glare for motorists, pedestrians, or neighboring premises.
(2) All exterior illumination shall be shaded so as not to project onto
adjoining property or thoroughfares.
(3) Direct exterior illumination and internally illuminated signs shall
avoid the use of glaring undiffused lights or bulbs that could
distract motorists.
(4) No signs shall be illuminated by the use of flashing, moving, or
intermittent lighting.
G. Sign measurements.
(1) Sign area. Except as noted, the area of all signs shall be computed
by measuring the area of the envelope required to enclose the
lettering or logo and the structures to which the letters or logo is
attached. In the case of a wall sign attached to a building, the
envelope shall be around the letters or logo. The sign support shall
not be considered when measuring the area of a ground or
freestanding sign.
(a) The area of a double-faced freestanding sign shall be computed
using only one face of the sign, provided that:
[1] The outline and dimensions of both faces are identical; and
[2] The faces are back-to-back so that only one face is visible
at any given time.
(b) The area of a monolith sign shall be computed by measuring
the entire vertical surface of a face upon which the letters or
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-16.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-16.5
1:795
285-16.6. Specific sign requirements for all districts.
logo is attached. In the case of a double-face or multi-faced
monolith sign, the area of the sign shall be computed using
only one face of the sign. The area of a cylindrical monolith
sign shall be computed by multiplying the diameter of the
cylinder by its height.
(2) Setback and distance requirements. In determining conformance
with setback standards and distance requirements, the following
guidelines shall be used:
(a) The distance between two signs shall be measured along a
straight horizontal line that represents the shortest distance
between the two signs.
(b) The distance between a sign and a parking lot or processing
area shall be measured along a straight horizontal line that
represents the shortest distance between the sign and the
outer edge of the parking lot or processing area.
(c) The distance between a sign and a property line shall be
measured along a straight line that represents the shortest
distance between the sign and the property line.
(d) The horizontal distance between a freestanding sign (such as a
pole-mounted sign) and any other point shall be measured from
the edge of the sign face rather than from the edge of the pole
or other structural support.
A. Temporary marketing signs. Freestanding and wall-mounted signs
offering the premises on which they are located for sale, for lease or for
rent shall be permitted in all districts subject to the following controls:
(1) Number. There shall not be more than one such sign per parcel.
(2) Area. No real estate sign shall exceed six square feet in area.
(3) Height. No freestanding real estate sign shall project higher than
five feet above the existing average grades.
(4) Location. Real estate signs shall be located on private property. If
freestanding, they will be set back six feet from the property line.
(5) Duration. Real estate signs shall be removed within 10 days after
sale or lease of a property or, in the case of rental property, 10 days
after final occupancy has been issued to the entire development.
B. Temporary political signs. The following provisions recognize the
special needs of the community in presenting diversified opinions,
educating the public or advertising or advocating a candidacy or cause
in a forthcoming election. Therefore, temporary political signs, under
285-16.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-16.6
1:796
those circumstances, shall be permitted in any district, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) Area. Temporary political signs shall be no larger than three square
feet in area.
(2) Height. No temporary political sign shall project higher than four
feet above the existing grade.
(3) Installation time frame. Temporary political signs shall not be
installed or placed upon property prior to three weeks before the
election or vote upon any proposition or candidate advertised
thereon or to which the sign or signs pertain.
(4) Removal of signs. It shall be the responsibility of the political
candidate or campaign chairperson to cause such temporary
political signs to be removed within five days after the date of the
election or vote upon the proposition to which the sign or signs
pertain.
(5) Permission required. The candidate or campaign manager shall
obtain the permission of the owner of a building, structure, or
property prior to posting a temporary political sign.
(6) Location. Political signs shall be set back six feet from the property
line.
C. Signs for churches, schools, and other institutional uses. Churches,
schools, and other institutional uses shall be permitted to erect signs
subject to the same standards as other signs for the district in which
they are located. However, in recognition of the fact that such uses are
often located in residential districts where signs may not be permitted,
such uses may nevertheless erect signs for the purposes of identifying
the church, school, or other institutional use; identifying affiliated uses,
such as a parsonage; stating the time or subject of church services, the
denomination of the church, or school classes; or presenting other
related information. Such signs shall conform to the following
regulations:
(1) Number. There shall be no more than one sign per use. In the case
of a school, parsonage, or other facility affiliated with and located
on the same parcel as a church or other institutional use, one
additional sign shall be permitted for the purposes of identification
of said school, parsonage, or other affiliated facility.
(2) Area. No such sign shall exceed 32 square feet.
(3) Height. No sign shall project higher than eight feet above the
existing average grade.
(4) Location. Such signs shall be located at least 10 feet from the
property line.
285-16.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-16.6
1:797
285-16.7. Residential district signs.
The following signs shall be permitted in all districts zoned for residential
purposes, including districts zoned R-1-A, R-1-B, R-1-C, R-1-D, R-2, R-3, and
R-4:
D. Municipal signs. Signs erected on municipal sites by the Township of
Grosse Ile shall conform to the standards for signs for churches,
schools, and other institutional uses, as set forth previously.
E. Signs on construction sites. On sites on which a building or structure is
legally under construction, one wall, ground, or freestanding sign shall
be permitted for the purposes of identifying the building, the designer,
the builder, and other participating entities.
(1) On individual home sites, the area of such sign shall not exceed six
square feet in area or five feet in height, and the sign shall be set
back at least six feet from the property line.
(2) In nonresidential districts, the area of such sign shall not exceed 24
square feet in area and eight feet in height, and the sign shall be set
back at least 10 feet from the property line.
F. Community group signs. The Township Community Development
Department may issue a temporary sign permit to allow the posting of
signs on Township-owned property by community groups that are
nonprofit agencies operating within the Township. Such signs shall be
located outside of the road right-of-way and shall be removed within 30
days of the permit issuing date.
A. Street number. For the purposes of public safety, the street number of
every residential building shall be prominently displayed on a side of
the building facing the street, using numbers that are at least three
inches in height.
B. Nameplate and identification signs. Nameplate and identification signs
for the purposes of indicating the name and address of the occupant
shall be permitted in residential districts subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Number. There shall be not more than one nameplate or
identification sign, which may be either freestanding or attached to
the building.
(2) Area. Such signs shall be no larger than one square foot.
(3) Height. Such signs shall project no higher than four feet above curb
level.
(4) Location. Such signs shall be located at least six feet inside all
property lines if freestanding.
285-16.6 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-16.7
1:798
C. Nonresidential advertising or identification signs. No signs shall be
permitted in a residentially zoned district that advertise or identify a
nonresidential use, except as permitted herein.
D. Signs accessory to parking areas. Signs accessory to parking areas
shall be permitted in multiple-family residential and mobile home park
districts subject to the following controls:
(1) Entrance-exit and directional signs. Signs designating parking area
entrances and exits, providing directions, designating "no parking"
areas, and identifying parking spaces for the handicapped shall be
permitted as needed within parking areas.
(2) Identification signs. One sign per entrance to a parking area shall
be permitted for the purpose of designating the conditions of use or
identity of such parking area. Such signs shall not exceed four
square feet in area.
E. Garage sale signs. Garage sale signs shall be permitted in residentially
zoned districts subject to the following controls:
(1) Number. A maximum of three signs shall be allowed for each
garage sale.
(2) Area. Garage sale signs shall be no larger than three square feet.
(3) Location. Such signs shall be located on private property.
F. Permanent residential identification signs.
(1) Permanent identification signs for residential subdivisions or
developments shall be permitted subject to the following controls:
(a) Purpose. Permanent residential identification signs shall bear
only the name of the development or subdivision, the address
of the building if a multiple-family structure, and the name and
address of the management, if applicable.
(b) Number. There shall not be more than one such sign located at
each entrance to the subdivision or development.
(c) Area. No such sign shall exceed 24 square feet in area.
(d) Height. No such sign shall project higher than eight feet above
the existing grade.
(e) Location. Such signs shall be located on private property, at
least 10 feet inside all property lines.
(2) Permanent identification signs for individual multiple-family
buildings shall be permitted subject to the following controls:
285-16.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-16.7
1:799
(a) Purpose. Such signs shall be for the purpose of identifying
individual buildings within a residential subdivision or
development.
(b) Number. There shall be no more than one such sign per
individual building.
(c) Area. No such sign shall exceed six square feet in area.
(d) Height. No such sign shall project higher than five feet above
the existing average grade.
(e) Location. Such signs shall be located on private property, at
least six feet inside all property lines if freestanding.
G. Temporary marketing signs in residential subdivisions.
(1) Real estate signs. Temporary marketing signs accessory to
residential subdivisions which are under construction shall be
permitted for the purpose of identifying homes, condominiums,
apartments, or mobile home sites for sale or rent. Such signs shall
be subject to the following controls:
(a) Number. One such sign shall be permitted for each entrance,
provided that no more than two such signs shall be permitted
per development or subdivision.
(b) Area. Such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in area.
(c) Height. No such sign shall project higher than eight feet above
the existing average grade.
(d) Location. Such signs shall be located on private property, at
least 10 feet inside all property lines if freestanding.
(e) Time limitation. A sign permit for any such temporary
accessory sign shall have a time limitation of two years. After
the two-year period, sign permits may be renewed yearly if at
least 5% of the lots remain vacant and available and new
homes remain under construction. Such signs shall be removed
upon cessation of new home marketing within the subdivision
or development, when 95% of all lots have been sold, or when
the permit expires, whichever comes first.
(2) Open house signs. Open house signs shall be permitted, provided
such signs do not exceed six square feet in area and five feet in
height. If signs are freestanding, they shall not extend beyond the
property line and shall be permitted only on the premises of the
open house.
(3) Model home signs. Model home signs shall be permitted for the
purposes of identifying the model style, provided such signs do not
exceed six square feet in area or five feet in height. If signs are
285-16.7 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-16.7
1:800
285-16.8. Commercial, industrial and airport district signs.
The following signs shall be permitted in all districts zoned for commercial,
industrial, or airport purposes (other than the Airport Industrial Park),
including districts zoned C-1, MSD and A-1:
freestanding, they shall be located on private property, at least six
feet from any property line.
A. Signs for residential district uses in commercial districts. Signs for
nonconforming residential district uses in commercial, industrial or
airport districts shall be governed by the sign regulations for residential
district uses as set forth in § 285-16.7.
B. Required street address. For the purposes of public safety, the street
number of every commercial and industrial building shall be
prominently displayed on a side of the building facing the street, using
numbers that are at least five inches in height.
C. General requirements.
(1) Total sign area.
(a) The total area of all signs shall not exceed 1 1/2 square feet for
each linear foot of building frontage facing a public street,
provided that the total sign area shall not exceed 50 square
feet, and except that signs in the Grosse Ile Industrial Park
shall conform to the sign area requirements set forth in the
Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions upon the use of land
therein.
(b) One wall, ground, or freestanding sign with a maximum area of
32 square feet shall be permitted to identify a shopping center,
or similar use, or the businesses therein, provided the
shopping center or other such use has minimum street
frontage of 30 feet. If said sign is used as a tenant directory
sign, the total sign area shall be allocated on an equal basis to
all tenants. The placement of such a sign shall not result in any
reduction in the number or total area of signs otherwise
permitted under the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Types of permitted signs. Total permitted sign area may be
allocated among one or more of the following types of signs, subject
to the provisions which follow: wall-mounted signs, ground or
freestanding signs, projecting signs, marquee signs, signs on
awnings and canopies, or window signs.
(3) Signs in the Grosse Ile Industrial Park. Signs located in the Grosse
Ile Industrial Park shall conform to the requirements for signs
specified in the Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions upon the
use of land in the Grosse Ile Industrial Park.
285-16.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-16.8
1:801
D. Specific requirements.
(1) Wall-mounted signs. Wall-mounted signs, including signs located on
the face of mansard-type roofs, shall be permitted in commercial
and industrial districts subject to the following controls:
(a) Height. The top of a wall-mounted sign shall not be higher than
whichever is lowest:
[1] Fifteen feet above grade.
[2] The top of the sills at the first level of windows above the
first story.
[3] The height of the building facing the street on which the
sign is located.
(b) Location. Wall-mounted signs shall be located on the fronts of
buildings, except that buildings located on a corner lot shall be
permitted to install one wall-mounted sign on the side of the
building facing a street.
(c) Dimensions. The maximum vertical dimension of any wallmounted
sign shall not exceed 1/3 of the height of the building.
The maximum horizontal dimension of any wall-mounted sign
shall not exceed 3/4 of the width of the building.
(d) Projection. Wall-mounted signs shall not project farther than
12 inches from the face of the wall and shall not project beyond
the building line.
(2) Ground or freestanding signs. Ground or freestanding signs shall
be permitted in commercial or industrial districts (excluding
Airport District) subject to the following controls:
(a) Number. Individual businesses shall be permitted to have one
ground or freestanding sign, provided that building frontage
on a public street is at least 30 feet, and provided further that
all setback requirements can be complied with. In the event
that individual businesses cannot comply with the setback or
frontage requirements, two or more adjoining businesses may
jointly apply for a permit for one ground or freestanding sign
that would serve all of the joined businesses, provided that the
joined businesses are capable of meeting the frontage and
setback requirements.
(b) Area. Total area of a ground or freestanding sign shall not
exceed 32 square feet.
(c) Height. The top of a ground or freestanding sign shall be five
feet above the average grade plus one foot for each three feet
of setback with a maximum height of 15 feet.
285-16.8 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-16.8
1:802
(d) Location. Ground or freestanding signs shall be located on
private property, no closer than one foot to the property line.
No such sign shall project over public property or adjoining
private property.
(e) Distance from other signs. Ground or freestanding signs shall
be located at least 35 feet from any other ground or
freestanding sign.
(3) Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall be permitted in commercial
and industrial districts (excluding Airport Industrial Park) subject
to the following controls:
(a) Area. Projecting signs shall not exceed eight square feet in
area.
(b) Height. The top of a projecting sign shall not be higher than 15
feet above the existing average grade.
(c) Width. The width of a projecting sign, as measured between
the two faces, shall not exceed 12 inches.
(d) Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of nine feet
shall be provided beneath any projecting sign.
(e) Projection. Projecting signs shall not project over public
property or adjoining private property.
(4) Marquee signs. Marquee signs shall be permitted in commercial
districts subject to the following controls:
(a) Area. Marquee signs shall not exceed 1 1/2 square feet per
linear foot of building frontage on a public street.
(b) Height. The top of a marquee sign shall not be higher than 15
feet above grade.
(c) Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of nine feet
shall be provided beneath any marquee sign.
(d) Projection. Marquee signs shall not project over public
property or adjoining private property.
(5) Signs on awnings and canopies. Signs on awnings and canopies
shall be permitted in commercial or industrial districts subject to
the following controls:
(a) Area. The total area of the lettering and logo shall not exceed
25% of the total area of the awning or canopy that is visible
from the street.
(b) Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of nine feet
shall be provided beneath any projecting awning or canopy
sign(s).
285-16.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-16.8
1:803
(c) Projection. Awnings and canopies shall not project over public
property or adjoining private property.
(6) Temporary cloth and banner signs, pennants and other devices.
Temporary cloth and banner signs, pennants, streamers, balloons,
and similar devices shall be permitted in commercial districts
subject to the following controls:
(a) Duration. Temporary cloth and banner signs, pennants, and
other such devices shall be erected for no longer than 30 days.
Damaged signs, pennants, and other such devices shall be
removed or repaired immediately.
(b) Area. Temporary cloth and banner signs shall not exceed 32
square feet in area. The placement of such signs or devices
shall not result in any reduction in the number or total area of
signs otherwise permitted under the provisions of this chapter.
(c) Location. Temporary cloth and banner signs, pennants, and
other such devices shall be located no closer than six feet to
any property line and shall be located where they will not
obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(d) Illumination. Cloth or banner signs, pennants, and other such
devices shall not be purposely illuminated.
(7) Gasoline price signs. Gasoline price signs shall be permitted in
commercial or industrial districts subject to the following controls:
(a) Number. One gasoline price sign shall be permitted for each
gas station.
(b) Area. Such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. The
placement of such signs or devices shall not result in any
reduction in the number or total area of signs otherwise
permitted under the provisions of this chapter.
(c) Height. The top of a gasoline price sign shall be no higher than
15 feet above average grade.
(d) Location. Such signs shall be located on private property, no
closer than one foot to any property line. Such signs shall not
project over public property or adjoining private property.
(e) Vertical clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of nine feet
shall be provided beneath any gasoline price sign.
(f) Price signs. The price of gasoline only may consist of an
electronic changeable message, provided: [Added 4-13-2015
by Ord. No. 15-002]
[1] Such signage does not comprise more than 50% of the sign
area;
285-16.8 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-16.8
1:804
285-16.9. Open space district signs.
Signs shall be permitted in the O-1 Open Space District and PRD Public
Recreation District subject to the controls for signs for churches, schools,
and other institutional uses as set forth in § 285-16.6.
285-16.10. Lighting.
[2] The illumination standards of § 265-16.5F are met; and
[3] Such signage shall remain static, except when pricing
changes (i.e., no flashing, blinking, moving of any sort is
allowed).
(8) Window signs. Temporary and permanent window signs shall be
permitted on the inside in commercial districts provided that the
total combined area of such signs does not exceed 1/3 of the total
window area. The area of permanent window signs shall be counted
in determining compliance with the standards for total area of
signs on the parcel. Temporary window signs that are faded,
yellowed, ripped, or otherwise damaged shall be removed
immediately.
A. All lighting shall be in conformance with the adopted Building and
Electrical Codes of the Township74 and Article 19.
B. Lighting shall be placed and shielded so as to direct the light onto the
site and away from adjoining properties. The lighting source shall not
be directly visible from adjoining properties. Lighting shall be shielded
so that it does not cause glare for motorists.
C. Lighting used for illumination of the exterior of buildings shall be
placed and shielded so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on
adjacent roads or adjacent properties.
D. Signs shall be illuminated in accordance with the regulations set forth
in § 285-16.5F herein and § 285-19.19.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-16.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-16.10
1:805

ARTICLE 17
Waterfront Provisions
[Ord. No. 257, effective 4-18-1999]
285-17.1. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to regulate dredging and shoreline filling
and the construction of waterfront structures and appurtenances along,
abutting upon or extending into the Detroit River, canals and waterways in
the Township in order to:
285-17.2. Scope of application.
A. Promote public health, safety, and general welfare;
B. Encourage the use of lands, waterways and natural resources in the
Township in accordance with their character and adaptability;
C. Provide for the orderly development of the Township;
D. Protect and enhance the values of the waterways within the Township;
E. Protect the economic value of this scenic resource from unwise and
disorderly development which may adversely pollute, destroy or
otherwise impair its beneficial use and preservation;
F. Protect boating, recreational values and uses of the waterways;
G. Reduce hazards to life and property;
H. Limit use of the shore to passive recreation and access to the water that
does not interfere with reasonable use of the waters by other riparian
owners;
I. Prevent ecological and aesthetic damage to the Township's shorelines
and waterways which may result from overcrowding and overuse;
J. Preserve and maintain the scenic views of the shoreline and further
promote scenic views of the waterways as the predominant waterfront
characteristic;
K. Establish the location and size of waterfront structures which may
hereafter be erected or altered; and
L. Provide rules and regulations for the construction of such waterfront
structures.
A. The regulations set forth in this article shall apply to all waterfront
areas located between the building line and pierhead line along the
Detroit River, and all interior canals and waterways.
B. The placement of aids to navigation and regulatory markings which are
approved by and installed in accordance with the requirements of the
285-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-17.2
1:807
285-17.3. Permitted uses.
Principal uses and special land uses are identified within each zoning
district.
285-17.4. Waterfront requirements.
The following requirements apply to all waterfront structures and
appurtenances:
United States Coast Guard are specifically exempt from the permit
requirements of this article.
C. Definitions for waterfront terminology are contained in Article 1, Rules
of Construction and Definitions.
A. Waterfront structures and appurtenances are a permitted accessory
use to a permitted principal use of waterfront property provided the use
is limited to recreational and personal use of the principal user
(occupant) and family members residing with the principal user of the
property. No structure will be approved without an existing primary
structure on the parcel.
B. Waterfront yard swimming pools are subject to the conditions covered
under § 285-17.4C of these regulations and Chapter 241, Swimming
Pools.
C. Boat clubs shall be permitted as special land uses in the R-1-A, R-1-B,
R-1-D, R-2 and R-3 Districts, subject to the regulations set forth in those
districts and approval requirements set forth in Article 21, Site Plan
Review, and Article 22, Special Land Use Review.
D. The use of a waterfront yard within 25 feet of the shoreline for
composting or the disposal of yard waste shall be prohibited.
A. Waterfront structures and appurtenances. [Amended 4-8-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-001]
(1) Permitted structures and appurtenances.
(a) The following structures and appurtenances shall be
permitted, provided that, individually or collectively, the
structure(s) and appurtenance(s) shall not be closer than six
feet to a side lot line, and provided further that such
structure(s) and appurtenance(s) shall be installed so that the
boat lifted, stored, docked or moored is a minimum of six feet
from any side lot line:
[1] Piers, including floating types;
[2] Wharfs;
285-17.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-17.4
1:808
[3] Flush mount, bottom davit and swivel hoists in boat ports
not having a roof;
[4] Mooring whips;
[5] Spring or mooring piles, ice cluster; and
[6] Unenclosed boat port/well without a roof.
(b) Lifting devices, including the structures and appurtenances
listed under Subsection A(1)(a)[3], [4] and [6] above, shall be
prohibited in the R-1-F District.
(2) A maximum of two uncovered and unenclosed boat ports/wells are
permitted per residential lot, and shall be designed and
constructed as a unit.
(3) A maximum of two hoists or other out-of-water lifting devices are
permitted per residential lot, and shall be designed and
constructed as a unit.
(4) All piers, pilings, or other construction in, over or upon any
waterway in the Township shall be constructed to leave a minimum
of 30 feet clearance and right-of-way for the free passage of
watercraft, measured a minimum of 15 feet in a perpendicular
direction from the center line of the navigable channel or the
center of the waterway, whichever distance is less.
(5) Waterfront structures located along the shore of any interior canal
shall not extend into the canal more than 12 feet from the shoreline
(excluding cut-in wells).
(6) Bulkheads or seawalls are permitted, provided they meet the
requirements of the MDEQ and the ACOE and subject to the
requirements of § 285-17.4E.
(7) Applications to construct waterfront structures and appurtenances
shall be subject to review, and approval procedures outlined in
§ 285-17.5A, herein.
(8) Construction or installation of structures and appurtenances shall
not obstruct the natural flow of water or access of boaters to:
(a) Adjoining or nearby parcels;
(b) Deeper waters; or
(c) Normal boating routes.
(9) All permitted structures and appurtenances shall be kept safe,
secure and in good repair.
(10) All lighting attached to waterfront structures shall be limited to
100 watts, except in the R-1-F District where the maximum shall be
285-17.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-17.4
1:809
60 watts, and shall be downward directed and shielded so as to not
cast light on adjacent lots or public roadways.
(11) Storage of any boats, vehicles, or materials other than construction
materials relating to an approved permit is not permitted between
the shoreline and East River Road, south of Horsemill and north of
Manchester; between the shoreline and West River Road, south of
Horsemill and north of Groh Road.
(12) Driveways, loading areas, parking lots, parking areas, or parking
spaces shall not be permitted between the shoreline and East River
Road, south of Horsemill and north of Manchester; between the
shoreline and West River Road, south of Horsemill and north of
Groh Road.
B. Number of boats and structures.
(1) The allowable accessory use of the waterfront shall be limited to
the mooring of not more than one boat and one personal watercraft
for every 33 feet of water frontage to a maximum of three boats and
three personal watercraft. Boats that are carried on a larger boat
and not moored in the water (e.g., a dinghy carried on a larger
boat) shall not be counted towards the maximum number of
allowable boats. Such accessory use of the waterfront shall meet
the requirements of § 285-17.3.
(2) The number of structures is limited to the extent such structures
serve the number of boats permitted in Subsection B(1), except for
lifting devices which are otherwise limited to a maximum of two by
Subsection A(2) and (3).
(3) Any storage or dockage of four or more boats shall be considered a
boat club, allowed only after special land use approval in the R-1-A,
R-1-B, R-1-D, R-2 and R-3 Districts, and subject to the regulations
set forth in Article 3, Single-Family Residential Districts, and
approval requirements set forth in Article 22, Special Land Use
Review. A boat club shall require a marina operating permit from
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. Such permit
shall be issued and a copy provided to the Township prior to the
Township taking action on the special land use.
(4) The rafting or anchoring of boats within 15 feet of the middle of the
navigable channel shall be prohibited.
C. Swimming pools. Except in the R-1-F District, where such structures
are prohibited, swimming pools in waterfront yards shall be permitted
as an accessory use to a principal use, subject to Chapter 241,
Swimming Pools, yard and bulk regulations of the zoning district, and
the following conditions: [Amended 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-001]
285-17.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-17.4
1:810
(1) Only belowground swimming pools shall be permitted in the yard
facing the waterfront on lots which front on either the Detroit River
or a canal.
(2) Proposed swimming pools shall be subject to the requirements and
procedures as set forth in § 285-17.5. In reviewing a plan for a
proposed swimming pool and related improvements, including
landscaping, the following shall be considered:
(a) All pools and related improvements must maintain minimum
setbacks of 10 feet from any property line, and 25 feet from the
shoreline.
(b) The total of all improvements constructed in a waterfront yard,
including the pool enclosed by a fence, shall not exceed thirtypercent
coverage of the waterfront yard.
(c) The pool shall not be constructed within a floodway as defined
by federal flood insurance regulations.
(d) All mechanical and support equipment shall be located on the
side of the pool nearest to the principal structure and shielded
from view of neighboring properties.
(e) The design and size of the proposed pool shall minimize the
impact on existing natural and man-made features of the site
and adjoining properties.
(f) Pool fencing shall be provided to completely enclose the pool
and shall be located not more than 10 feet from the perimeter
of the pool. Pool fences shall be four feet above the natural
grade at its base. Fences shall be nonobscuring in nature. All
pool fences shall also meet the requirements of Chapter 241,
Swimming Pools.
(g) The placement of the pool and related improvements, including
landscaping, shall not obscure the view to open water from any
adjoining residence.
D. Clear vision triangles. Each lot shall maintain clear vision triangles
along both side lot lines between the average shoreline setback and the
shoreline as described below. Within such clear vision triangles, the
planting of a continuous row of shrubs, evergreen trees or other
vegetation that obscures views along the shoreline (e.g., hedgerow or
green fence) shall not be permitted. Such triangles shall be bounded by
the following sides, as illustrated in Figure 17:
(1) The side lot line;
(2) The shoreline; and
285-17.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-17.4
1:811
(3) A line that commences at the intersection of the side lot line and
the average shoreline setback and runs towards the shoreline at a
thirty-degree angle from the side lot line.
E. Shoreline fill, dredging and construction of bulkheads or seawalls.
Construction of bulkheads or seawalls along the Detroit River and all
interior canals and waterways shall be permitted, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) Any fill, dredging, or construction shall not extend beyond the
bulkhead line as established by review of the Michigan Department
of Environmental Quality.
(2) Shoreline fill, dredging, or construction of bulkheads or seawalls
shall be permitted for the following:
(a) To stabilize the shoreline;
(b) To improve access to the water;
(c) To protect or improve the natural flow of water; and
(d) To improve the aesthetic value of the property.
(3) In no case shall shoreline fill, dredging, or construction of
bulkheads or seawalls impede the natural flow of water or obstruct
the access of boaters to deeper waters.
285-17.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-17.4
1:812
285-17.5. Notification and review procedures.
Applications to construct any waterfront structures or appurtenances
permitted by this article, to fill along the shoreline, to construct, repair, or
demolish a bulkhead or seawall or to dredge any waterway shall be subject
to the following public hearing, review, and approval procedures:
(4) No bulkhead, seawall or fill shall project beyond an existing
bulkhead, seawall or shoreline in such a manner as to interfere
with the normal flow of water, result in the deposit of debris, or
cause a hindrance to navigation.
(5) Proposed fill shall avoid the appearance of being "added on." Any
extension of land shall blend into the existing shoreline in a natural
appearing manner.
(6) Applications for shoreline fill, dredging, or construction of
bulkheads or seawalls shall be subject to review and approval
procedures outlined in § 285-17.5 herein.
(7) Prior to the final inspection of the project for shoreline filling or
construction of bulkheads or seawalls, the land shall be graded and
seeded so as to provide proper drainage within the applicant's
property, away from buildings, and to leave the surface fit for other
land uses permitted in the district. The grade must be established
within 90 days of the completion of construction.
(8) Any grading, excavating, filling, land balancing or similar activity
shall conform to the grading regulations set forth in Chapter 124,
Grading.
F. Other structures. Other accessory structures shall be permitted where
Article 19, General Provisions, specifically provides for these structures
in the waterfront yard. [Added 9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
A. Waterfront application. Applications shall be accompanied by two sets
of sketch plans, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 20 feet or greater
scale, which shall show the following information:
(1) Existing bulkheads, seawalls, waterfront structures and
appurtenances on the property, adjacent to the applicant's property
and across the navigable channel within 200 feet of the proposed
structures, appurtenances, or docks and the location of the boat to
be lifted, docked or moored.
(2) The following information regarding the channel:
(a) The approximate depth of water along the shore;
(b) The width and center of the channel, measured between the
shorelines or any protruding waterfront structures;
285-17.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-17.5
1:813
(c) The approximate location, width and depth of the navigable
channel; and
(d) The relation of existing rights-of-way for free passage of
watercraft on canals and interior waterways.
(3) Designation of all property lines along with the method used to
verify the location of the property lines.
(4) Proposed structures, appurtenances, docks, bulkheads or seawalls
and the location of the boat to be lifted, stored, docked or moored.
(5) Location of any proposed alteration to topography of waterfront
land and the quantities and type of shoreline fill materials, if
proposed.
(6) Time frame for completion of the project.
(7) The name and address of each adjoining property owner.
(8) Where shoreline fill or construction of new bulkheads or seawalls
(not including repair or replacement of existing bulkheads or
seawalls in same location) is proposed, cross sections and
topography at two-foot contour intervals, referenced to United
States Lake Survey and USGS benchmarks, shall be provided for
existing and proposed topography of waterfront land, proposed
grades to adjoining property, and the depth of water along the
shore.
(9) Where dredging is proposed or where the location of the center of
the navigable channel deviates by more than 15 feet from the
center line of the channel (measured between the shoreline or
protruding waterfront structures), cross sections and topography
at two-foot contour intervals, referenced to United States Lake
Survey and USGS benchmarks, shall be provided for the location,
width and depth of the navigable channel.
(10) Application for a waterfront structure, shoreline fill or construction
of bulkheads or seawalls shall be referred to the Michigan
Department of Environmental Quality, Wayne County Soil and
Sedimentation and United States Army Corps of Engineers for
approval. No Township permit shall be issued without verification
of receipt of the above permits.
(11) Application fee.
B. Public hearing procedure. [Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
(1) In the case of waterfront applications for permits, and only after
the receipt by the Township of Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality, Wayne County Soil and Sedimentation, and
United States Army Corps of Engineers approvals, the Zoning
Administrator shall send a notification to each property owner
285-17.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-17.5
1:814
within 500 feet along the waterway and along both sides if it is a
channel internal to the Township, advising them of the application,
its availability for review for a twenty-one-calendar-day period, and
that they may request a public hearing by the Planning Commission
within 21 calendar days of the date of the notice. The Zoning
Administrator may also refer an application to the Planning
Commission where it is unclear if the application meets the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) If a public hearing is requested, the Zoning Administrator shall
publish a notice of public hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township. Separate notice shall be sent by mail or
personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is
being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed
within 500 feet of the boundary in question, and to the occupants of
all structures within 500 feet.
(3) The applicant shall be responsible for the costs associated with a
public hearing before the Planning Commission, as established by
the Township Board of Trustees.
C. Review procedure. If no request is made for a hearing during the
notification period, the Zoning Administrator shall take action on the
application, except that the Planning Commission sketch plan approval,
as outlined in Article 21, shall be required for the following:
(1) Applications to establish a pierhead affecting more than a single
lot;
(2) Proposals for waterfront development where Planning Commission
review is specifically required;
(3) Applications for waterfront development that are referred to the
Planning Commission by the Zoning Administrator at the request of
a property owner or for a determination of compliance with this
chapter; and
(4) Joint applications involving more than one owner or one parcel.
285-17.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-17.5
1:815

ARTICLE 18
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
[Ord. No. 218, effective 8-27-1995]
285-18.1. Intent; objectives.
A. Nonconformities are lots, uses, structures, buildings, or site plans for
developed sites which do not conform to one or more provisions or
requirements of this chapter but which were lawfully established prior
to the date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. Such
nonconformities are considered to be incompatible with the current or
intended use of land, buildings or structures in the district in which
they are located. This article is intended to meet the objectives stated
below by establishing regulations that govern the completion,
restoration, reconstruction, extension, and/or substitution of
nonconformities and specify the circumstances and conditions under
which nonconformities shall be permitted to continue.
B. The objectives of this chapter are to eliminate, or bring into compliance,
lots, buildings, structures and uses which legally existed at the date of
adoption of this chapter but do not meet the current standards of this
chapter. This chapter also has special provisions to permit certain
nonconforming situations considered to be less harmful to continue
under certain conditions, but to discourage their expansion,
enlargement, or extension. The standards of this article are intended to
accomplish the following:
(1) Terminate and remove any use, building, accessory structure or
any combination thereof that was established after the effective
date of this chapter and in violation of this chapter. Such uses,
buildings or accessory structures are classified as illegal
nonconformities and shall not receive any of the rights, privileges
or protection conferred by this article for legal nonconforming
situations.
(2) Eliminate nonconforming uses which are more intense than the
uses permitted within the zoning district and are considered to be
incompatible with permitted uses, or encourage their
redevelopment into a more conforming use.
(3) Permit legal nonconforming buildings, structures or uses to remain
until they are discontinued or removed, but to discourage their
survival.
(4) Encourage a gradual upgrading to a more conforming status of site
plans which were developed in compliance with the standards at
the time of their construction but which do not meet the site
standards of this chapter and its amendments.
(5) Encourage the combination of contiguous nonconforming lots of
record to create lots which conform to current standards, to avoid
285-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-18.1
1:817
285-18.2. Applicability.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require
a change in plans, construction, or designated use of any building on
which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this chapter, upon which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on and for which there is a valid
building permit. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner. Where demolition or removal of an existing building
has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such work shall
be deemed to be actual construction, provided that such work shall be
diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
285-18.3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning described below:
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of land or cessation of the use of
the land by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring rights
to the land to another owner or of resuming use of the land or building (i.e.,
a discontinuance and an indication of an intent to abandon).
DISCONTINUANCE — A vacation of a lot, building or structure, or a ceasing
of the activities related to the nonconforming situation.
EFFECTIVE DATE — Whenever this article refers to the "effective date"
of this chapter, it shall be deemed to include the effective date of any
amendments if the amendments created or increased the nonconforming
situation.
ILLEGAL NONCONFORMITIES — Any lot, use, building, structure or any
combination thereof that was established in violation of this chapter at the
effective date of this chapter.
LEGAL NONCONFORMITIES — Certain existing lots, buildings, structures,
site plans and uses of land that were lawful prior to the effective date of this
chapter but have become nonconforming under the terms of this chapter
and its amendments.
NONCONFORMING ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — An accessory structure
or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter, or
amendments thereto, that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter
in the district in which it is located. (Example: an accessory deck which does
not meet current setback standards.)
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building or portion thereof lawfully
existing at the effective date of this chapter that does not meet the minimum
size, setback, height or other building provisions of this chapter in the
the public health, safety and welfare problems associated with the
overcrowding of land.
285-18.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-18.3
1:818
district in which it is located. (Example: a house which does not meet the
required front yard setback.)
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot of record lawfully existing at the effective
date of this chapter that does not meet the minimum area or lot dimensional
requirements for the district in which it is located. (Example: a lot of record
of 25,000 square feet in a district which requires a minimum lot of 30,000
square feet.)
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign lawfully existing on the effective date of
this chapter, or amendments thereto, which does not meet all the standards
or regulations of this chapter. (Example: a business with a twenty-foot-tall
pole sign when the current Zoning Ordinance allows only a ten-foot-tall
ground sign.)
NONCONFORMING SITE PLAN — A development on a site which met
ordinance requirements for site design elements at the time the site was
developed, such as the amount of parking, parking lot pavement or
landscaping, but which does not meet the current site design standards of
the Township. (Example: a retail store with 10 parking spaces when the
current Zoning Ordinance requires 15 parking spaces.)
NONCONFORMING USE — A use which lawfully occupied a building or
land at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments thereto, and that
does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
285-18.4. Nonconforming uses of land, buildings and accessory
structures.
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a
lawful use on open land, a lot(s), building(s) or accessory structure(s) exists
that is made nonconforming by this chapter or its amendments, such use
may be continued, as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
A. Expansions. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any
parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such
use, and which existed at the effective date of this chapter, but no such
use shall be enlarged, expanded or extended to occupy a greater area of
land or greater floor area than was occupied at the effective date of this
chapter.
B. Accessory uses and structures. No new accessory use, building or
structure shall be established.
C. Relocation. The nonconforming use shall not be moved in whole or in
part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the
effective date of this chapter.
D. Abandonment or discontinuance. If such nonconforming use on open
land is abandoned or discontinued for any reason for a period of six
months, or a nonconforming use within a building or structure is
abandoned or discontinued for more than one year, except as noted
285-18.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-18.4
1:819
below, such use shall not be reestablished. Subsequent use of such land
shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district
in which such land is located.
E. Special standards for single-family homes in a nonresidential district.
(1) A single-family residential dwelling in a zoning district which does
not permit such a use may be expanded to occupy the floor area
necessary for living purposes subject to approval by the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
(2) A single-family dwelling and its accessory structures in a zoning
district which does not permit such use may be continued,
replaced, repaired or remodeled if damaged by flood, fire, or
vandalism, if approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such
approval requires a finding that the resulting building footprint and
floor area will be the same size or smaller than that of the building
before such change. Replacement of such nonconforming singlefamily
building shall commence no sooner then receiving a valid
building permit and no later than six months from the date of
damage. Work shall be diligently pursued toward completion. The
applicant may be required to provide the Township with evidence,
visual or otherwise, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator that work is being diligently pursued. Failure to
complete replacement or diligently work toward completion shall
result in the loss of legal nonconforming status unless good cause
for the delay is accepted at a hearing before the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
F. Change in use. Except for single-family dwellings as permitted above, a
nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. If no
structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a building,
or building and land in combination, may be changed to another
nonconforming use if the Zoning Board of Appeals, either by general
rule or by making findings in the specific case, finds the proposed use is
more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In
permitting such change, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require
conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this
chapter. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure
and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming use,
it shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use.75
G. Removal. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and
land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall
eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. [Amended
7-22-2002]
75.Editor's Note: Original Subsection G, Nonconforming use in combination with
nonconforming building, which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
285-18.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-18.4
1:820
285-18.5. Nonconforming lots of record. [Amended 6-9-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-09]]
The following regulations shall apply to any nonconforming lot of record
or nonconforming lot described in a deed or land contract executed and
delivered prior to the effective date of this chapter or amendment thereto:
H. Exceptions. Any use for which a special exception, variance or special
land use permit has been granted as provided in this chapter shall not
be deemed a nonconformity.
A. Use of nonconforming lots. Any nonconforming lot shall be used only for
a use permitted in the district in which it is located. In any district in
which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding
limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family
dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of this chapter. This provision
shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area
or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided
that the lot is in conformance with all other applicable yard setback,
maximum lot coverage, minimum floor area and maximum height
requirements for the district in which it is located. (See Subsection C
below.)
B. Variance to area and bulk requirements. All buildings shall adhere to
the area and bulk requirements of the zoning district without the need
for variances from the Zoning Board of Appeals. (See Subsection C
below.)
C. To develop a nonconforming lot(s) under the provisions of Subsections
A and B of this section, the applicant is required to submit evidence that
ownership of the lot was not under contiguous single ownership with
other lots which could have been combined into a conforming or more
conforming lot.
D. Nonconforming contiguous lots under the same ownership. The
following regulations shall apply to nonconforming contiguous lots
under the same ownership.
(1) If two or more lots or combination of lots with contiguous frontage
are or have been under single ownership and are of record at the
time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of
the individual lots do not meet the requirements established for lot
width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an
individual parcel for the purposes of this chapter, except as
provided in Subsection D(5) below.
(2) No portion of said parcel shall be used, occupied, or sold in a
manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area
requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of a
285-18.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-18.5
1:821
parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area less than the
requirements stated in this chapter.
(3) Any combination, in whole or in part, of nonconforming lots of
record shall result in lots that conform to the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent feasible. Any altering of lot lines or
combination of lots shall result in lots that conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
(4) Once any combination that creates a conforming lot occurs, the
resulting lot shall not retain nonconforming lot of record status and
will hereafter be required to comply with the lot requirements of
this chapter.
(5) Where an individual owns two contiguous nonconforming lots, such
lots may be sold or developed as separate individual lots only where
each lot meets all of the following conditions. The intent of these
standards is to ensure that development of nonconforming lots will
not overbuild the lots; result in a development pattern or structures
that are out of character with the surrounding neighborhood;
diminish access to open space, sunlight and views for existing
residences; and will be in accordance with the recommendations of
the Township Master Plan for neighborhood preservation.
(a) This option may only be exercised where an individual owns no
more than two contiguous nonconforming lots and a dwelling
currently exists on one of the lots, and the second lot is vacant.
Where more than two contiguous nonconforming lots are
under single ownership, the lots must be combined to create
conforming lots.
(b) Each lot has an area and width equal to or greater than the
median area and width of all developed lots within 750 feet.
Such seven-hundred-fifty-foot dimension shall be measured
from the perimeter of the applicant's lots and shall include all
lots or portions of lots within 750 feet, but shall only include
lots that are within the same zoning district. Where there are
multiple lots developed with a single dwelling, such lots shall
be considered a single combined lot for calculation of median
area and width. Multiple contiguous vacant lots shall be
considered a single combined lot for calculation of median area
and width. The applicant shall provide a map and calculations
to certify the median lot area and width.
(c) The lots shall conform to Subsections A and B above.
(d) All buildings shall adhere to the area and bulk requirements of
the zoning district, as outlined in Article 3, Single-Family
Residential Districts, without the need for variances from the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
285-18.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-18.5
1:822
285-18.6. Nonconforming buildings and structures. [Amended
9-12-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
Where a lawful building or structure exists at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms
of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height,
yards, landscape buffer, off-street parking, loading space, minimum setback,
or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such
building or structure may be continued, provided it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(e) Sketch plans for the lot and building elevations shall be
approved by the Community Development Director. In addition
to the dimensional requirements of the zoning district, the
Community Development Director shall consider the proposed
dwelling's compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood in
terms of building height, massing, setbacks, architectural
design, materials, roof pitch, orientation and size of garages
and accessory buildings. The decision of the Community
Development Director may be appealed to the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(f) Evidence shall be provided from the Wayne County Register of
Deeds that the contiguous nonconforming lots are separate
lots of record and the lots have not previously been combined
into fewer tax identification numbers.
A. Permitted expansions.
(1) An expansion (footprint or floor area) of a nonconforming building
or structure shall be permitted on a conforming side when all of the
following conditions exist:
(a) Only one side of the building or structure does not conform
with setback requirements.
(b) The side which is nonconforming provides at least 90% of the
setback and building spacing requirements.
(c) The expansion will conform with all setback, building spacing
and height requirements.
(2) Except as noted above, no building or structure may be enlarged
unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Replacement of a nonconforming single-family dwelling. A
nonconforming building used as a single-family residence, and its
accessory structures, may be continued, replaced, repaired or
remodeled if damaged by flood, fire, vandalism, accident or other
natural disaster if approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such
approval requires a finding that the resulting building footprint will be
the same size or smaller than that of the building before such change or
285-18.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-18.6
1:823
that the building will become more conforming. Replacement of such a
nonconforming single-family building shall commence within one year
of the date of damage and work shall be diligently pursued toward
completion. Failure to complete replacement or diligently work toward
completion shall result in the loss of legal nonconforming status unless
good cause for the delay is accepted at a hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
C. Damaged nonconforming buildings and structures. Except as noted in
Subsection B above, a nonconforming building or structure which is
damaged by flood, fire or vandalism to an extent of more than 50% of its
market value prior to damage (as described in Subsection H), exclusive
of the foundation, shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, unless the lot is a nonconforming lot of
record, in which case the provisions of § 285-18.5 also apply. Such
nonconforming building may be replaced provided replacement is
commenced within one year of the date of damage and is being
diligently pursued toward completion. Failure to complete replacement
shall result in the loss of legal nonconforming status unless good cause
for the delay is accepted at a hearing before the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
D. Relocation of a nonconforming building or structure. Should any
nonconforming building or structure be relocated or moved for any
reason for any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations
for the district in which it is located after it is relocated or moved.
E. Safety-related repairs, improvements and modernization. Repairs,
improvements, or modernization of nonconforming buildings or
structures deemed necessary by the Department of Community
Development to keep a nonconforming building structurally safe and
sound shall be permitted provided such repairs or improvements do not
exceed 50% of the market value (as described in Subsection H) of the
building or structure during any period of 12 consecutive months. This
cost/value calculation shall not include any costs associated with
modernization of electrical, plumbing, heating or cooling systems to
meet Building Code requirements.76 Any such repairs, improvements,
and modernization shall not result in an enlargement of the
nonconforming structure. However, if a nonconforming structure or a
structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or
unlawful due to lack of maintenance and repairs and is declared as such
by the Department of Community Development, it shall not thereafter
be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in full conformity with the
regulations in the district in which it is located.
F. Non-safety improvements and modernization. Improvement or
modernization of nonconforming structures which is not deemed
necessary by the Department of Community Development to keep a
nonconforming building structurally safe and sound shall be permitted
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-18.6 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-18.6
1:824
285-18.7. Nonconforming sites.
The intent of this section is to permit improvements and minor modifications
to a conforming use and building which do not meet all of the various
site-improvement-related regulations of this chapter. The purpose is to
allow gradual compliance with the site-related requirements, for the entire
site, for sites which predate the various standards of this chapter for
landscaping, paving and other non-safety site-related items. Such
improvements or expansions may be permitted by the Planning Commission
during special land use or site plan review without a complete upgrade of
all site elements under the following conditions:
285-18.8. Change of tenancy or ownership.
In the event there is a change in tenancy, ownership, or management,
an existing nonconforming use or structure shall be allowed to continue
provided there is no change in the nature or character of such
nonconformity.
provided such repairs or improvements do not exceed 25% of the
market value of the structure (as described in Subsection H) during
any period of 12 consecutive months. Any such improvements or
modernization shall not result in an enlargement of the nonconforming
structure.
G. Elimination of nonconformity. In the event a nonconforming situation is
removed, the corresponding section of the building or structure shall
thereafter conform.
H. Market value. For the purpose of this article, market value shall be
determined by an acceptable independent appraisal provided by the
applicant. The Township Assessor shall review the appraisal. The value
of the repairs or improvements shall be based on a written estimate
from a licensed contractor provided by the applicant. This estimate
shall be reviewed by the Township Department of Community
Development.
A. The applicant is proposing reasonable site improvements on the overall
site in relation to the scale and construction cost of the building
improvements or expansion.
B. The applicant has addressed safety-related site issues on the overall
site.
C. The applicant has upgraded the overall site landscaping consistent with
Article 13, Landscaping, Screening and Walls.
D. The improvement or minor expansion will not increase noncompliance
with site requirements.
E. A site plan shall be submitted in accordance with Article 21, Site Plan
Review.
285-18.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-18.9
1:825
285-18.9. Unlawful nonconformities.
No nonconformity shall be permitted to continue in existence if it was
unlawful at the time it was established.
285-18.10. Recording of nonconforming uses.
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for maintaining records
of nonconforming uses and structures as accurate as is feasible and for
determining legal nonconforming uses and structures in existence on the
effective date of this chapter. Failure on the part of a property owner to
provide the Zoning Administrator with necessary information to determine
legal nonconforming status may result in denial of requested or required
permits.
285-18.11. Acquisition of private property by Township.
In order to accomplish the elimination of nonconforming uses and
structures which constitute a nuisance or are detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare, Grosse Ile Township, pursuant to Section 16
of Public Act 184 of 1943, as amended, may acquire, by purchase,
condemnation or otherwise, private property for the purpose of removal of
nonconforming uses.
285-18.12. Summary of nonconforming regulations.
Type of Nonconforming Situation Regulatory Response
Illegal nonconforming use, building
or accessory structure
Must cease
A nonconforming use in a building is
discontinued, or a nonconforming
building or accessory structure is
abandoned for over one year
Must cease and all nonconforming
rights are terminated (§ 285-18.4D)
A nonconforming use on open land
is discontinued for over 30 days
Must cease and all nonconforming
rights are terminated (§ 285-18.4D)
Change in ownership of a
nonconforming lot, use or building
No affect on nonconformity or rights
(§ 285-18.8)
Establishment of a new
nonconforming use
Not permitted, except an existing
nonconforming use may be changed
to a more conforming use, as
determined by the ZBA
(§ 285-18.4F)
Expansion of a nonconforming use
within a conforming building
Permitted (§ 285-18.4A)
Expansion of a nonconforming use
outside a building or an expansion of
the building which contains a
nonconforming use
Not permitted unless approved by
the ZBA (§ 285-18.4A)
285-18.9 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-18.12
1:826
Type of Nonconforming Situation Regulatory Response
Request to construct or expand a
principal building on a
nonconforming lot when an adjacent
nonconforming lot is under the same
ownership
Lots must be combined unless
variance granted by ZBA
(§ 285-18.5D)
Request to construct or expand a
principal building on a
nonconforming lot when no adjacent
lot is under the same ownership
Requires a variance by the ZBA.
This hardship cannot be self-created
by selling a lot. (§ 285-18.5D)
Request to expand or increase
height of a nonconforming building
Expansion which conforms
permitted in some cases, a variance
from the ZBA may be required
(§ 285-18.6A)
Safety-related maintenance and
structural repairs to a
nonconforming building or structure
(modernization of electrical,
plumbing, heating and cooling
systems to meet Building Code
requirements is permitted
regardless of cost)
Permitted up to 50% of the value of
the building (§ 285-18.6E)
Non-safety-related renovation or
modernization to a building
containing a nonconforming use or
to a nonconforming building or
accessory structure
Permitted up to 25% of the value of
the building (§ 285-18.6F)
Request to renovate or expand a
conforming use or building when the
site plan does not meet all of the
current site design standards
Reviewed by Planning Commission
(§ 285-18.7)
Rebuilding of a single-family home
in a nonresidential zoning district
damaged by catastrophe
Permitted to rebuild to same or
smaller footprint on previous
foundation (§ 285-18.4E)
Rebuilding of a nonconforming
single-family home in a single-family
residential district
Requires approval by the ZBA
(§ 285-18.6B)
Reestablishment of a nonconforming
use or rebuilding of a
nonconforming building if damaged
by catastrophe
Permitted only if damage is less than
50% of the pre-catastrophe fair
market value (§ 285-18.6C)
285-18.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-18.12
1:827

ARTICLE 19
General Provisions
[Ord. No. 235A, effective 11-24-1996; Ord. No. 272, effective
8-29-1999; Ord. No. 293, effective 9-24-2000]
285-19.1. Scope of application.
The standards and regulations listed in this article shall apply to all uses,
buildings and structures within all zoning districts unless otherwise
addressed.
285-19.2. Voting place.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to interfere with
the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a
Township, school or other public election.
285-19.3. Principal building, structure or use.
No zoning lot may contain more than one principal building, structure or
use, except groups of multiple-family dwellings under the same ownership,
condominium developments, mobile or manufactured housing parks,
shopping centers or office and industrial complexes.
285-19.4. Single-family dwelling design standards.
Single-family dwellings in any zoning district, whether manufactured homes
or site ("stick") built homes, located outside a mobile home park shall
conform to the residential design standards of § 285-3.4E in addition to the
Township Building Code.77
285-19.5. Uses not otherwise included within a district. [Amended
11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07; 12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05]
A land use which is not cited by name as a permitted use in a zoning
district may be permitted upon determination by the Planning Commission
that such use is clearly similar in nature and compatible with the principal
uses permitted by right, special land use, or as a permitted accessory
use listed in that district. Such determination shall be made at a public
hearing, with notice given following the procedures contained in Article 22.
Such public hearing shall not replace the requirement for a separate public
hearing to consider special land use approval, following the procedures and
requirements of Article 22, if such use is determined to be a special land
use. The applicant shall be required to submit pertinent information on
the physical and operational characteristics of the proposed use and any
additional information that may be requested by the Planning Commission.
In making a determination of similarity and compatibility with the listed
uses in that district, the Planning Commission shall consider the following:
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.5
1:829
A. Determination of compatibility. In making the determination of
compatibility, the Planning Commission shall consider specific
characteristics of the use in question and compare such characteristics
with those of the uses which are expressly permitted by right or special
land use in the district. Such characteristics shall include, but are not
limited to, traffic generation, parking, types of service offered, types of
goods produced, methods of operation, and building characteristics.
B. Conditions by which use may be permitted. If the Planning Commission
determines that the proposed use is compatible with permitted uses in
the district, the Commission shall decide whether the proposed use is
most similar to those permitted by right, as a special land use, or as a
permitted accessory use. The proposed use shall be subject to the
review and approval requirements for the district in which it is located.
The Planning Commission shall have the authority to establish
additional standards and conditions under which a use may be
permitted in a district.
C. Use provided for in other district. No use shall be permitted in a district
under the terms of this section if said use is specifically listed as a use
permitted by right or as a special land use in any other district.
D. Prohibited uses. Certain uses may not be appropriate within the
Township of Grosse Ile given the existing development pattern,
environmental condition, limited road access to the island and overall
character in the community. In accordance with the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, a zoning ordinance or zoning
decision can prohibit establishment of a requested land use within a
Township upon a finding that there is not an appropriate location within
the Township or the use is unlawful, even if there is a demonstrated
need for that land use in the Township or surrounding area. In finding
that there is no appropriate location for the use within the Township,
the Planning Commission shall consider the following:
(1) The land area required by the proposed use;
(2) Existing environmental conditions and potential environmental
hazards;
(3) The potential impact on surrounding properties in terms of traffic,
noise, lighting, property valuation and views;
(4) Demand and capacity of utilities and municipal services to support
the proposed use; and
(5) The applicant cannot demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Planning Commission that there is not an alternative land use that
will provide the property owner with a reasonable rate of return on
investment.
E. Other laws and ordinances: Any use that would constitute a violation of
any other federal, state or local law or regulation shall be prohibited.
285-19.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.6
1:830
285-19.6. Yard and bulk regulations and exceptions. [Amended
7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-02]
All lots, buildings, and structures shall comply with the following general
yard and bulk regulations unless specifically stated otherwise in this
chapter:
A. General compliance.
(1) Every building hereafter erected on a lot or parcel of land created
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter shall comply with
the lot size, lot coverage, and setback requirements for the district
in which it is located.
(2) No yards in existence on the effective date of this chapter shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced if already less
than, the minimum yard requirements of this chapter. The
maintenance of yards and other open space and minimum lot area
legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of
the owner of such building or of the property on which it is located
for as long as the building is in existence.
B. Exceptions to required yards. The following structures and projections
shall be permitted when located in the required yards, as specified:
(1) In all required yard setbacks, the following shall be permitted:
(a) Awnings and canopies that project two feet or less into the
required yard;
(b) Steps or access ramps necessary for access that are four feet
or less above grade;
(c) Driveways, sidewalks, pathways, and boardwalks two feet or
less above grade;
(d) Chimneys that project two feet or less into the required yard;
(e) Approved freestanding signs;
(f) Arbors and trellises;
(g) Flagpoles;
(h) Window air-conditioning units;
(i) Fences and walls, except in waterfront yards and subject to
applicable restrictions set forth herein; and
(j) Landscape materials that are in compliance with § 285-19.8,
Corner clearance.
(2) Residential lots or parcels fronting onto the Detroit River or a canal
and abutting a public or private road shall maintain the yard (both
required and non-required yard) which fronts on the water as an
285-19.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.6
1:831
open, unobscured yard, except that a boat port or boat dock/well, a
swimming pool and other allowable waterfront structures shall be
permitted in accordance with Article 17.
(3) In required front yard setbacks the following shall be permitted:
(a) Open paved terraces not over three feet above the average
grade of the adjoining ground and not projecting farther than
10 feet into the required front yard setback, but not including
roofed-over terraces or porches; and
(b) Bay windows, overhanging eaves, and other architectural
features which project three feet or less into the required front
yard setback.
(4) In required side yard setbacks; bay windows, overhanging eaves
and other architectural features which project no more than two
inches for each one foot of width of the side yard setback shall be
permitted, provided that such features shall not project farther
than three feet into the required side yard setback and such
features shall maintain a minimum separation of 10 feet from any
building or other such feature on an adjacent property.
(5) In required rear yard setbacks, open paved terraces, decks and
open porches not over three feet above the average grade of the
adjoining ground and not projecting farther than 10 feet into the
required rear yard setback shall be permitted. Roofed-over
terraces or porches, bay windows, overhanging eaves, and other
architectural features which project three feet or more into the
required rear yard setback shall be subject to the requirements for
principal buildings.
C. Permitted height. No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered subsequent to the effective date of
this chapter to exceed the maximum height established for the district
in which the structure is located, except as follows:
(1) Chimneys, church spires, cupolas, domes, towers, water tanks,
chimneys, smokestacks and monuments may be erected to a height
up to 60 feet, as shown on an approved site plan.
(2) Flag poles may be up to 40 feet tall.
(3) Structural extensions appropriate to the building design, such as
cornices and pediments, may be up to five feet above the stated
height limit of the zoning district, as shown on an approved site
plan.
(4) Mechanical equipment, including elevator housings, stairways,
tanks, heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment, and
other similar equipment, located on the roof of any building shall
285-19.6 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.6
1:832
285-19.7. Road frontage.
285-19.8. Corner clearance.
No fence, wall, structure, or planting shall be erected, established, or
maintained on any corner lot which will obstruct the view of drivers in
vehicles approaching the intersection. Fences, walls, structures, or
plantings located in the triangular area described below shall not be
permitted to exceed a height of 30 inches above the lowest point of the
intersecting road(s). The unobstructed triangular area is described as
follows:
285-19.9. Entrance features.
In all districts, so-called entranceway structures, including but not limited
to walls, columns, and gates marking entrances to single-family
subdivisions or multiple-family housing projects, office complexes, shopping
centers and industrial parks, may be permitted. Such entrance features may
be located in a required yard, provided such entranceway structures meet
comply with the height limit established for the district in which
the structure is located and the following standards:
(a) All such equipment shall be screened from view at the property
line by a pediment, solid wall or architectural feature that is
constructed of the same material and compatible in
appearance with the principal building.
(b) Roof-mounted equipment shall not exceed a height of 10 feet
above the surrounding roof surface, and shall occupy no more
than 15% of the total roof area.
A. No structure shall be erected on property which does not directly abut
for at least 60 feet upon a public road right-of-way or a private road that
complies with the requirements of Chapter 205, Roads and Driveways,
of the Municipal Code, except within the R-1-C Single-Family
Residential District and Macomb Street District where the minimum
frontage requirement shall be 40 feet.
B. No land which is located in a residential district shall be used for a
driveway or other access to land which is located in a nonresidential
district.
A. The area formed at the corner intersection of two road right-of-way or
easement lines, the two sides of the triangular area being 30 feet in
length measured along abutting public right-of-way lines, and the third
side being a line connecting these two sides; or
B. The area formed at the corner intersection of a road right-of-way or
easement and a driveway, the two sides of the triangular area being 10
feet in length measured along the right-of-way line and edge of the
driveway, and the third side being a line connecting these two sides.
285-19.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.9
1:833
the requirements of § 285-19.8, Corner clearance, and are approved by the
Department of Community Development. A permit from the Wayne County
Department of Public Services shall be required if the entrance feature is in
the public right-of-way.
285-19.10. Essential services.
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by state,
federal, and local ordinances and laws. Proposals for construction of
essential services shall be subject to review, following the procedures and
requirements of Article 21 and Article 22, as applicable, it being the
intention of the Township to achieve efficient use of the land and alleviate
adverse impact on nearby uses or lands. Essential services shall comply
with all applicable regulations that do not affect the basic design or nature
of operation of said services.
285-19.11. Accessory structures and uses. [Amended 1-13-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-01.5; 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-02]
Accessory structures and uses shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Timing of construction. No accessory structure or use shall be
constructed or established on a parcel unless there is a principal
building, structure, or use being constructed or already established on
the same parcel of land.
B. Attached accessory structures. Accessory structures attached to the
principal building or structure shall be considered part of the principal
building for the purposes of determining conformance with area,
setback and bulk requirements. Detached accessory structures shall be
no less than 10 feet from the principal building or structure.
C. Permitted number of accessory buildings. Only one detached accessory
building per principal structure is allowed.
D. Detached accessory structure location. Detached accessory structures
shall meet the following location requirements:
285-19.9 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.11
1:834
Type of Lot
Floor Area
of Accessory
Building
(square
feet)
Yard
Permitted Setback Required
Internal lot 900 or less Rear yard 6-foot minimum from
side or rear lot line:
side yard: 6 feet; rear
yard; 6 feet
Greater than
900, up to
1,200(a)
Rear yard Must meet principal
building side and rear
yard setback
requirement; side yard:
principal building
setback requirement;
rear yard: principal
building setback
requirement
Greater than
1,200(a)
Rear yard Side yard: height of
accessory building; rear
yard: principal building
setback requirement
Corner lot 900 or less Rear yard 6-foot minimum from
side or rear lot line and
must be set back from
side street a distance
equal to or greater than
the principal building;
side yard: 6 feet; rear
yard: 6 feet; side street:
equal to or greater than
the principal building
285-19.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.11
1:835
Type of Lot
Floor Area
of Accessory
Building
(square
feet)
Yard
Permitted Setback Required
Greater than
900, up to
1,200(a)
Rear yard Must meet principal
building side and rear
yard setback
requirement and must
be set back from side
street a distance equal
to or greater than the
principal building; side
yard: principal building
setback requirement;
rear yard: principal
building setback
requirement; side
street: equal to or
greater than the
principal building
Greater than
1,200(a)
Rear yard Side yard: height of the
accessory building; rear
yard: principal building
setback requirement;
side street: equal to or
greater than the
principal building
Through lot or
double frontage
lot
120 maximum Side yard Must meet same side
yard setback as
required for principal
building; side yard:
principal building
setback requirement;
rear yard: principal
building setback
requirement; front
yards: equal to or
greater than the
principal building
285-19.11 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.11
1:836
Type of Lot
Floor Area
of Accessory
Building
(square
feet)
Yard
Permitted Setback Required
Waterfront lot,
other than the
R-1-F District
120 maximum Side yard
waterfront
yard
Must meet principal
building side yard:
principal building
setback requirement;
waterfront yard: may
not be located in the
average shoreline
setback, except for
waterfront structures
permitted in Article 17
Waterfront lot,
R-1-F Hickory
Island
900 or less Street front
yard
3-foot minimum from
side yard: 3 feet; street
front yard: 15 feet
NOTES:
(a) Accessory buildings larger than 900 square feet shall only be
allowed subject to the requirements of Subsection E below.
E. Detached accessory structure area and height. Detached accessory
buildings and structures shall meet the following maximum floor area
and height requirements:
(1) On lots with an area less than 30,000 square feet, the height of
detached accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed one
story and 12 feet. The cumulative square footage of all detached
accessory structures and buildings shall not occupy more than 25%
of the rear yard and shall not exceed 900 square feet in area.
(2) On lots with an area of 30,000 square feet or more, the area of
accessory buildings shall be a maximum of 1,200 square feet and
the height shall be a maximum of 15 feet. A half-story is allowed
within the roofed area above the main floor, provided that it shall
only be used for storage. The roof shall be a pitched roof with the
gable ends at the short sides of the building.
(3) On lots with an area of 43,560 square feet or more, the maximum
allowable area of accessory buildings shall be 1,400 square feet,
and the maximum height shall be 17 feet. A half-story is allowed
within the roofed area above the main floor, provided it shall only
be used for storage. The roof shall be a pitched roof with the gable
ends at the short sides of the building. [Amended 4-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-02]
285-19.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.11
1:837
(4) The Planning Commission may grant approval to allow an
accessory building larger than the above maximum floor area
where the following conditions are met. The public hearing
procedures and standards of Article 22, Special Land Use Review,
shall be followed, except that the Planning Commission shall be the
approval authority.
(a) The lot shall have an area of at least 30,000 square feet.
(b) The accessory building shall be screened from view of adjacent
lots through a combination of setback, existing vegetation and
proposed landscaping, as depicted on a landscape plan.
(c) The accessory building shall meet principal building rear yard
setbacks and be set back from the side lot lines a distance at
least equal to the height of the accessory building. [Amended
4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
(d) The architecture shall be compatible with the principal
building, including architectural style, detailing and roof pitch.
The Planning Commission may require dormers or other
features to break up the mass of the roof.
(5) On waterfront lots within the R-1-F District, the ground floor area
of detached accessory buildings shall be a maximum of 900 square
feet and the height shall be a maximum of 15 feet. A half-story is
allowed within the roofed area above the main floor.
F. Use of accessory buildings. An accessory building shall not be used as a
dwelling. Residential plumbing shall not be installed within accessory
buildings. Accessory buildings shall not be used for a home occupation
or any business within a residential zoning district.
G. Conformance with lot coverage standards. Accessory buildings and
structures shall be included in computations to determine compliance
with maximum lot coverage standards.
H. Site plan approval. If submission of a site plan for review and approval
is required, then said plan shall indicate the location of proposed
accessory structures and uses.
I. Location of potential nuisances. [Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No.
12-02]
(1) Accessory uses and related structures that could produce noise,
odors, or other nuisances, such as, but not limited to, household
animal enclosures, dog runs, storage of wood, yard composting and
storage of maintenance equipment, shall be located in the rear yard
behind the principal structure.
(2) Mechanical equipment, such as central air-conditioning units, heat
pumps and generators shall be located in the rear yard behind the
principal structure, except that the Zoning Administrator may
285-19.11 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.11
1:838
285-19.12. Noncommercial communication antennas.
Communication antennas or towers, including radio, television, satellite
dishes and other accessory noncommercial transmitting, relay or reception
antennas below 300 watts of output, shall be permitted provided that such
antennas conform to the provisions of this section and other applicable
Township codes. Television, radio antennas and satellite dishes are
exempted from the regulations of this section provided the diameter is one
meter (39.4 inches) or less in any zoning district that permits residential
and two meters (78.8 inches) or less in any zoning district that does not
permit residential.
allow placement in the nonrequired side yard where a rear yard
location is not practical and adequate screening is provided from
the adjacent property.
(3) Wood-burning furnaces located in an accessory structure shall be
prohibited.
J. Conformance with zoning district standards. Accessory buildings and
structures shall be subject to the provisions set forth in the particular
zoning district.
K. Fences. Fences shall comply with Chapter 103 of the Municipal Code,
Fences.
A. Only one antenna shall be permitted on each single-family residentially
zoned parcel for personal use by the occupant of the residence, in
addition to one traditional residential television antenna.
B. Antennas, towers or satellite dish antennas shall be located in a side or
rear yard only.
C. Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas shall be obscured from the
view of the public right-of-way and adjacent properties by a screening
wall or fence, evergreen plantings, or a combination of the above.
D. Antennas shall not be located where they will block fire lanes or utility
easements.
E. The setbacks for such antennas from all lot lines shall be a distance
equal to the height of such antennas, provided that no portion of an
antenna, including a satellite dish antenna, shall be located closer than
six feet, measured on a horizontal plane, to any side or rear lot line.
F. The diameter of antennas and satellite dishes shall not exceed 10 feet.
G. No advertising or identification display shall be placed on any portion of
an antenna or tower, including a satellite dish antenna.
H. Roof-mounted antennas shall be subject to the following conditions:
285-19.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.12
1:839
285-19.13. Commercial communication towers.
The following regulations shall be met by all commercial radio and
television, microwave, mobile phone, public utility, television, and other
transmitting or relay towers ("towers" hereafter). The regulations contained
in this section shall not apply to antennas which are accessory to an
unrelated principal use and are for personal use by the occupant(s),
including radio, television, satellite dishes and other noncommercial
transmitting, relay or reception antennas, provided that such
noncommercial antennas meet the requirements of § 285-19.12.
(1) For the purposes of this section, a reception antenna regulated by
this section shall be considered to be a portion of the structure.
(2) All roof-mounted antennas must be anchored in an approved
method as outlined in the Building Code.78
(3) The antenna shall not be mounted on the front of the structure.
I. Erection or movement of an antenna, tower or satellite dish shall
require a building permit. The applicant shall submit a sketch plan to
the Zoning Administrator for approval. The sketch plan shall indicate
the location and height of the satellite dish and buildings, paved areas
and other appropriate site features within 100 feet of the proposed
location.
J. Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance from
these standards upon determining compliance with the standards of
this section would not provide reasonably good reception, that the
variance requested is the minimum necessary to provide reasonably
good reception and that any negative impact on adjacent properties
shall be minimized to the maximum extent practical.
A. Towers shall be permitted in any commercial or industrial district. A
site plan must be submitted for approval as outlined in Article 21, Site
Plan Review. Towers which exceed the district height limit may be
allowed subject to special land use approval as outlined in Article 22,
Special Land Use Review. The installation of antennas to existing
towers where the total height of the tower with antennas is not
increased or additional lighting is not required by the Federal Aviation
Administration shall be subject to administrative approval as outlined in
Article 21, Site Plan Review.
B. All towers shall meet the following conditions:
(1) The setbacks for such towers from all abutting streets or adjacent
property shall be a distance equal to the height of such tower. The
setback shall be the total height of the tower and shall remain clear
of any building or structure except an accessory utility building for
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-19.12 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.13
1:840
285-19.14. Waste receptacles.
Receptacles, including waste receptacles, waste compactors, and recycling
bins, shall be designed, constructed and maintained according to the
standards of this section. Waste receptacle location and details of
construction shall be shown on site plans. A change in receptacle location
or size shall require modification to the enclosure, as warranted by this
section.
the tower itself. If the tower is located on a lot with a building, the
tower shall be located to the rear of the building.
(2) The tower shall be approved by the Federal Aviation
Administration, and all aviation hazard lighting shall be shown on
the site plan.
(3) Any lighting on the tower shall be subject to Planning Commission
approval.
(4) No signs or logo visible from off site shall be permitted on the
tower.
(5) The Planning Commission may require a security fence to prevent
access to the tower.
(6) The fenced yard surrounding the tower shall be screened with sixfoot-
tall evergreen trees placed every 10 feet around the perimeter
of the yard.
(7) Any utility building(s) shall be constructed of brick and have a
pitched roof of at least 1:4.
(8) The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission that there are no existing towers that can practically
accommodate, or be modified to accommodate, the communication
equipment planned for the proposed tower.
(9) The tower shall be constructed to allow future collocation and
accommodate the maximum number of foreseeable users
technically practicable. The applicant shall provide the Township
with a letter of intent to lease excess space on the tower and
commit the tower owner and successors to:
(a) Respond to any requests for information from another
potential shared use applicant;
(b) Negotiate in good faith and allow for leased shared use if an
applicant demonstrates that it is technically practicable; and
(c) Make no more than a reasonable charge for a shared use lease.
(10) The structural plans must be approved by the Township Engineer.
285-19.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.14
1:841
A. Waste receptacles shall be located in the rear yard or non-required side
yard (i.e., not within the minimum side yard setback), unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Commission. Waste receptacles shall be as
far as practical, and in no case less than 20 feet, from any residential
district and located so that they are not easily damaged by the refuse
device. The location and orientation of the waste receptacle and
enclosure shall minimize the potential for the waste receptacle to be
viewed from a public street or adjacent residential districts.
B. Waste receptacles shall be easily accessed by refuse vehicles without
potential of damaging the building or automobiles parked in designated
parking spaces.
C. The receptacle base shall be at least 10 feet by six feet, constructed of
six inches of reinforced concrete pavement. The base shall extend six
feet beyond the front of the waste receptacle pad or gate to support the
front axle of a refuse vehicle.
D. Waste receptacles shall meet the following standards:
(1) Each waste receptacle shall have an enclosing lid or cover.
(2) Waste receptacles shall be enclosed on three sides with a berm or
wall meeting the requirements of Subsection D(3), below, and with
a gate on the fourth side. The gate must be maintained in operable
and sanitary condition, kept closed except when access is needed
to the receptacle and be lockable. [Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-003]
(3) The enclosure shall be a berm or wall constructed of brick,
concrete or decorative precast panel with brick effect, a wooden
enclosure provided the lumber is treated to prevent decay, or an
alternative material deemed acceptable by the Planning
Commission. The Commission's determination shall be based on
property conditions, including, but not limited to, the zoning of the
property, nature of the land use, character of neighboring
properties and visibility of the enclosure. Enclosures shall have a
minimum height of six feet or at least one foot higher than the top
of the receptacle, whichever is higher, and spaced at least three
feet from the receptacle. If a wooden enclosure is proposed,
suggested timber materials include Cedar, No. 2 Cedar rough sawn
seasoned, Redwood, No. 2 Common Finish (S4S), Douglas Fir-larch
or Southern Pine. Posts shall be set in concrete 42 inches below
grade. Posts shall be either six-inch-by-six-inch pressure-treated
wood or three-inch diameter galvanized steel posts. [Amended
4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-003]
(4) Spacing between the enclosure and any part of the receptacle shall
not be less than two feet, and bollards, curbing or similar
protective devices may be required by the Planning Commission to
285-19.14 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.14
1:842
285-19.15. Home occupations.
prevent damage to the enclosure. [Amended 4-13-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-003]
(5) The enclosure shall be screened with five-foot-high evergreens
planted a minimum of six feet apart wherever the enclosure wall is
visible to a public street or residential district. [Amended
4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-003]
A. Requirements. Home occupations shall be subject to the requirements
of the zoning district in which they are located, as well as the following
standards:
(1) Home occupations must be clearly incidental to the use of the
dwelling as a residence.
(2) No outdoor display or storage of materials, goods, supplies, or
equipment used in the home occupation shall be permitted on the
premises.
(3) The appearance of the principal structure shall not be altered, nor
shall the home occupation be conducted in a manner which would
cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by
the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or signs or the
emission of sounds, noises, or vibrations.
(4) Only the residents of the dwelling unit may be engaged in the home
occupation.
(5) No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations
or involve construction features or the use of electrical or
mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the
structure.
(6) No home occupation shall cause an increase in the use of any one
or more utilities (water, sewer, electricity, trash removal, etc.) such
that the combined total use for the dwelling unit and home
occupation would exceed the average for residences in the
neighborhood.
(7) No signs are permitted for a home occupation.
(8) A home occupation shall not create noise, dust, vibration, smell,
smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other
hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than
would normally be generated within the same residentially zoned
district in Grosse Ile Township.
B. Uses prohibited as home occupations.
(1) The following uses, by the nature of their operation, have a
pronounced tendency to increase in intensity beyond the limits
285-19.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.15
1:843
285-19.16. Keeping of animals.
permitted for home occupations, thereby impairing the reasonable
use and value of surrounding residential properties. Therefore, the
following uses shall not be permitted as home occupations:
(a) Animal hospitals or kennels;
(b) Vehicle and engine repair businesses or storage;
(c) Antique shops;
(d) Barbershops and beauty parlors;
(e) Clinics and hospitals;
(f) Private clubs;
(g) Landscape installation and maintenance businesses, including
lawn mowing businesses;
(h) Snowplowing and tree removal businesses;
(i) Concrete contractors;
(j) Trailer rental;
(k) Restaurants and tea rooms;
(l) Tourist homes and bed-and-breakfast operations; and
(m) Repair shops and service establishments.
(2) Uses that have similar negative impacts on a residential area to
those listed above, as determined by the Planning Commission,
shall also be prohibited.
A. The keeping of up to three domesticated household pets over one pound
and over six months of age, including dogs, cats, birds, and other
animals generally regarded as household pets, is permitted as an
accessory use in any single-family detached dwelling; the keeping of
one such domesticated household pet is permitted in an attached
dwelling unit. These standards are based on the intensity of use. Such
activity shall be in compliance with the regulations of the Wayne County
Health Department and other ordinances, deeds or development
bylaws.
B. The keeping of horses and other equines is permitted in any singlefamily
residential zoning district, subject to the limitations and
conditions contained in Chapter 130, Horses, of the Municipal Code.
The keeping of livestock other than horses and other equines is
prohibited in all zoning districts, except as may be authorized in the
Public Recreation District (PRD) in accordance with § 285-11.2,
Permitted uses. [Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
285-19.15 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.16
1:844
285-19.17. Temporary structures and uses.
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, temporary buildings, structures
and uses shall comply with the following requirements. A temporary
building or structure shall not be used as an accessory building or structure.
285-19.18. Bed-and-breakfast inns.
The following standards apply to bed-and-breakfast inns which are special
land uses within the Airport District and permitted principal uses in the
Macomb Street District:
C. The keeping of nondomesticated animals, such as wild and exotic
animals, and the keeping of vicious animals is prohibited in all zoning
districts.
A. Residential use.
(1) A temporary building or structure which could be used on a
temporary basis, such as a house trailer, basement, tent, shack,
garage, barn, or other outbuilding, shall not be used as a residence
on any parcel without prior approval of the Zoning Board of
Appeals. Approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be for a
period not to exceed six months with a single six-month extension
allowed with approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals. A structure
which has not been completed according to approved plans shall
not be issued a certificate of occupancy and shall not be occupied
or otherwise used.
(2) A building or structure may be approved for temporary residential
use only while damage to the principal dwelling due to fire, flood,
ice, wind, or other natural disaster is being repaired under an
approved building permit.
B. Nonresidential use. Temporary buildings for nonresidential use,
including semitrucks/trailers, shall be permitted only when the
intended use is by a contractor or builder in conjunction with a
construction project under an approved building permit. Such
temporary structures shall be removed immediately upon completion of
the construction project prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
C. Performance guarantee. The Township shall require the posting of a
performance guarantee to ensure proper and complete removal and
cleanup of all temporary buildings upon completion of the project.
A. Such dwelling shall meet all applicable codes and ordinances of the
Township, County of Wayne and State of Michigan.
B. Floor plans drawn to scale of all floors to be utilized for bed-andbreakfast
activities shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.
285-19.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.18
1:845
C. The dwelling shall be suitable in character for the use proposed, shall
not be cause for a change in character of the neighborhood and shall
have a facade style consistent with surrounding principal buildings.
D. The dwelling shall be the permanent residence of the bed-and-breakfast
operator. The bed-and-breakfast shall employ only those living in the
house or up to one additional employee.
E. The dwelling shall be a single-family dwelling which contributes to the
historical significance of the district, with not more than eight sleeping
rooms available for guests of the bed-and-breakfast dwelling.
F. The site shall meet the minimum requirements of the single-family
residential districts. The bed-and-breakfast operator's living area shall
be a minimum of 900 square feet (not including the bedroom and
bathroom facilities of the bed-and-breakfast occupants).
G. There shall be no separate cooking facilities provided for the bed-andbreakfast
occupants. Meals, other than those served as a part of the
normal operation of the household, shall be served only to occupants of
the bed-and-breakfast facility.
H. Occupancy shall be of a transient nature, for periods not to exceed four
weeks within a given one-year period.
I. An unlighted sign meeting the requirements of Article 16, Sign
Regulations, may be provided. Such sign may be provided as a ground
sign or a wall sign.
J. Off-street parking shall be provided based upon space for each rental
room and two spaces for the operator of the facility. It is the Township's
intent to discourage the alteration to yards, removing of landscaping or
the intruding upon the integrity of the neighborhood altered in order to
provide parking. In those instances where required parking cannot be
provided on site in compliance with these standards, the applicant may
request special consideration from the Planning Commission. In such a
case, the applicant shall submit an analysis of parking required and
parking provided within a three-hundred-foot radius of the subject
parcel. After analyzing these data, the Planning Commission may
reduce the number of the required parking spaces if it is established
that sufficient off-street parking exists in the neighborhood.
K. Adequate lavatories and bathing facilities shall be provided to all
guests, and a minimum of one bathroom per floor is required for all bedand-
breakfast operations.
L. A bed-and-breakfast dwelling establishment shall be considered to have
ceased operation when active rental of the facility lapses for six months
or more.
M. The operator must first obtain a license from the Township of Grosse Ile
to operate a bed-and-breakfast dwelling.
285-19.18 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.18
1:846
285-19.19. Lighting.
N. A bed-and-breakfast operation shall be confined to the single-family
dwelling unit that is the principal dwelling unit on the property. No
premises shall be utilized for a bed-and-breakfast operation unless the
following conditions are met:
(1) Minimum exits. There shall be at least two exits to the outdoors
from such premises.
(2) Size of sleeping rooms. Rooms utilized for sleeping shall have a
minimum size of 100 square feet for two occupants, with an
additional 30 square feet for each additional occupant to a
maximum of four occupants per room.
(3) Smoke detectors. Each sleeping room used for the bed-andbreakfast
operation shall have a separate smoke detector alarm,
installed in accordance with the applicable Building Code
requirements.79
(4) Lavatory facilities. Lavatory and bathing facilities shall be available
to all persons using any bed-and-breakfast operation.
A. General. All lighting shall be in conformance with the adopted Building
and Electrical Codes of the Township.80
B. Shielding.
(1) Lighting shall be placed and shielded to direct the light onto the
site and away from adjoining properties or across the street. The
lighting source shall not be directly visible from adjoining
properties or across the street. Lighting shall be shielded so that it
does not cause glare for motorists. Light output shall be limited to
2.5% of fixture luminosity at a height equal to the light. This
requirement may be waived for ornamental lighting which is part of
an overall architectural theme, as approved by the Planning
Commission. Bollard lights are permitted to light driveways and
pedestrian areas. Light shall not exceed more than 0.5 footcandle
at a residential property line. Light shall not exceed more than 1.0
footcandle at a nonresidential property line.
(2) Lighting used for illumination of the exterior of buildings shall be
placed and shielded so as not to interfere with the vision of persons
on adjacent roads or adjacent properties.
C. Height. Light fixtures shall have a maximum height of 20 feet where
adjacent to a residential district. Light fixtures shall have a maximum
height of 25 feet where adjacent to nonresidential districts. Such height
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-19.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.19
1:847
285-19.20. Safety provisions.
shall be measured from the ground adjacent to the pole to the center of
the light fixture.
D. Photometric plan. During site plan review, the Planning Commission
may require the submission of a photometric plan prepared by an
electrical engineer graphically illustrating the planned layout and
footcandles of the site lighting. The evaluation of the photometric plan
is intended to permit the Planning Commission to determine potential
adverse effects the site lighting may have on adjoining properties and
motorists. Compliance with the lighting design criteria shall be
demonstrated by submitting the following for review:
(1) Lighting plan showing light fixture locations and type designations;
(2) Photometric plan for an empty and full parking lot showing
horizontal luminance levels for all lighting, including canopy
lighting, in a point-by-point format with contour lines;
(3) Lighting equipment specifications and data sheets; and
(4) Any other presentations required to convey the intent of the design.
E. Signs. Signs shall be illuminated in accordance with the regulations set
forth in Article 16, Sign Regulations.
A. Public service access. All structures shall be provided with adequate
access for fire, police, sanitation and public works vehicles.
B. Fire protection. All structures constructed after the effective date of
this chapter shall be provided with adequate fire protection, including
adequate water supply for fire-fighting purposes, adequate internal fire
suppression system, use of fire walls and fireproof materials, and other
fire protection measures deemed necessary by the Township Fire Chief.
C. Excavations and holes. Excavations and holes created in conjunction
with a construction project shall be adequately barricaded and
illuminated if not filled in at the end of the working day. Where such
excavations or holes are located in a public right-of-way, it shall be the
responsibility of the contractor to notify the Police Department of their
existence.
D. Building demolition. Before a building or structure is demolished, the
owner, wrecking company, or person who requests the demolition
permit shall notify all utilities providing service to the building. A
demolition permit shall not be issued until all utilities have provided
notification that service has been properly terminated.
E. Duration of building construction. Construction of any structure that
requires a building permit must commence within the limits established
by the Township Building Code.81 All exterior construction, site grading
and landscaping must be completed within two years of the date
285-19.19 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.20
1:848
285-19.21. Lot splits and consolidations.
construction commenced. The applicant may request a one-year
extension from the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided a written request
is received before the expiration date and the structure(s) and site
comply with current standards (i.e., any amendments to this chapter
since the building permit was issued).
A. Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish the conditions under
which parcels of land may be divided or consolidated for the purposes
of sale, development, or use.
(1) Parcels and tracts. The division of parcels or tracts that are not part
of a recorded plat shall not exceed four, provided additional splits
may be allowed based upon the standards contained in Section 108
of the Michigan Land Division Act (Public Act 288 of 1967, as
amended).
(2) Recorded plats. Notwithstanding the above and pursuant to
Section 263 of the Michigan Land Division Act (Public Act 288 of
1967, as amended), a lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a
recorded plat shall not be partitioned or divided into more than
four parts under the provisions of this section. A division to a
subdivision lot that creates more than four parts shall require
approval as a subdivision under the provisions of Chapter 238,
Subdivision Control, of the Municipal Code.
B. Application requirements.
(1) Application. An application for lot or parcel split or consolidation
shall be submitted to the Community Development Department in
triplicate on forms provided by the Community Development
Department.
(2) Additional submission requirements. Along with the application, a
written instrument fully executed in a form legally sufficient for
recording with the County Register of Deeds shall be submitted.
Such instrument shall contain a legal description of all lots, parcels
and outlots that will result from the division or consolidation of
parcels described thereon.
(3) Deed history. Records from the County Register of Deeds for the
previous 10 years shall be submitted that detail the deed history of
the lot or parcel and the parent lot or parcel sufficient to determine
whether the proposed division will violate the maximum number of
land divisions allowed by Act 288 of the Michigan Public Acts of
1967, as amended.
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-19.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.21
1:849
(4) Plan or drawing. The applicant shall also submit a plan or drawing,
drawn to scale by a registered engineer or surveyor, showing all of
the following information:
(a) A location map at an appropriate scale illustrating the subject
lot or parcel in relationship to surrounding parcels and street
system.
(b) Name and address of the property owner and applicant if not
the property owner.
(c) Name, address and professional seal of the registered land
surveyor or civil engineer who prepared the plan and easement
information.
(d) A boundary survey in accordance with Public Act 132 of 1970
of the lot or parcels illustrating dimensions.
(e) A topographic survey by contours on USGS datum at intervals
of not more than two feet may be required for lots or parcels
that contain wetlands or floodplain.
(f) Site information including the location of any shoreline,
streams, public drains and boundaries of any areas which have
characteristics of wetlands regulated by the United States
Army Corps of Engineers, the State of Michigan or the
Township and other natural or man-made features of special
interest in development and use of the parcels.
(g) The surveyed location of all buildings and structures on the lot
or parcel and within 100 feet of all property lines with notes
indicating if the buildings and structures are to be retained,
modified or removed.
(h) Existing access points adjacent to or across from the subject
parcel frontage within 150 feet of the subject parcel.
(i) Land area of existing and resultant lot(s) including and
exclusive of public rights-of-way and submerged lands.
(j) Type, location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
easements.
(k) Completely dimensioned limits within which the principal
structure and accessory buildings or structures shall be
confined on each parcel.
(l) Any deed restrictions or conservation easements.
(m) Any Zoning Board of Appeals variances or rulings on the
property.
(5) Access permit. The applicant shall provide documentation from the
Wayne County Department of Public Services that adequate sight
285-19.21 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.21
1:850
distance is provided at any proposed access point along a public
road.
C. Approval standards. All divisions or consolidations to lots, parcels and
tracts shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Lot area. Each lot or parcel resulting from the proposed division
shall have a net area not less than that required for a lot in the
particular zoning district, exclusive of any submerged area or area
occupied by a public street right-of-way or an access easement.
(2) Building envelope. Within each proposed lot or parcel, there shall
be delineated and fully dimensioned an area within which the
principal structure shall be confined. The areas so delineated shall
be such that, in the opinion and judgment of the Planning
Commission, development on each parcel will be in conformity with
the spirit and intent of the chapter with respect to the particular
zoning district, will be compatible with existing development in the
vicinity primarily as to yard relationships, and will not adversely
affect adjacent properties. No building permits shall be issued for
buildings not located within the limits shown on an approved site
plan.
(3) Buildable area. For any lot or parcel where available references or
on-site observation indicates potential for a wetland regulated by
the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the State of Michigan
or the Township, the applicant shall submit a wetland
determination study of the site conducted by a qualified wetland
consultant or the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. If
the study indicates the presence of a regulated wetland, the
applicant shall illustrate on a site plan that the proposed lots or
parcels have sufficient area for building in compliance with the
setback requirements.
(4) Minimum frontage. Every lot or parcel being created shall abut a
public street right-of-way or a private road that complies with the
requirements of § 285-19.7 and Chapter 205, Roads and Driveways,
of the Municipal Code.
(5) Minimum lot width. Each lot or parcel being created shall provide
the minimum lot width as required in the particular zoning district.
(6) Shape of parcels. Lots and parcels should resemble rectangles but
may be irregularly shaped as conditions dictate. However, unusual
shapes proposed only for the purpose of meeting lot area or width
requirements shall not be permitted.
(7) Depth to width ratio. The depth to width ratio of lots or parcels
created through land division that are one acre or less in size shall
not exceed four to one. Variation from these proportions may be
permitted where such action would reduce existing
nonconformance with these standards.
285-19.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.21
1:851
(8) Easement. Approval of a proposed division of land shall be subject
to the dedication of any easements necessary for roads, public
utilities or other necessary public facilities required. An accurate
legal description shall be provided for all such easements, prepared
by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer, that includes
recitation of the purpose of the easement, with grant to the
Township, its successors and assigns, in perpetuity, of the right to
occupy and use such easement for installation, maintenance and
operation of public utilities.
(9) Elimination or reduction of nonconforming situations. The land
division or combination shall not create and shall eliminate any
nonconforming situation or reduce the degree of nonconformity
(such as a nonconforming use, lot, building, building setback or
access) to the degree deemed practical by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(10) Special assessment districts. In cases where water, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, street paving, or other such facilities have been
installed by special assessment, and a lot or parcel proposed to be
divided has been assessed therefor, no division shall be permitted
unless the applicant agrees in writing to pay to the special
assessment district an additional amount, to be determined by the
Township Assessor, representing the increased benefit that may be
derived through such land division. The additional amount shall be
credited to the appropriate special assessment district.
(11) Required information and permits. No land division shall be
approved unless all of the required information and approved
permits have been provided.
D. Review procedures for lot splits and consolidations within recorded
plats. The following procedure shall be followed to split or consolidate a
lot, outlot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat:
(1) Review by Township departments. The Community Development
Department shall circulate the application among applicable
Township departments for review and comment before
transmitting it to the Planning Commission. The Community
Development Department shall make a determination whether the
proposed division will violate the maximum number of land
divisions allowed by Act 288 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1967, as
amended, based upon information provided by the applicant.
(2) Review by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
review the application, along with the reports from various
Township departments, and make a recommendation to the
Township Board. In reviewing an application, the Planning
Commission shall consider the approval standards of Subsection C.
(3) Utilities and road improvements. Following a recommendation by
the Planning Commission, the applicant shall be responsible for
285-19.21 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.21
1:852
installing all required utilities and road improvements necessary
to serve the proposed lots. The Township Board shall not take
final action on the land division until all required utility and road
improvements have been made. Required utility and road
improvements shall be installed within one year of the Planning
Commission recommendation to the Township Board, provided that
the Planning Commission may grant up to a one-year extension
upon written request by the applicant.
(4) Township Board action. The Township Board shall make the final
decision to approve or deny any application for division of land. The
Township Board, based upon a recommendation by the Planning
Commission, may waive the above standards in Subsection C for
lots to be dedicated to the public for purposes such as roads,
utilities, parks or natural preserves/open space.
E. Review procedures for splits and consolidations of parcels and tracts.
The following procedure shall be followed to split or consolidate a
parcel or tract of land that is not part of a recorded plat:
(1) Review by Township departments. The Community Development
Department shall circulate the application among applicable
Township departments for review and comment before
transmitting it to the Planning Commission. The Community
Development Department shall make a determination whether the
proposed division will violate the maximum number of land
divisions allowed by Act 288 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1967, as
amended, based upon information provided by the applicant.
(2) Review by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
review the application, along with the reports from various
Township departments, and approve or deny the application for
division of land within 30 days of the Community Development
Department receiving a complete application. In reviewing an
application, the Planning Commission shall consider the approval
standards of Subsection C. The Planning Commission may waive
the above standards in Subsection C for parcels to be dedicated to
the public for purposes such as roads, utilities, parks or natural
preserves/open space.
(3) Utilities and road improvements. Following an approval by the
Planning Commission, the applicant shall be responsible for
installing all required utilities and road improvements necessary to
serve the proposed parcels. The Township shall not grant building
permits for the subject parcels until all required utility and road
improvements have been made.
F. Recording of action. Upon approval by the Township Board, the
Township shall forward one copy of the approved form to the County
Bureau of Taxation, and one copy shall be retained in the Township
records.
285-19.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.22
1:853
285-19.22. Bridges, causeways and ferry landings. [Added 6-9-2003
by Ord. No. 03-07]
Bridges, causeways and ferry landings for vehicular, pedestrian or rail
traffic shall be permitted in all districts by special land use approval by
the Grosse Ile Township Board in accordance with Article 22 Special Land
Use Review. Due to the potential community-wide impact, notice of the
public hearing for a bridge, causeway or ferry landing special land use
request shall be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Township and separate notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery
to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all
persons to whom real property is assessed within one mile of the proposal
and to the occupants of all structures within one mile. A site plan for
any proposed bridge, causeway or ferry landing must also be submitted
for approval by the Planning Commission in accordance with Article 21,
Site Plan Review. All bridges, causeways and ferry landings shall meet the
following conditions:
A. Design of the bridge, causeway or ferry landing shall be compatible
with surrounding land uses and will minimize impact on views along the
waterfront. Bridges shall have a low-profile design to ensure vehicle,
and pedestrian safety and minimal impact on aesthetics. Bridges and
causeways shall be designed in accordance with Wayne County
standards. The design of the bridge shall incorporate measures to
ensure pedestrian safety. The design of the bridge shall be approved by
the Township Board.
B. The bridge, causeway or ferry landing shall be located and designed to
minimize impact to natural features, including natural shorelines,
wetlands, fish, and wildlife habitat and waterways.
C. The bridge, causeway or ferry landing shall be constructed so as not to
obstruct the navigability of the waterway. Where a bridge crosses a
navigable waterway; a swing, drawbridge or other opening mechanism
shall be provided to allow passage of watercraft.
D. Ferry landings shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of Article 17, Waterfront Provisions.
E. A traffic impact study shall be prepared that demonstrates the
following:
(1) The proposed bridge, causeway or ferry landing will not generate a
significant additional amount of traffic in such a way that
represents a burden to existing bridges or roads.
(2) The bridge, causeway or ferry's capacity will withhold estimated
traffic and any projected traffic increases within 30 years of
completion of the structure.
F. Adequate screening shall be provided to ensure that the privacy of
adjacent land uses is protected. Preservation of natural vegetation and
285-19.22 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.22
1:854
285-19.23. Alternative energy systems. [Added 6-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-03]
supplemental landscaping may be required. New structures shall be
placed to minimize impact to waterfront views of adjacent lots.
G. The bridge, causeway or ferry landing shall not be located such that it
creates nonconforming conditions for buildings on adjacent lots by
virtue of the side yard adjacent to the proposed bridge access road
becoming a front yard.
H. The applicant shall obtain all necessary permits from the U.S. Army
Crops of Engineers, the Michigan Department of Environmental
Quality, the U.S. Coast Guard and Wayne County.
I. Any lighting shall be subject to Planning Commission approval.
J. Any directional sign to the bridge, causeway or ferry landing shall be
subject to Planning Commission approval in accordance with the Roads
and Driveways Ordinance.82
K. No sign or logo visible from off-site shall be permitted for a ferry
landing.
L. Any proposed utility building or toll booth shall be no larger than
necessary to accommodate the activity and be consistent with existing
conditions, use and character of the area.
M. Any utility building or toll booth shall be constructed of brick and have a
pitched roof of at least 1:4.
N. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided to accommodate
facility users and employees in accordance with Article 12, Parking and
Loading Requirements.
O. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission that there are no existing bridges, causeways or ferry
landings that can accommodate the need for the proposed bridge,
causeway or ferry landing.
P. The bridge, causeway or ferry shall provide for unimpeded emergency
vehicle access meeting the requirements of the Township Fire Marshal.
A ferry shall not serve as the means of access to residential dwellings.
All residential dwellings shall be accessible by roadways and bridges,
and building permits for dwellings shall not be issued until completion
of the bridge and road access.
Q. Bridges and causeways shall comply with the requirements of the
Township Roads and Driveways Ordinance.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Roads and Driveways.
285-19.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.23
1:855
A. Wind energy conversion systems. Wind energy conversion systems
(WECS) shall be allowed in all zoning districts, except where prohibited
under Subsection A(5), subject to the following regulations:
(1) Intent. The intent of these regulations is to provide for the
development of sustainable energy sources while providing
regulations that limit the impact of these facilities and protect the
community from impacts of WECS facilities as follows:
(a) Protect the visual character of neighborhoods and the natural
residential character of the island;
(b) Protect neighboring property owners from noise and safety
impacts;
(c) Protect waterfowl and birds within the Detroit River
International Wildlife Refuge and avian wildlife inherent to the
neighborhoods; and
(d) Ensure structures do not exceed a height that would impact
aviation safety, and the airspace around the Grosse Ile Airport.
(2) Special land use. A WECS shall be allowed with special land use
approval from the Township Board, based upon a Planning
Commission public hearing and recommendation following the
procedures and standards of Article 22, Special Land Use Review.
(3) Accessory structure. A WECS shall be allowed as an accessory
structure on a lot that contains a principal building. Only one
WECS shall be allowed per principal building.
(4) Location. A WECS may only be located in a rear yard within
prescribed setbacks. A WECS may not be attached to a building.
(5) Prohibited locations. In order to protect wildlife in the Detroit River
International Wildlife Refuge and to protect views along the
waterfront, WECS shall not be permitted in the following locations:
(a) In any waterfront yard or over a waterway;
(b) Between the shoreline and East River Road, south of Horsemill
and north of Manchester; and the front yards of lots fronting
along this segment of East River Road;
(c) Between the shoreline and West River Road, south of Horsemill
and north of Groh Road; and the front yards of lots fronting
along this segment of West River Road;
(d) Any of the following locations: Calf Island, Celeron Island,
Hennepin Point, Hickory Island, Round Island, Sugar Island
and Stony Island.
(6) Permitted height. The maximum permitted height of a WECS shall
be 35 feet. The allowable height of a WECS may be further limited
285-19.23 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.23
1:856
in order to meet the setback requirements of Subsection A(7)
below.
(7) Setback. A WECS shall be setback at least equal to 1 1/2 times the
height of the WECS from all lot lines, wetlands, utility lines,
easements and any public road right-of-way.
(8) Aviation hazard. The WECS shall not be located or erected to a
height that would pose a hazard to aircraft operations and shall not
encroach above the height limits of any of the airport runway
approach zones for the Grosse Ile Municipal Airport.
(9) Blade clearance. The minimum blade or rotor clearance from the
ground shall be 20 feet for a horizontal-axis WECS and 10 feet for a
vertical-axis WECS. The minimum blade or rotor clearance from a
building or utility line shall be 20 feet.
(10) Blade diameter. The blades or rotor of a WECS shall have a
maximum diameter of six feet.
(11) Braking system. Each WECS shall be equipped with both a manual
brake and automatic braking, governing or feathering device
capable of keeping the WECS operation in high winds within 80%
of its survival wind speed.
(12) Tower construction. A WECS shall be constructed with a tubular
tower. Lattice towers and guy wires shall be prohibited. The WECS
shall be constructed of quality materials with a coating that will
prevent rust and discoloring.
(13) Climbing devices. Towers shall not have permanent attached tower
climbing devices.
(14) Color. A WECS shall be painted a nonobtrusive (light color such as
white, beige or light gray) color that is nonreflective. No striping or
color shall be visible on the blades or tower.
(15) Electrical lines. All distribution lines from the WECS to the building
and the electrical grid connection shall be underground. The
generator and all other electrical equipment, and controls shall be
enclosed within the nacelle, pole or within a building.
(16) Power grid connection. The applicant shall provide proof of written
notice to the local electric utility of the proposed interconnection to
the power grid and the utility's response. The resident shall comply
with all requirements of the servicing utility if the WECS is
interfaced with the utility grid. The utility will install appropriate
electric metering (for sellback and non-sellback), and the customer
will be required to install a disconnecting device adjacent to the
electric meter(s). Any connection shall be inspected and approved
by the appropriate utility company.
(17) Noise.
285-19.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.23
1:857
(a) Noise emissions from the operation of a WECS shall not exceed
all the following, as measured at the nearest property line and
road:
[1] Forty-five dBA;
[2] Ten dBA greater than the statistical background sound
level (L90) or the sound level that is exceeded 90% of the
time by ambient background noise; and
[3] Three dBA less than the statistical high sound level (L10)
or the sound level that is exceeded 10% of the time by
ambient background noise.
(b) After installation of the WECS, sound pressure level
measurements shall be provided to the Township within 60
days of the operation of the WECS. Two tests are shall be done
as follows:
[1] First with the WECS turned off, so that ambient
background noise can be documented; and
[2] A second test with the WECS operating.
(c) All sound pressure levels shall be done at the applicant's
expense by a third party, qualified professional according to
the procedures in the most current version of ANSI S12.18,
and measured with a sound meter that meets or exceeds the
most current version of ANSI S1.4 specifications for a Type II
sound meter. The test will be taken with wind speeds of at least
10 miles per hour. The Township may require the owner to pay
for a sound evaluation by a professional at any time to
determine compliance with the requirements of this section.
(d) The WECS shall be maintained such that the noise limit is not
exceeded for the life of the WECS. Where a WECS exceeds the
noise limits of this section, the owner shall discontinue WECS
operation and it shall be removed, repaired or replaced with a
new WECS of equal or lesser size that complies with this
section. If a property owner fails to properly maintain the
WECS, the Township may remove the WECS in accordance
with Subsection A(22) below.
(18)Radio interference. WECS shall be designed, constructed and
operated so as not to cause radio and television interference. In the
event that electromagnetic interference is experienced, the
applicant must remove the WECS. If a property owner fails to
remove the WECS, the Township may remove the WECS in
accordance with Subsection A(22) below.
(19)Water pumping. A WECS shall not be used for pumping water.
285-19.23 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.23
1:858
(20) Emergency contact. The survival wind speed in miles per hour, and
meters per second, the name and telephone number of the installer,
and the name and telephone number of the person responsible for
maintenance and shutdown procedures shall be provided on labels
attached to the WECS tower subsystem in a visible, easily read, and
easily accessible location.
(21) Sketch plan. The special land use application shall be accompanied
by a sketch plan meeting the requirements of § 285-21.5 along with
the following additional information:
(a) Location and height of all buildings, structures, electrical lines,
towers, guy wires, guy wire anchors, security fencing, and
other aboveground structures associated with the WECS.
(b) The location of all existing and proposed overhead and
underground electrical transmission or distribution lines shall
be shown.
(c) Lot survey showing all lot lines, rights-of-way and easements.
(d) Inventory of any trees that will need to be removed or trimmed
for the WECS in accordance with Chapter 282, Woodland and
Tree Preservation.
(e) Proposed setbacks for the WECS from all lot lines, structures
located on the property where the WECS will be located and
structures on adjacent lots within 100 feet of the lot lines.
(f) A copy of the manufacturer's installation instructions and
blueprints and stamped engineered drawings of the tower,
base, footings, and foundation.
(g) Ambient noise measurements taken on the site of the proposed
WECS indicating the statistical background sound level (L90)
and statistical high sound level (L10) measured on the dB(A)-
weighted scale.
(h) Manufacturer's specifications indicating the operating noise
levels of the WECS at full RPM based upon industry standards;
expected noise level at property line or road right-of-way.
Demonstration that noise specifications shall meet standards
of this chapter to be confirmed after the WECS is installed. The
petitioner shall certify that the WECS will comply with the
noise limit of this chapter as a condition of approval.
(i) Documentation to ensure that construction code, utility
interconnection, and safety requirements shall be complied
with.
(22) Performance guarantee. A performance guarantee shall be posted
at the time of receiving a special land use permit for the WECS to
ensure removal of the facility when it is no longer used or is no
285-19.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.23
1:859
longer maintained in compliance with this chapter. The applicant
shall provide funds to the Township for removal of the WECS,
which reasonably reflects the cost of removal of the WECS and
restoration of the property. Cost estimates for removal of the WECS
shall be provided for the Township Engineer's approval. Adequate
funds shall also be provided to cover the Township's administrative
costs in the event that the applicant or its successor does not
remove the WECS in a timely manner. The performance guarantee
shall, at the election of the Township Board, be in the form of: cash;
security bond; or an irrevocable letter of credit.
(23) Maintenance. The WECS must be kept and maintained in good
repair and condition at all times. If a WECS is not maintained in
operational and reasonable condition or poses a potential safety
hazard, the applicant shall take expeditious action to correct the
situation or remove the WECS. The Township may require
documentation of maintenance.
(24) Inspection. The Township may require testing of any WECS to
ensure proper operation and compliance with the requirements of
this section. Any necessary repair shall be required to comply with
the requirements of this section and shall be completed within 45
days of the test or the WECS shall be ordered to be removed.
Failure to remove a WECS within 45 days shall be grounds for the
Township to remove the WECS at the owner's expense. The
Township may order repair or removal sooner where there is an
immediate safety hazard.
(25) Abandonment. Any WECS that has not produced electricity for a
period of six successive months or longer shall be deemed to be
abandoned and shall be promptly dismantled and removed from the
property. All above and below ground materials must be removed
within 45 days of receiving an abandonment notification from the
Township. Failure to remove an abandoned WECS within 45 days
shall be grounds for the Township to remove the WECS at the
owner's expense. The ground must be restored to its original
condition within 60 days of receiving the abandonment notification.
(26) Change in ownership. Where there is a change in ownership for a
property containing a WECS, the new owner must register with the
Community Development Department to update the ownership
information on the permit. The updated permit can be approved
administratively by the Zoning Administrator, provided the WECS
is in compliance with all requirements of this section, based upon
an inspection conducted in accordance with Subsection A(24)
above.
B. Solar panels. Solar panels shall be allowed in all zoning districts either
attached to permitted principal or accessory buildings or as accessory
structures subject to the following regulations:
285-19.23 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.23
1:860
(1) Attached to building. Where attached to a building, the solar panels
shall be subject to the same regulations as the building in terms of
height and setbacks. Solar panels may be attached to the roof or
the building wall, but not both.
(a) Roof-mounted panels shall include solar panels integrated as
the surface layer of the roof structure with no additional
apparent change in relief or projection (the preferred
installation), or separate flush-mounted solar panels attached
to the roof surface.
[1] Solar panels integrated as the surface layer of the roof
structure may be located on any part of the roof.
[2] Separate flush-mounted solar panels may only be located
on a rear- or side-facing roof.
[3] Separate flush-mounted solar panels installed on a
building or structure with a sloped roof surface shall not
project vertically above the peak of the roof to which it is
attached.
[4] Solar panels mounted on a flat roof shall not project
vertically higher than the height of the parapet wall
surrounding the roof or shall be screened by architectural
features in accordance with § 285-19.6C(4).
(b) Flush-mounted solar panels on the building wall may only be
attached to one side or rear building facade and shall not face a
street.
(c) Roof-mounted panels shall be permitted on the roof of a
covered boat well, but freestanding solar panels shall not be
permitted over the water.
(2) Freestanding. Solar panels that are not attached to a building shall
be permitted as accessory structures subject to the following
regulations:
(a) Freestanding solar panels shall be permitted in the rear yard
only.
(b) Freestanding solar panels shall be setback six feet from the
side and rear lot line.
(c) Freestanding solar panels shall not exceed a height of four
feet.
(d) The surface area covered by a freestanding system shall not
exceed 2% of the lot or 360 square feet, whichever is less,
except as provided for in Subsection B(5) below. Area covered
shall be included in the lot coverage calculations for the lot.
285-19.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-19.23
1:861
(e) All power transmission lines shall be underground.
(f) Freestanding solar panels shall not be visible from adjacent
property and shall be screened by landscaping where
necessary.
(3) Glare. Solar panels shall be placed and arranged such that
reflected solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto adjacent
buildings, properties or roadways.
(4) Building permit. Solar energy systems shall conform to applicable
industry standards. A building permit shall be obtained for a solar
energy system in accordance with the Building and Electrical
Codes.
(5) Commercial solar array. In the A-1 Airport and Light Industrial
District, the Planning Commission may approve a site plan under
Article 21 for solar photovoltaic plants or arrays of photovoltaic
modules, mounted on buildings or ground mounted, developed for
commercial purposes.
(a) The solar array may be developed as a principal use on a lot
and shall not be subject to surface area limits of Subsection
B(2)(d) above.
(b) The solar array shall meet all dimensional and site design
requirements of the A-1 Airport and Light Industrial District.
(c) The solar array shall be designed to not create glare that would
be a hazard to aviation.
285-19.23 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-19.23
1:862
ARTICLE 20
Permits, Performance Guarantee and Enforcement
[Ord. No. 273, effective 8-29-1999]
285-20.1. Administrative regulations.
A. Scope of regulations. No structure or tract of land shall hereafter be
used or occupied, and no structure, or part thereof, shall be erected,
altered, or moved, except in conformity with the regulations specified
herein for the zoning district in which the structure or land is located.
However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been
issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this chapter,
or amendments thereof, and provided construction is begun within six
months of the effective date and diligently pursued toward completion,
said building or structure may be completed in accordance with the
approved plans. The applicant may be required to provide the Township
with evidence, visual or otherwise, demonstrating to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Administrator that work is being diligently pursued. Failure
to diligently work toward completion shall result in the loss of legal
nonconforming status unless good cause for the delay is accepted at a
hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. Furthermore, upon
completion of construction said building may be occupied under a
certificate of occupancy, as approved by the Building Official, for the
use for which the building was originally designated, subject thereafter
to the provisions of Article 18 concerning nonconformities. Any
subsequent text or map amendments shall not affect previously issued
valid permits.
B. Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety
and general welfare.
C. Nonabrogation of other ordinances or agreements. This chapter is not
intended to abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation, permit,
easement, covenant, or other private agreement previously adopted,
issued, or entered into and not in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter. However, where the regulations of this chapter are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than other such
ordinances, rules, regulations, permits, easements, covenants, or other
private agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall govern.
D. Vested right. Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed
to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any
particular use, district, zoning classification, or permissible activities
therein. Furthermore, such rights as may exist through enforcement of
this chapter are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent
amendment, change or modification as may be necessary for the
preservation or protection of public health, safety, and welfare.
E. Continued conformity with yard and bulk regulations. The maintenance
of yards and other open space and minimum lot area legally required
285-20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-20.1
1:863
285-20.2. Permit required.
285-20.3. Permits and certificates.
for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such
building or of the property on which it is located for as long as the
building is in existence.
F. Division of lots. No lot in any zoning district shall hereafter be divided
into two or more lots and no portion of any lot shall be sold unless all
lots resulting from each such division or sale conform to all applicable
regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located. Any
division of land shall require review and approval by the Township
under the provisions of § 285-19.21, Lot splits and consolidations,
Chapter 238, Subdivision Control, or Chapter 71, Condominium
Projects, as applicable.
G. Unlawful buildings, structures, site designs and uses. A building,
structure, or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of adoption
or amendment of this chapter shall not become or be made lawful solely
by reason of the adoption of this chapter. To the extent that an unlawful
building, structure, or use is in conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, said building, structure, or use remains unlawful hereunder.
H. Voting place. The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as
to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in
connection with a public election.
I. Conditions of approval. Any conditions placed upon an approval under
this chapter shall remain in effect for as long as the approval is valid.
Noncompliance with any conditions of approval shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful, without a permit, as approved by the Zoning
Division of the Community Development Department, to erect or
demolish any new building or structure, or to alter or repair any
existing building or structure, or to fill, excavate, regrade for drainage,
grub or clear-cut any lands, or dredge over or upon waterways in the
Township of Grosse Ile, including the Detroit River, canals, and other
waterways in the Township. Application for such permits shall be made
with the Community Development Department in accordance with
application rules and regulations as required and subject to the
provisions of this chapter and in particular this article as required
herein.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the littoral and
riparian rights of property owners. Any permit issued hereunder does
not authorize the violation of any subdivision restriction, deed
restriction or other private protective covenant as may apply to the
property, and such restrictions and covenants are only enforceable by
the property owners subject to the provisions of this chapter.
285-20.1 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-20.3
1:864
A. Scope of requirements. [Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-02]
(1) Building permit. A building permit shall be required prior to the
erection, alteration, repair, renovation, demolition or removal of
any building or structure regulated by the Building Code,83 and/or
the excavation, filling, grubbing, clearing or grading of lots. The
terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in
structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind
of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of ingress and egress, or
other changes affecting or regulated by the Township of Grosse Ile
Building Code or this chapter or other applicable ordinances of the
Township of Grosse Ile.
(2) Certificates of occupancy. No building, structure, land, or part
thereof shall be used, nor shall any existing use of any building,
structure, land, or part thereof be changed, unless a certificate of
occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. Temporary
certificates of occupancy can be issued in accordance with
Subsection C(5) of this section.
(3) Site plan and special land use permits. Certain uses require site
plan or special land use approval under the provisions of this
chapter. No building permit shall be issued under this article for
activities requiring site plan or special land use approval until such
time as site plan approval is issued by the Planning Commission
under Article 21 and a special land use permit is issued by the
Township Board under Article 22, as applicable.
B. Building and zoning compliance permits. The following guidelines shall
apply to the issuance of permits: [Amended 3-10-2003 by Ord. No.
03-02]
(1) Permit requirement. No building permit shall be issued for the
construction, moving, alteration or use of any building or structure
or part thereof regulated by the Building Code,84 or for the use of
any land, which is not in total compliance with the Township of
Grosse Ile Building Code or this chapter or other applicable
ordinances of the Township of Grosse Ile.
(2) Zoning compliance permit. A zoning compliance permit must be
obtained for certain buildings or structures listed below. The
permit shall be approved before the building or structure is
erected, altered, moved or repaired. The permit shall only be
granted for structures that will be in conformity with this chapter
and all other applicable ordinances. Such buildings and structures
include:
(a) Fences that are six feet or less in height.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-20.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-20.3
1:865
(b) One-story detached accessory buildings that have a floor area
of 200 square feet or less.
(c) Retaining walls that are less than four feet in height.
(3) Valid period of permits. A building permit or zoning compliance
permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire
one year from the date of issuance. The premises shall be inspected
on that date and the applicant notified of any violations. Failure to
correct violations or complete work in the time period specified by
the Building Official shall constitute a violation of this chapter,
subject to the penalties set forth in § 285-20.6. If construction has
not been completed within the one-year time frame, the applicant
may apply to the Community Development Department for a oneyear
extension. The application for an extension shall include a
construction schedule specifying the time frame for completion of
unfinished activities.
(4) Inspection of completed work. The holder of any building permit
shall notify the Grosse Ile Building Official upon completion of the
work authorized by the permit for the necessary inspection. If the
work inspected receives approval, an application shall be made to
the Building Department for a certificate of occupancy. All roads,
driveways and pathways damaged during construction shall be
restored to their original condition. Examples include cuts in
pavement for underground utility needs, crushing damage from
equipment and similar damages caused through construction
practice.
C. Certificate of occupancy. No land, building, structure, or part thereof
shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following guidelines
shall apply to the issuance of certificates of occupancy:
(1) General requirements. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for a building, structure, or part thereof, or for the use of any land,
only if such building, structure, or use is fully in accordance with
the Building Code,85 all provisions of this chapter, and all other
ordinances of the Township of Grosse Ile.
(2) Certificate required prior to use. No building or structure, or part
thereof, which is hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or
used unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued. A building
permit does not necessarily constitute compliance with the
requirements for a certificate of occupancy. Upon completion of the
work outlined by the permit, the premises must be inspected and a
certificate of occupancy issued.
(3) Certificates for accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings
and uses shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy but
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-20.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-20.3
1:866
may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the principal
use, provided the accessory buildings or uses are shown on the
plan drawing and are completed at the same time as the principal
use.
(4) Period of validity. A certificate of occupancy shall remain in effect
for the life of the building, structure, or part thereof, or use of the
land, until the use of the building, structure or land changes. A
change of use shall require a new certificate of occupancy.
(5) Temporary certificates. A temporary certificate of occupancy for a
portion of a building or structure in the process of construction,
erection, or alteration may be issued, provided that such portion of
the building, structure, or premises is in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter and the adopted Building Code,86 and
provided further that no threat to public safety exists. The Building
Official may require that a performance guarantee be provided in
accordance with § 285-20.5 as a condition of obtaining a temporary
certificate. Such temporary certificate may be issued for a period
not to exceed six months but may be renewed provided that
construction, erection, or alteration of the remaining portion of the
building or structure is proceeding without delay.
D. Application requirements. Applications for building permits and
certificates of occupancy shall be made on forms supplied by the
Community Development Department and accompanied by such fees as
may be specified. Applications for permits shall explicitly describe the
proposed work for which authorization is requested. All applications
shall be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale and in sufficient
detail to enable the Building Official to determine if the proposal is in
compliance with this chapter. Accordingly, the plot plan shall, at
minimum, provide the following information:
(1) The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot and, if the lot
is not a lot of record, a recorded survey, legal description and
parcel identification number;
(2) The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to
be erected, altered or moved, plus all existing buildings and
structures on the lot;
(3) The existing and intended use of the lot and of all structures upon
it;
(4) The location of all utilities serving the site, including water and
sanitary sewer;
(5) All road rights-of-way, easements and driveways;
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 40, Building Construction.
285-20.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-20.3
1:867
285-20.4. Fees.
Any application for an amendment to this chapter, site plan review, review
of a special land use proposal, building permit, certificate of occupancy,
request for a variance, or other request for other action pursuant to the
regulations set forth in this chapter shall be subject to and accompanied by
a fee as established by resolution of the Township Board. The assessment
and payment of application fees does not affect the requirements for a
performance guarantee as specified in § 285-20.5 herein.
285-20.5. Performance guarantee.
(6) Any woodlands, inventoried to meet the requirements of Chapter
282, Woodland and Tree Preservation, and any wetlands or natural
drainage courses, delineated to meet the requirements of Chapter
275, Wetlands and Drainageways, and conservation easements;
(7) Copies of any granted variances, deed restrictions or other
restrictive covenants;
(8) The Building Official may require a property survey where
proposed construction has the potential encroach into required
setbacks; and
(9) Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots or other
matters deemed necessary for determining compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Intent. To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any
conditions imposed by the Township Board, Zoning Board of Appeals,
Planning Commission or Community Development Department, the
Township may require that a performance guarantee be deposited with
the Township to ensure faithful completion of improvements.
[Amended 7-22-2002]
B. General requirements. The performance guarantee shall meet the
following requirements:
(1) The performance guarantee may be in the form of a cash deposit,
irrevocable letter of credit, certified check, cash escrow, or similar
instrument acceptable to the Township. If the applicant posts a
letter of credit, the credit shall require only that the Township
present the credit with a sight draft and an affidavit signed by the
Township Attorney attesting to the Township's right to draw funds
under the credit. If the applicant posts a cash escrow, the escrow
instructions shall provide that the escrow agent shall have a legal
duty to deliver the funds to the Township whenever the Township
Attorney presents an affidavit to the agent attesting to the
Township's right to receive funds, whether or not the applicant
protests that right.
285-20.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-20.5
1:868
285-20.6. Violations and penalties.
(2) The performance guarantee shall be submitted at the time of
issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. The
Township shall deposit the funds in an interest-bearing account in a
financial institution with which the Township regularly conducts
business.
(3) The amount of the performance guarantee shall be sufficient to
cover the estimated cost of the improvements associated with a
project for which site plan approval is sought, or a portion thereof
as specified by the Planning Commission. The applicant shall
provide an itemized schedule of estimated costs to complete all
such improvements. The exact amount of the performance
guarantee shall be determined by the Building Official.
(4) The entire performance guarantee, including interest accrued,
shall be returned to the applicant upon satisfactory and timely
completion of the required improvements. The applicant may
request that the performance guarantee be returned as work
progresses in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed
on the required improvements, provided that a minimum of 10%
shall be held back on each element until satisfactory completion of
the entire project.
(5) An amount not less than 10% of the total performance guarantee
may be retained for a period of at least one year after installation of
landscape materials to ensure proper maintenance and
replacement, if necessary. This amount shall be released to the
applicant upon certification by the Community Development
Department that all landscape materials are being maintained in
good condition.
C. Unsatisfactory completion of improvements. Whenever required
improvements are not installed or maintained in accordance with the
standards set forth in this chapter, the Township may complete the
necessary improvements itself or by contract to an independent
developer and assess all costs of completing said improvements against
the performance bond or other surety, including any interest accrued
on said bond or surety. Prior to completing said improvements, the
Township shall notify the owner, site plan review applicant and/or other
firm or individual responsible for completion of the required
improvements.
A. Nuisance per se. Buildings erected, altered, razed or converted or uses
carried on in violation of any provision of this chapter are hereby
declared to be a nuisance per se and shall be subject to abatement or
other action by a court of appropriate jurisdiction.
B. Violation. Any person, firm, corporation, or agent, or any employee,
contractor, or subcontractor of the same, who or which fails to comply
285-20.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-20.6
1:869
285-20.7. Records.
with any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the regulations
adopted in pursuance thereof, or who or which impedes or interferes
with the enforcement of this chapter by the Building Official or other
enforcement official, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
C. Inspection of violation. The Zoning Administrator shall inspect each
alleged violation and shall order correction, in writing, of all conditions
found to be in violation of this chapter. The order to correct a violation
shall be issued by serving personally or by sending, by registered mail,
return receipt requested, such order to the last known address of the
owner of the property upon which the violation occurs or, when
applicable, the violator. A party who has failed to accept such registered
mail shall be deemed to have been served.
D. Penalties. Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-3. The provisions of
Chapter 1, Article II, Municipal Civil Infractions, also apply to violations
of this chapter. Each act of violation and each day during which such
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition
of any sentence shall not exempt the offense from compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. [Amended 7-22-2002]
E. Authority to pursue court action. The Township Board or its duly
authorized representative is hereby empowered to commence and
pursue any and all necessary and appropriate actions or proceedings in
the Circuit Court, or any other court having jurisdiction, to restrain or
prevent any noncompliance with or violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter and to correct, remedy, or abate such noncompliance or
violation. Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by such
noncompliance or violation may institute suit or join the Township
Board in such a suit to abate the violation.
F. Other remedies. The rights and remedies set forth above shall not
preclude the use of other remedies provided by law, including any
additional rights of the Township to initiate proceedings in an
appropriate court of law to restrain or prevent any noncompliance with
any provisions of this chapter or to correct, remedy, or abate such
noncompliance.
G. Rights and remedies preserved. Any failure or omission to enforce the
provisions of this chapter, and failure or omission to prosecute any
violations of this chapter, shall not constitute a waiver of any rights and
remedies provided by this chapter or by law and shall not constitute a
waiver nor prevent any further prosecution of violations of this chapter.
A. The Grosse Ile Township Community Development Department or office
of the Zoning Administrator shall maintain all permanent and current
records of this chapter, including, but not necessarily limited to, all
285-20.6 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-20.7
1:870
maps, amendments, variances, appeals, special land uses, certificates
of occupancy and related applications.
B. Every rule or regulation, decision, finding of fact, condition of approval,
resolution, or other transaction of business of the Planning Commission
or Zoning Board of Appeals shall be duly recorded and filed in the
public records of the office of the Township Clerk. A copy of any
application, permit, certificate, transcript of a public meeting, or other
item of the public record may be obtained from the appropriate
Township office upon payment of copying costs.
285-20.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-20.7
1:871

ARTICLE 21
Site Plan Review
[Ord. No. 219, effective 8-27-1995]
285-21.1. Intent.
The site plan review procedures and standards set forth herein provide a
consistent and uniform method for review of proposed development plans to
ensure full compliance with the standards contained in this chapter, other
applicable local ordinances, standard engineering practices, and state and
federal laws. The procedures set forth herein are further intended to:
285-21.2. Applicability; project types.
A building permit shall not be issued until a site plan or sketch plan is
approved in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth herein
and all necessary review, inspection, and permit fees have been fully paid.
The extent of site plan review for various types of projects is classified into
four types in the table below (Table 21.1).
A. Achieve efficient use of the land;
B. Protect natural resources;
C. Minimize adverse impacts on adjoining or nearby properties;
D. Provide a mechanism for review of new development as well as
redevelopment of existing sites and to bring existing development into
compliance with current standards; and
E. Encourage cooperation and consultation between the Township and the
applicant to facilitate development in accordance with the Township's
land use objectives.
A. Exempt: select projects, such as single-family homes in an individual
lot, are exempt from site plan review given their relatively low level of
impact on adjacent land uses and given that compliance with applicable
zoning regulations can be addressed during the building permit review
process.
B. Full site plan: the most involved process for larger and more intense
projects, including most new developments and major expansions.
C. Sketch plan: smaller-scale projects and expansions or changes in use to
existing sites are permitted to provide less detailed information than a
full-scale site plan review. The level of information is intended to be
proportionate to the extent of the change and yet ensure adequate
review for compliance with applicable standards. Sketch plans shall
still undergo a formal review by the Planning Commission.
D. Administrative review: select smaller-scale projects and expansions or
changes in use to existing sites, which are required to provide a sketch
285-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.2
1:873
plan, do not require review by the Planning Commission but instead
shall undergo a formal review for approval by the Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator may confer with the Site Plan Review
Committee (SPRC).
E. Site Plan Review Committee: the SPRC shall consist of the Zoning
Administrator and the Planning Commission Chairperson, or the Chair's
designated representative. The Zoning Administrator may also include
other Township officials, staff and consultants as he/she deems
appropriate.
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.1
Table of Eligible Uses and Required Review Process
[Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
Required Review
Situation/Use
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan1
(PC)
Admin.
Review2
(SPRC) Exempt3
New Development:
Construction of 1 singlefamily
dwelling unit on 1 lot
in a residential zoning
district.
X
Construction of more than 1
principal residential building
on a single lot, such as site
condominiums.
X
Construction of any
nonresidential use or
building.
X
Establishment of special land
uses in all zoning districts,
except where specifically
noted elsewhere in this table.
X
Erection of cellular phone
towers and other
communication towers.
X
Construction of essential
public service buildings and
storage areas.
X
Golf courses and public/
private parks.
X4
285-21.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-21.2
1:874
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.1
Table of Eligible Uses and Required Review Process
[Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
Required Review
Situation/Use
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan1
(PC)
Admin.
Review2
(SPRC) Exempt3
Minor changes during
construction, such as changes
in landscape species to a
similar variety, realignment of
a driveway or road due to an
unanticipated and
documented constraint during
construction, or to improve
safety or protect natural
features.
X
Minor changes during
construction required by
outside agencies.
X
Expansions:
Expansion of 1 single-family
dwelling unit on 1 lot in a
residential zoning district.
X
An increase in the floor area
up to 1,000 square feet or
10% of the existing floor area,
whichever is less, based on
the cumulative total of the
proposed expansion and any
expansion within the last 5
years, as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
X
An increase in the floor area
greater than that specified
above.
X
An increase in parking or
loading area of up to 10% or
6,000 square feet of
pavement area without any
building changes.
X5
285-21.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.2
1:875
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.1
Table of Eligible Uses and Required Review Process
[Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
Required Review
Situation/Use
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan1
(PC)
Admin.
Review2
(SPRC) Exempt3
An increase in parking or
loading area over 10% or
6,000 square feet of
pavement area.
X5
Changes to building height
that do not add additional
floor area.
X
Changes In Use:
Any change in the use of land
or a building to a more
intensive use, in terms of
parking needs, noise, traffic
volumes, and similar impacts.
X
A change in use for a site that
does not comply with current
site design standards (such as
landscaping, signage, lighting
or drainage).
X
A change in use to a similar
or less intense use provided
the site shall not require any
significant changes in the
existing site facilities such as
parking, landscaping,
lighting, signs, bike paths or
sidewalks.
X
Improvements to outdoor
recreational uses and parks
that are permitted uses.
X
A change from a
nonconforming use, building
or site to a more conforming
situation.
X
285-21.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-21.2
1:876
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.1
Table of Eligible Uses and Required Review Process
[Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
Required Review
Situation/Use
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan1
(PC)
Admin.
Review2
(SPRC) Exempt3
Other Types of Projects:
Accessory open air
businesses.
X
Accessory buildings and
structures constructed or
erected accessory to a
permitted single-family
dwelling unit and those up to
100 square feet in area in
other districts.
X4
Accessory buildings and
structures greater than 100
square feet associated with a
non-single-family residential
use in any zoning district.
X
Accessory keeping of animals. X
Architectural changes to a
non-single-family residential
structure (an elevation plan
describing changes and
construction materials is
required).
X
Bike path, pathway or
sidewalk construction or
relocation.
X5
Construction of an entrance
feature associated with a nonsingle-
family residential use
(walls, landscaping, etc.).
X
Fences associated with a nonsingle-
family residential use,
installed or improved.
X5
285-21.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.2
1:877
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.1
Table of Eligible Uses and Required Review Process
[Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
Required Review
Situation/Use
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan1
(PC)
Admin.
Review2
(SPRC) Exempt3
Grading, excavation, filling,
soil removal, creation of
ponds or clearing of trees
within an area up to 100
square feet, provided such
activity is normally and
customarily incidental to
single-family uses on the site.
X6
Grading, excavation, filling,
soil removal, creation of
ponds or clearing of trees
other than that specified
above.
X5,6
Home occupations. X
Internal construction or
change in the floor plan that
does not increase gross floor
area, increase the intensity of
use or affect parking
requirements on a site which
meets all site design
standards of this chapter.
X
Landscape changes to similar
species and that are
consistent with the standards
of this chapter.
X
Modifications to upgrade a
non-single-family residential
building to improve barrierfree
design or to comply with
the Americans with
Disabilities Act or other
federal, state or county
regulations.
X
285-21.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-21.2
1:878
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.1
Table of Eligible Uses and Required Review Process
[Amended 4-19-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
Required Review
Situation/Use
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan1
(PC)
Admin.
Review2
(SPRC) Exempt3
Parking lot improvements,
provided the total number of
spaces shall remain constant.
X5
Residential care facilities
licensed by the state that
require special land use
approval.
X
Sign relocation or
replacement provided it
meets the dimensional and
location standards of this
chapter.
X
Site improvements such as
installation of walls, fences,
lighting or curbing consistent
with standards of this
chapter.
X
Temporary uses, sales and
seasonal events.
X
Utility system improvements. X5
Waste receptacle relocation
to a more inconspicuous
location or installation of
screening around the waste
receptacle.
X
Waterfront features as
specified in Article 17.
X7
285-21.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.2
1:879
285-21.3. Submission and review of site plans and sketch plans.
[Amended 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01]
Site plans and sketch plans must be submitted in accordance with the
following procedures and requirements:
NOTES:
1 Requires review and approval by the Planning Commission (see
§ 285-21.4).
2 May be reviewed by the Site Plan Review Committee (see §§ 285-21.2
and 285-21.4); the Zoning Administrator has authority for approval. If
the modifications are not deemed minor, then normal site plan review by
the Planning Commission shall be required. Planning Commission review
shall be required for all site plans that involve a request for a variance, a
special land use, or discretionary decisions.
3 A building permit is still required.
4 For a golf course, a general layout of holes, ball trajectory and natural
features is required; full site plan review is required for buildings,
structures and parking areas that illustrate the area around such
facilities.
5 Construction plans must be approved by the Township Engineer.
6 See also Chapter 282, Woodland and Tree Preservation, and Chapter 275,
Wetlands and Drainageways.
7 Waterfront permit applications that are reviewed by the Planning
Commission under § 285-17.4 shall also require sketch plan approval from
the Planning Commission.
A. Applicant attendance. The application shall be submitted by the owner
of an interest in the land for which site plan approval is sought, or the
designated agent of said owner. The applicant or a designated
representative must be present at all scheduled review meetings or
consideration of the plan shall be tabled due to lack of representation.
Absence at two consecutive meetings without prior notice to the Zoning
Administrator shall result in denial of the application. The Zoning
Administrator may recommend to the Planning Commission
Chairperson that the applicant's architect or engineer be required to be
present at the meeting in order to address technical matters related to
the application.
B. Preapplication meeting with Site Plan Review Committee. The
applicant may be required to schedule a meeting with the Site Plan
Review Committee to discuss the project, submittal requirements and
review procedures. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss applicable
standards and technical issues, and to determine the appropriate type
of review process based on Table 21.1. If the project is determined to be
eligible for Site Plan Review Committee approval, the procedures of
285-21.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-21.3
1:880
§ 285-21.4 shall be followed; in other cases, the process shall proceed
as described below.
C. Project introduction before the Planning Commission. The applicant
shall meet with the Planning Commission at a regularly scheduled
meeting. The purpose of this meeting is to allow the applicant to
introduce the site plan concept, and receive comments or direction
from the Planning Commission on the site plan or the need for
additional material needed to evaluate the impacts of the use, such as
traffic or environmental studies. No formal action shall be taken. The
applicant shall submit the following information at least 10 business
days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the item is
scheduled:
(1) Township review fee;
(2) The name and address of the owner and any designated
representative of the owner;
(3) Written description of the proposed use;
(4) Conceptual site plan, illustrating existing site features, lot
dimensions, general footprints for proposed buildings and parking,
and relationship to adjacent land uses; and
(5) A location map.
D. Final submittal. If site plan review is required, the applicant shall
submit 15 copies of the following to the Zoning Administrator. If sketch
plan review is required, the applicant shall submit nine copies of the
following to the Zoning Administrator.
(1) A complete application form supplied by the Township;
(2) A written description of the proposed project or use;
(3) Documentation that the applicant has submitted one copy of the
application plus two copies of the site plan to the Wayne County
Office of Public Services, the Wayne County Health Department
and all applicable public utility companies;
(4) Any additional information the Planning Commission finds
necessary to make the determinations required herein; and
(5) A complete site plan or sketch plan that includes the information
listed in § 285-21.5, Submittal requirements;
(6) A draft development agreement meeting the requirements of
§ 285-21.6, Standards for site plan approval.
E. Technical (staff) reviews. The Zoning Administrator shall forward the
application and site plan(s) to the Township Planner and Township
Engineer for review. The Department of Public Works, Fire Chief, Police
Chief, Building Department Manager, Road Committee and Natural
285-21.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.3
1:881
Resources Committee, if applicable as determined by the Zoning
Administrator or Planning Commission, shall also review the
application. The reviews shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.
F. Technical review conference. The Zoning Administrator may schedule a
conference with applicable consultants and departments which
reviewed the submittal information. The applicant may be permitted to
attend the conference. The Zoning Administrator may waive this
conference upon a finding that the various reviews are consistent. The
technical reviews may be revised and resubmitted following the
conference.
G. Agency approvals. The applicant shall be required to obtain all other
necessary agency permits from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Michigan Department of Natural Resources, the Wayne County Office of
Public Services, the Wayne County Health Department, and all
applicable utility companies. Copies of applications and approvals from
all applicable outside agencies shall accompany submission of the
application and final site plan to the Township.
H. Planning Commission consideration. Following technical review and
comment, and compliance with administrative procedures, the site plan
shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall review the application for site plan review,
together with the reports and recommendations from the Zoning
Administrator, Township Planner, Township Engineer, Department of
Public Works, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Building Department Manager,
Road Committee and other reviewing agencies, as appropriate. The
Planning Commission shall then make a determination based solely on
the requirements and standards of this chapter. The Planning
Commission is authorized to table, grant approval, approval subject to
revisions, or denial as follows:
(1) Table. The application may be tabled if it is determined to be
incomplete, the applicant has not fully responded to deficiencies
identified in the technical review, an ordinance interpretation or
variance is needed from the Zoning Board of Appeals, or that
revisions are necessary to bring the site plan into compliance with
applicable standards and regulations. The Planning Commission
shall direct the applicant to prepare additional information, revise
the site plan or direct the Township staff to conduct additional
analysis. The applicant shall be required to prepare revised plans
accompanied by a complete list of all changes, certified by the
applicant's design professional. Amended plans or other materials
which show a diligent effort to address all reasons for tabling, as
determined by the Planning Commission Chair or designee, shall be
placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission for further
review and action.
285-21.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-21.3
1:882
(2) Approval. Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance with
the standards and requirements of this chapter and other
applicable ordinances and laws, approval shall be granted subject
to the applicant providing copies of all required outside agency
approvals.
(3) Approval subject to revisions. Upon determination that a site plan
is in compliance except for minor revisions, said revisions shall be
identified and the applicant shall be given the opportunity to
correct the site plan prior to applying for a building permit. The
applicant shall resubmit the site plan, accompanied by a complete
list of all changes, certified by the applicant's design professional,
to the Planning Commission for final approval after said revisions
have been completed. At its discretion, the Planning Commission
may waive its right to review the revised site plan, and instead
authorize the Township Zoning Administrator to review and
approve the resubmitted plan if all required revisions have been
addressed and copies of any permits required by outside agencies
have been provided. The Planning Commission may set a maximum
time frame, not to exceed 90 days, for plans containing all required
revisions to be resubmitted to the Township Zoning Administrator.
If all required revisions are not submitted within the maximum time
frame set, Planning Commission approval shall become null and
void.
(4) Denial of approval. Upon determination that a site plan does not
comply with standards and regulations set forth in this chapter,
requires extensive revision in order to comply with said standards
and regulations, or the applicant has not satisfactorily addressed
all reasons for site plan tabling, site plan approval shall be denied.
The applicant must revise the plans and resubmit if the applicant is
still interested in pursuing the project. A resubmittal shall be
considered a new site plan and be required to re-initiate the full
site plan review process. Any person aggrieved by the decision of
the Planning Commission in denial of a site plan shall have the right
to appeal the decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
I. Recording of site plan review action.
(1) Each action taken with reference to a site plan review shall be duly
recorded in the minutes of the Planning Commission's meeting. The
grounds for action taken upon each site plan shall also be recorded
in the minutes. After action has been taken, one copy of the
application and site plan(s), signed by the Secretary of the Planning
Commission or designee, shall be transmitted to each of the
following:
(a) The applicant, along with a written transmittal of the grounds
of action and any conditions of approval;
(b) The Planning Commission's files; and
285-21.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.3
1:883
(c) The Building Department files, if appropriate.
(2) The development agreement meeting the requirements of
§ 285-21.7, Conditions to site plan approval, shall be revised based
upon Township review and the final agreement executed by the
applicant with a copy provided to the Township.
J. Engineering review. Following Planning Commission approval of a site
plan, the Township Engineer shall make a full review of the engineering
plans. A building permit shall not be issued until the Township Engineer
issues final approval of the engineering plans. The Township Engineer
will take one of the following actions on the engineering plans:
(1) Require revisions. If the engineering plans do not meet Township
engineering standards, the applicant shall be directed to revise the
plans.
(2) Approval. Upon determination that the engineering plans comply
with Township engineering standards, approval shall be granted by
Township Engineer.
(3) Refer site plan back to Planning Commission. Upon determination
that the engineering plans do not comply with Township
engineering standards and would require revision to the extent
that the site plan configuration approved by the Planning
Commission would be altered, the applicant shall be required to
revise the site plan and engineering plans and resubmit the site
plan to the Planning Commission for review and approval as an
amended site plan.
K. Completion of site design.
(1) Following final approval of the site plan or sketch plan and final
approval of the engineering plans by the Township Engineer and
Building Department, a building permit may be obtained. It shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all other applicable
Township, county, or state permits prior to issuance of a building
permit.
(2) If construction has not commenced within one year of site plan or
sketch plan approval by the Planning Commission or the Zoning
Administrator (as applicable), approval becomes null and void and
a new application for site plan or sketch plan review shall be
required. The applicant may request a one-year extension by the
Planning Commission, provided that a written request is received
before the expiration date and the site plan complies with current
standards (i.e., any amendments to the Zoning Chapter since the
site plan was approved).
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property for which
site plan approval has been granted to maintain the property in
accordance with the approved site design on a continuing basis
285-21.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-21.3
1:884
285-21.4. Administrative plan review.
For uses and projects eligible for administrative review, as identified in
Table 21.1, the following procedure shall apply:
285-21.5. Submittal requirements.
The following data shall be included with and as part of the site plan(s) or
sketch plan(s) submitted for review:
until the property is razed, or until new zoning regulations
supersede the regulations upon which site approval was based, or
until a new site design approval is sought. Any property owner
who fails to maintain an approved site design shall be deemed in
violation of the applicable use provisions of this chapter and shall
be subject to penalties.
A. Submittal requirements. Five copies of the sketch plan that contains the
information listed in § 285-21.3D shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.
B. Review by Site Plan Review Committee. If the submittal is deemed to be
complete by the Zoning Administrator, the plan shall be reviewed by the
Site Plan Review Committee. The Site Plan Review Committee shall
confine its review to the proposed alterations only, rather than review of
the entire building or layout. Following receipt of requested technical
(staff) reviews and Site Plan Review Committee comments, the Zoning
Administrator shall either approve the sketch plan, approve the sketch
plan with a condition that certain revisions be made, or deny the sketch
plan.
C. Appeal. Both the Site Plan Review Committee and the applicant shall
have the option to request sketch plan review by the Planning
Commission.
D. Recording of approved sketch plan. A notice of sketch plan approval
shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission, along with a list of any
conditions on the approval. Thereafter, the approval shall be recorded
as described in § 285-21.3I.
E. Issuance of building permit. A building permit shall be issued following
review and approval of any construction plans by the Department of
Community Development and Township Engineer, as appropriate.
285-21.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.5
1:885
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.5
Submittal Requirements
Required for
Site Plan Data
Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan
A.pplication form: The application form shall contain
the following information:
Name and address of the applicant and property owner; X X
Address and common description of property and
complete legal description;
X X
Dimensions of land and total acreage; X X
Zoning on the site and all adjacent properties; X X
Description of proposed project or use, type of building
or structures, and name of proposed development, if
applicable;
X X
Name and address of firm or individual who or which
prepared site plan; and
X X
Proof of property ownership. X X
SBi.te plan descriptive and identification data:
Site plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire
development, drawn to an engineer's scale of not less
than 1 inch equals 50 feet for property less than 3
acres, or 1 inch equals 100 feet for property 3 acres or
more in size. Sheet size shall be at least 24 inches by 36
inches. If a large development is shown in sections on
multiple sheets, then one overall composite sheet shall
be included;
X X
Title block with sheet number/title; name, address and
telephone number of the applicant and firm or
individual who or which prepared the plans; and date(s)
of submission and any revisions (month, day, year);
X X
Scale and North point; X X
Location map drawn to a separate scale with North
point, showing surrounding land, water features, zoning
and streets within a quarter mile;
X —
Legal and common description of property; X X
Identification and seal of architect, engineer, land
surveyor, or landscape architect who prepared
drawings;
X —
285-21.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-21.5
1:886
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.5
Submittal Requirements
Required for
Site Plan Data
Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan
Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all
abutting parcels;
X X
Proximity to section corner and major thoroughfares;
and
X —
Net acreage (minus rights-of-way) and total acreage. X X
SCi.te data:
Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking
areas and other improvements on the site and within
100 feet of the site;
X X
On parcels of more than 1 acre, topography on the site
and within 100 feet of the site at two-foot contour
intervals, referenced to a USGS benchmark;
X —
Proposed lot lines, lot dimensions, property lines,
setback dimensions, structures, and other
improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the
site;
X X
Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes
and streams, and wetlands with elevations;
X X
All existing and proposed easements; X X
Location of exterior lighting (site and building lighting); X —
Location of trash receptacle(s) and transformer pad(s)
and method of screening;
X X
Extent of any outdoor sales or display area; and
An environmental impact report, prepared by the
applicant in accordance with Chapter 98,
Environmental Assessment, of the Grosse Ile Municipal
Code.
X —
ADc. cess and circulation:
Dimensions, curve radii and center lines of existing and
proposed access points, roads and road rights-of-way or
access easements;
X X
Opposing driveways and intersections within 250 feet of
site;
X —
285-21.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.5
1:887
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.5
Submittal Requirements
Required for
Site Plan Data
Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan
Cross-section details of proposed roads, driveways,
parking lots, sidewalks and nonmotorized paths
illustrating materials and thickness;
X —
Dimensions of acceleration, deceleration, and passing
lanes;
X —
Dimensions of parking spaces, islands, circulation aisles
and loading zones;
X X
Calculations for required number of parking and
loading spaces;
X X
Designation of fire lanes; X X
Traffic regulatory signs and pavement markings; X —
Location of existing and proposed sidewalks/pathways
within the site or right-of-way;
X X
Location, height, and outside dimensions of all storage
areas and facilities.
X X
LEa. ndscape plans:
Location, sizes, and types of existing trees 6 inches or
greater in diameter, measured at 3.5 feet off the
ground, and the general location of all other existing
plant materials, with an identification of materials to be
removed and materials to be preserved;
X X
Description of methods to preserve existing
landscaping;
X —
The location of existing and proposed lawns and
landscaped areas;
X X
Landscape plan, including location and type of all
proposed shrubs, trees, and other live plant material;
X —
Planting list for proposed landscape materials with
caliper size or height of material, method of installation,
botanical and common names, and quantity;
X —
Proposed dates of plant installation; and X —
Landscape maintenance schedule. X —
FB.uilding and structure details:
Location, height, and outside dimensions of all proposed
buildings or structures;
X X
285-21.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-21.5
1:888
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.5
Submittal Requirements
Required for
Site Plan Data
Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan
Building floor plans and total floor area; X —
Details on accessory structures and any screening; X —
Size, height and method of shielding for all site and
building lighting;
X —
Location, size, height, and lighting of all proposed site
and wall signs;
X X
Location, size, height and material of construction for
all obscuring wall(s) or berm(s) with cross sections,
where required;
X X
Building facade elevations for all sides, drawn at an
appropriate scale; and
X —
Description of exterior building materials and colors
(samples may be required).
X —
IGn.formation concerning utilities, drainage and
related issues:
Location of sanitary sewers and septic systems, existing
and proposed;
X —
Location and size of existing and proposed water mains,
well sites, water service, storm sewer loads, and fire
hydrants;
X —
Stormwater drainage and retention/detention
calculations;
X X
Indication of site grading, drainage patterns and other
stormwater management measures;
X X
Stormwater retention and detention ponds, including
grading, side slopes, depth, high water elevation,
volume and outfalls;
X X
Location and size of underground storm sewers and
drains;
X X
Location of above- and below-ground gas, electric and
telephone lines, existing and proposed;
X —
Location of transformers and utility boxes; and X —
Assessment of potential impacts from the use,
processing, or movement of hazardous materials or
chemicals, if applicable.
X —
285-21.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.5
1:889
Township of Grosse Ile
Table 21.5
Submittal Requirements
Required for
Site Plan Data
Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan
AHd. ditional information required for multiplefamily
residential development:
The number and location of each type of residential unit
(1-bedroom units, 2-bedroom units, etc.);
X —
Density calculations by type of residential unit (dwelling
units per acre);
X —
Garage and/or carport locations and details, if
proposed;
X —
Mailbox clusters; X —
Location, dimensions, floor plans and elevations of
common building(s) (e.g., recreation, laundry, etc.), if
applicable;
X —
Swimming pool fencing detail, including height and type
of fence, if applicable;
X —
Location and size of recreation and open space areas;
and
X —
Indication of type of recreation facilities proposed for
recreation area.
X —
GENERAL NOTES:
If any of the items listed above are not applicable, the following information
should be provided on the site plan:
1. A list of each item considered not applicable; and
2. The reason(s) why each listed item is not considered applicable.
285-21.6. Standards for site plan approval.
Site plan approval shall be granted only if the site plan meets all applicable
standards set forth in this chapter as outlined below:
A. Adequacy of information. The site plan shall include all required
information in sufficiently complete and understandable form to
provide an accurate description of the proposed use(s) and structure(s).
B. Site design characteristics. All elements of the site design shall be
harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, the
size and type of lot, the character of adjoining property, and the type
and size of buildings. The site shall be developed so as not to impede
285-21.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-21.6
1:890
the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding
property for uses permitted by this chapter. The site shall be designed
to conform to all provisions of this chapter. Redevelopment of existing
sites shall be brought into conformance with all site improvement
provisions of this chapter which are relative to and proportionate to the
extent of redevelopment, as determine by the Planning Commission.
C. Buildings. Buildings and structures will meet or exceed setback
standards, and height and other dimensional standards, and be placed
to preserve environmentally sensitive areas. Redevelopment of existing
structures shall meet or exceed all standards for which a variance has
not been obtained.
D. Preservation of natural areas. The landscape shall be preserved in its
natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil
removal, alteration to the natural drainage courses, and the amount of
cutting, filling and grading. Insofar as practical, natural features and
the site topography shall be incorporated into the proposed site design.
E. Privacy. The site design shall provide reasonable visual and sound
privacy for dwelling units located therein and adjacent thereto. Fences,
walks, barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the
protection and enhancement of property and the privacy of its
occupants.
F. Emergency vehicle access. All buildings or groups of buildings shall be
arranged so as to permit emergency vehicle access by some practicable
means to all vehicles.
G. Ingress and egress. Every structure or dwelling unit shall be provided
with adequate means of ingress and egress via public streets and
walkways.
H. Pedestrian circulation. The site plan shall provide a pedestrian
circulation system which is insulated as completely as is reasonably
possible from the vehicular circulation system.
I. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation layout. The arrangement of public
or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall respect
the pattern of existing or planned streets and pedestrian or bicycle
pathways in the area. The width of streets and drives shall be
appropriate for the volume of traffic they will carry.
J. Drainage. Stormwater management systems and facilities shall
preserve the natural drainage characteristics and enhance the
aesthetics of the site to the maximum extent possible and shall not
substantially reduce or increase the natural retention or storage
capacity of any wetland, water body, or watercourse or cause
alterations which could increase flooding or water pollution on or off
the site.
285-21.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.6
1:891
285-21.7. Conditions to site plan approval. [Added 1-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-01]
K. Soil erosion. The proposed development shall include measures to
prevent soil erosion and sedimentation.
L. Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall be designed so that it is
deflected away from adjacent properties and so that it does not impede
the vision of drivers on public streets.
M. Public services. The scale and design of the proposed development shall
facilitate the adequate provision of services currently furnished by or
that may be required of the Township or other public agency, including
but not limited to fire and police protection, stormwater management,
sanitary sewage removal and treatment, traffic control and
administrative services.
N. Traffic impact. The expected volume of traffic to be generated by the
proposed use shall not adversely impact existing roads and the
circulation thereon or access to or from the Township via the two
bridges.
O. Hazardous materials. Sites which include storage of hazardous
materials or waste, fuels, salt, or chemicals shall be designed to prevent
spills and discharges of polluting materials to the surface of the ground,
groundwater or nearby surface water bodies. Such sites shall be
designed to meet all applicable state and federal regulations.
A. The Township shall prepare a written development agreement
specifying all the terms and understandings of the site plan approval,
which shall be signed by the applicant and recorded with the Township
as a condition of approval. The content of the agreement shall be based
on the extent of the proposed development, but shall at a minimum
provide the following:
(1) A legal description for the site.
285-21.6 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-21.7
1:892
(2) General description of any improvements to infrastructure,
including sidewalks, roads or utilities.
(3) Agreement to protect and maintain any landscaping, natural
features or open space areas designated on the site plan.
(4) Agreement to comply with all conditions of site plan approval.
(5) The approved site plan shall be incorporated by reference and
attached as an exhibit.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property for which site
plan approval has been granted to maintain the property in accordance
with the approved site design on a continuing basis until the property is
razed, or a new site design is approved. This maintenance requirement
includes landscaping, walls, fences, pedestrian pathways, sidewalks,
pavement, building exterior, drainage facilities and all other elements
of the approved site plan.
C. Any property owner who fails to properly maintain an approved site
plan and site design shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and the
approved site plan and shall be subject to the penalties appropriate for
the violation.
D. Any site plan subsequently submitted for a future expansion or site
improvement shall be subject to the applicable requirements of the
Zoning Chapter at that time. Where the terms of a previous
development agreement are superseded by new regulations,
compliance with the new Zoning Chapter shall be required. In
reviewing new site plans for a previously approved site, the Planning
Commission may amend previous development agreements based upon
changes to ordinances, site conditions or expansions to the
development.
285-21.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-21.7
1:893

ARTICLE 22
Special Land Use Review
[Ord. No. 220, effective 8-27-1995]
285-22.1. Intent.
Special land uses are uses considered to be more intense, or potentially
more disruptive, compared to the various uses in a particular zoning district
which are permitted by right. The uses classified as special land uses vary
by district and are listed in the regulations of each zoning district.
A. The procedures and standards set forth herein are intended to:
(1) Accommodate uses which are needed and beneficial to the
Township but need to be carefully located due to their potential
impacts;
(2) Provide a consistent and uniform method for review of proposed
special land uses;
(3) Provide a mechanism for public input on decisions involving more
intense land uses;
(4) Ensure full compliance with the standards contained in this chapter
and other applicable local ordinances and state and federal laws;
(5) Regulate the use of land operations and site design based on the
characteristics of a particular use;
(6) Achieve efficient use of the land;
(7) Ensure impacts associated with a specific use can be
accommodated within the environmental capacities of the
impacted area;
(8) Provide site design and operational standards to minimize any
negative impact on adjoining or nearby properties; and
(9) Establish procedures for expansion or change in use of a special
land use for both uses which have received special land use
approval and those which existed prior to the adoption of special
land use review procedures.
B. These provisions encourage cooperation and consultation between the
Township and the applicant to facilitate development in accordance
with the Township's land use objectives. An approved special land use
shall be considered a conforming use permitted in the district at the
specific site where it is located.
285-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-22.2
1:895
285-22.2. Submittal requirements and review procedures.
[Amended by Ord. No. 277, effective 9-27-1999; 11-13-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-07]
The procedures and requirements listed below shall apply during the review
of special land use proposals. (See flow chart, Figure 22.1, at the end of this
chapter.)
A. Applicant attendance. The applicant or a designated representative
must be present at all scheduled review meetings or consideration of
the special land use and site plan may be tabled. Any need to
readvertise a public hearing due to absence or a requested tabling shall
be funded by the applicant. Absence at two consecutive meetings
without prior notice to the Zoning Administrator shall result in denial of
the application.
B. Administrative preapplication meeting. The applicant shall schedule a
meeting with the Zoning Administrator to discuss the project, submittal
requirements and review procedures. The Zoning Administrator may
involve the Township officials, Township staff or consultants at the
meeting, as deemed appropriate.
C. Process selection. The Zoning Administrator shall determine if a
conceptual review of the proposed special land use is necessary prior to
a final submittal (i.e., whether the next step is Subsection D or
Subsection G). In making such a determination, the Zoning
Administrator shall consider:
(1) The current use of the site;
(2) The existing natural features on the site;
(3) The size of the proposed use and the site;
(4) The type of adjacent land uses; and
(5) The anticipated impacts associated with the proposed use in terms
of traffic, noise, dust, odors, hours of operation, aesthetics and
need for municipal services.
D. Conceptual plan submittal. If the Zoning Administrator determines a
review of the conceptual plan is appropriate, the applicant shall submit
the following information:
(1) Application form and review fee;
(2) Written description of the proposed use; and
(3) A conceptual site plan illustrating existing site features, lot
dimensions, general footprints for proposed buildings and parking,
and relationship to adjacent land uses.
E. Conceptual plan, technical (staff) review. The Zoning Administrator
shall distribute the conceptual plan submittal information to
285-22.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-22.2
1:896
appropriate Township staff and consultants for written technical
reviews. The Zoning Administrator shall distribute the technical
reviews to the Planning Commission and the applicant.
F. Conceptual plan, review by Planning Commission. The applicant shall
meet with the Planning Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting.
The purpose of this meeting is to allow the applicant to present the
concept, and receive comments or direction from the Planning
Commission on the site plan or the need for additional information
needed to evaluate the impacts of the use, such as a traffic or
environmental study. No formal action shall be taken.
G. Final submittal. The owner of an interest in land for which special land
use approval is sought, or the designated agent of said owner, shall
submit 15 copies of the following to the Zoning Administrator:
(1) A complete application form supplied by the Township;
(2) Township review fee;
(3) Written information describing the special land use;
(4) A written description regarding compliance with the standards of
§ 285-22.3, Standards for granting special land use approval;
(5) Documentation that the applicant has submitted one copy of the
application plus two copies of the site plan to the Wayne County
Office of Public Services, the Wayne County Health Department
and all applicable public utility companies;
(6) Any additional information the Planning Commission finds
necessary to make the determinations required herein; and
(7) A complete site plan meeting the requirements of Article 21, Site
Plan Review.
H. Technical (staff) reviews. The Zoning Administrator shall forward the
application to the Township Planner for review. The Department of
Public Works, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Township Engineer, Building
Department Manager, Road Committee and Natural Resources
Committee, if applicable, shall also review the application. The reviews
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator.
I. Technical review conference. The Zoning Administrator shall schedule
a conference with applicable consultants and departments which
reviewed the submittal information. The applicant may be permitted to
attend the conference. The Zoning Administrator may waive this
conference upon a finding that the various reviews are consistent. The
technical reviews may be revised and resubmitted following the
conference or submittal of a revised application. An application shall
not be forwarded to the Planning Commission until all required
technical information is provided.
285-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-22.2
1:897
J. Planning Commission public hearing. Following the technical review
process, the Planning Commission shall schedule and conduct a public
hearing to review the request in accordance with the following
procedures:
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall publish a notice of public hearing
on the request for special land use approval in accordance with
§ 285-24.6 and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of
2006.
(2) The Planning Commission shall conduct the required public
hearing. The purpose of the public hearing is for the Planning
Commission and the applicant to receive public comment on the
special land use application. The Planning Commission shall not
take action at the same meeting when the public hearing is
conducted unless there is a specific finding that all review
standards are met and no conditions are necessary for the
recommendation to the Township Board.
(3) Following the public hearing the applicant shall submit revised
plans and a document which point- by-point addresses each issue,
as directed by the Planning Commission, within 120 days or the
application shall be considered null and void.
K. Planning Commission recommendation on special land use.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review the special land use
application in consideration of public hearing comments, technical
reviews from Township staff and consultant's correspondence from
applicable review agencies, and compliance with the standards of
§ 285-22.3 and other applicable standards of this chapter. The
Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the
Township Board to approve, approve with conditions or deny the
request. If the application is determined to be incomplete or more
information is required, then the Planning Commission may either:
(a) Table the request and direct the applicant to prepare
additional information or revise the plan;
(b) Return the request for another technical review conference, or
direct the Township staff to conduct additional analysis; or
(c) Recommend denial of the request.
(2) If the revised plans are determined to be significant by the
Planning Commission, it may elect to conduct another public
hearing. If the Planning Commission recommends approval with
conditions, a list of conditions shall be sent to the applicant by
certified mail, return receipt requested. If conditions are imposed,
plans or other information illustrating compliance with the
conditions shall be submitted and approved by staff prior to the
application being submitted to the Township Board.
285-22.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-22.2
1:898
L. Site plan approval. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan
for the special land use under the provisions of Article 21, Site Plan
Review. Site plan review may be conducted simultaneously with special
land use review. The Planning Commission shall take one of the
following actions on the site plan:
(1) Table the special land use if the site plan is deficient;
(2) Table the site plan to await action of the Township Board on the
special land use; or
(3) Grant approval with the condition that the special land use is
approved by the Township Board.
M. Township Board action. Following receipt of the Planning Commission's
recommendation, the special land use shall be considered by the
Township Board. The Township Board shall take one of the following
actions on the request.
(1) Table. If the application is determined to be insufficient, does not
fully respond to Planning Commission issues or more information is
required, then the request may be tabled. The Township Board
shall direct the applicant to prepare additional information, revise
the plan or direct the Township staff to conduct additional analysis.
(2) Reconsideration. If the Township Board believes there is new
information which might modify the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, the Board may return the application with
the new information to the Planning Commission for
reconsideration. The Planning Commission shall provide a
recommendation within 30 days.
(3) Approval. Upon determination that a special land use proposal is in
compliance with the standards and requirements of this chapter
and other applicable ordinances and laws, the Township Board
shall approve the application.
(4) Conditional approval. The Township Board may impose reasonable
conditions with the approval of a special land use, in accordance
with the following:
(a) Conditions imposed shall be considered a valid exercise of the
police power to mitigate impacts associated with the proposed
use or activity to achieve the following:
[1] Ensure that public services and facilities affected by a
proposed special land use or activity will be capable of
accommodating increased service and facility loads
generated by the new development;
[2] Protect the natural environment;
285-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-22.2
1:899
[3] Ensure reasonable compatibility with adjacent uses of land
and the overall character of the Township, to the extent
practical for the use; or
[4] Meet the intent and purpose of this chapter and the
particular zoning district.
(b) Conditions of any approval are attached to the land and will
remain through subsequent owners, except an expiration date
for the special land use may be specified if the special land use
is considered to be temporary in nature.
(c) A listing of conditions shall be sent to the applicant by
registered mail, return receipt requested. The applicant shall
submit a revised site plan or other information that
demonstrates compliance with the conditions for
administrative approval by the Zoning Administrator within 60
days of the date of conditional approval and prior to issuance of
a building permit or the submission shall be considered null
and void. The Zoning Administrator may submit the revised
site plan to the Planning Commission for comments or
approval.
(5) Denial of special land use application. Upon determination that a
special land use proposal does not comply with standards and
regulations set forth in this chapter, or requires extensive revision
in order to comply with said standards and regulations, the
Township Board shall deny the application. Resubmittal of an
application which was denied shall be considered a new
application.
N. Recording of Township Board action. Each action taken with reference
to a special land use proposal shall be duly recorded in the minutes of
the Township Board. The grounds for action taken upon each proposal
shall also be recorded in the minutes. After action has been taken, one
copy of the application and site plan(s) shall be transmitted to each of
the following:
(1) The applicant, along with a written transmittal of the grounds for
action and/or conditions of approval;
(2) The Planning Commission's files; and
(3) The Building Department's files.
O. Effect of approval. Any special land use approval shall run with the land
in perpetuity, unless the use is specifically determined to be temporary
in nature or the use is discontinued. The special land use approval shall
apply only to the land area contained within the parcel, lot,
condominium unit, or other legally defined location for which the
special land use approval was granted.
285-22.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-22.2
1:900
P. Variances. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have authority with
regard to special land uses as follows:
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have authority to grant
dimensional or site design variances, provided that such standards
are not conditions of special land use approval. If dimensional or
site design variances are requested for a special land use, the
request shall first be reviewed by the Planning Commission, which
shall provide a recommendation to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Any variances shall be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals
prior to Planning Commission action on the site plan or special land
use, as applicable. The Zoning Board of Appeals may deny a
variance upon a finding, with a recommendation from the Planning
Commission, that the variance would be contrary to the special
land use standards in § 285-22.3.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to reverse
or modify the Township Board or Planning Commission decision to
approve or deny a special land use permit.
(3) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have authority to grant
variances to any special land use standards or conditions of special
land use approval.
Q. Building permits. Following final approval of the special land use, and
site plan, the applicant shall submit engineering plans to the Township
Engineer and Building Department. The applicant shall also obtain all
other applicable Township, county or state permits. The Building
Department shall issue a building permit once all required approvals
and permits are granted.
R. Completion of site design. If construction has not commenced within
one year of final site plan approval, the special land use and site plan
approvals become null and void and a new application for special land
use review shall be required. The applicant may apply to the Planning
Commission for a one-year extension of the special land use and site
plan one time. Such a request shall only be considered if made in
writing by the applicant prior to the expiration date of the approval.
Such an extension shall only be granted if the applicant provides
evidence that the use and site plan has a reasonable likelihood to be
established during the one-year extension period. The applicant may be
required by the Zoning Administrator to submit a new site plan if the
Planning Commission finds there have been applicable amendments to
this chapter since the special land use was approved.
S. Maintenance. The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance
of the property in accordance with the approved site design on a
continuing basis until the property is razed, or until new zoning
regulations supersede the regulations upon which approval was based,
or until a new use or site plan is approved. Any property owner who
285-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-22.2
1:901
285-22.3. Standards for granting special land use approval.
A special land use proposal shall be approved by resolution that the
proposed use will comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter,
including site plan review criteria set forth in Article 21, Site Plan Review,
applicable standards for specific uses, and all of the following standards:
fails to maintain an approved site design shall be deemed in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
T. Inspections. The Zoning Administrator may make periodic
investigations of developments authorized by special land use permit to
determine continued compliance with all requirements imposed by the
Planning Commission and this chapter.
A. Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed special land use shall
be compatible with and in accordance with the general principles and
objectives of the Township's Master Plan and shall promote the intent
and purpose of this chapter.
B. Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed special land use shall
be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be compatible
with existing or planned uses on surrounding land. In determining
whether a special land use will be compatible and not create a
significant detrimental impact, as compared to the impacts of permitted
uses, consideration shall be given to the degree of impact the special
land use may have on adjacent property, as compared with the expected
value to the community. The following types of impacts shall be
considered:
(1) Use activities, processes, materials, equipment, or conditions of
operation;
(2) Vehicular circulation and parking areas;
(3) Outdoor activity, storage and work areas;
(4) Hours of operation;
(5) Production of traffic, noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, odors, dust,
glare, and light;
(6) Impacts on adjacent property values; and
(7) The relative ease by which the impacts above will be mitigated.
C. Impact of traffic on the street system. The location and design of the
proposed special land use shall minimize the negative impact on the
street system in consideration of items such as vehicle trip generation
(i.e., volumes), types of traffic, access location and design, circulation
and parking design, street and bridge capacity, traffic operations at
proposed access points, and traffic operations at nearby intersections
and access points. The Township may require mitigation to maintain the
285-22.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-22.3
1:902
285-22.4. Amendments, expansions and changes in use.
preexisting traffic operations. Route and operational restrictions (such
as hours, cleaning of dust or debris) may be established for
construction traffic to minimize negative impacts. The Township may
require submittal of a traffic impact study to ensure compliance with
this standard. Such a traffic study shall be in accordance with standard
practices and procedures and prepared by a qualified traffic
professional.
D. Impact on the overall environment. The proposed special land use shall
not have an unacceptable significant adverse effect on the quality of the
natural environment in comparison to the impacts associated with
typical permitted uses. This determination shall be made in
consideration with other ordinances (Chapter 282, Woodland and Tree
Preservation, and Chapter 275, Wetlands and Drainageways). The
Planning Commission may require a quantitative comparison of the
impacts of typical permitted uses and the special use to assist in making
this determination (such as an overlay of conceptual development
plans, on a natural features map, illustrating other site development
options to demonstrate that the impacts have been minimized to the
extent practical). If the cumulative impact creates or contributes to a
significant environmental problem, mitigation shall be provided to
alleviate the impacts associated with the requested use (i.e., ensure the
end result is at least similar to the preexisting conditions).
E. Compliance with standards of this chapter. The proposed special land
use shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to meet
the stated intent of the zoning district.
F. Public services. The proposed special land use shall be located where it
can be adequately served by essential public facilities and services,
such as streets, pedestrian or bicycle facilities, police and fire
protection, drainage systems, water and sewage facilities, and schools.
A. Major amendments. Any person or agency shall notify the Zoning
Administrator of any change in an existing special land use. Any major
amendment to an approved special land use shall require submittal of a
new application for special land use and follow the review procedures
contained in this article. Amendments to the site plan shall bring the
site into compliance with all requirements of this chapter determined to
be reasonable by the Planning Commission in proportion to the extent
of the change at the site and in consideration of the physical constraints
of the site. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the
proposed amendment constitutes a minor or major amendment, based
on the standards below:
(1) Changes increase the building's usable floor area by more than
25% or 2,500 square feet, whichever is less; or
285-22.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-22.4
1:903
285-22.5. Discontinuance.
For any use with a special land use permit which ceases to operate
continuously for at least a one-year period, the special land use shall be
considered discontinued and the special land use permit shall be deemed
null and void.
285-22.6. Repeal of prior planned unit development provisions.
(2) Parking lots are expanded by more than 25% or 6,000 square feet
of pavement, whichever is less.
B. Minor amendment. Minor amendment to an approved special land use
does not require submittal of a new application for a special land use.
C. Change in use. Change to another special land use shall require
submittal of a new application for special land use and follow the review
procedures contained in this article.
D. Required site plan. Any change, whether it is deemed minor or major,
shall require submittal of a site plan in accordance with Article 21, Site
Plan Review.
E. Multiple uses. For a use or building which involves more than one
activity classified as a special land use, a separate special land use
permit shall be required for each use requiring special land use review
on a lot, or for any expansion of a special land use which has not
previously received a special land use permit.
A. Any reference to planned unit development is hereby eliminated
throughout or in any portion of this chapter.
B. Existing planned unit developments. Projects which were approved
under the prior planned unit development standards shall be
considered conforming, provided that such projects conform to the site
plan and conditions upon which they were approved and the projects
have either been completed or work is diligently being carried on. Any
expansion shall conform to the regulations of the particular zoning
district; no expansion in area beyond the area approved as a PUD shall
be considered. A change in uses approved as part of the PUD shall be
prohibited unless the Planning Commission determines the change is to
a less intensive land use; such a change shall be reviewed as a special
land use according to the procedures and standards of this article. Any
modifications to the previously approved site plans shall be reviewed
under the standards of this chapter and the other applicable
ordinances.
285-22.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-22.6
1:904
ARTICLE 23
Zoning Board of Appeals87
[Ord. No. 274, effective 8-29-1999]
285-23.1. Purpose. [Amended 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07]
The purpose of this article is to provide guidelines and standards to be
followed by the Zoning Board of Appeals in considering requests for
variances and appeals, where the jurisdiction of the Board of Appeals has
been established by Article 24, Administrative Organization, of this chapter
or by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006.
285-23.2. Scope of variances, appeals and interpretations.
285-23.3. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Zoning Board of
Appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of the facts
A. Appeals. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any
person, firm, or corporation or by any office, department, board, or
bureau aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator, the
Planning Commission, or other administrative officer or body charged
with enforcement of this chapter, with the exception of decisions to
approve or deny a special land use application. An appeal from any
decision or action shall be filed not later than 30 calendar days after the
decision or action being appealed has been taken.
B. Variances. Where there are practical difficulties preventing a property
owner from conforming to the strict letter of this chapter, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall have the power to authorize variances from the
standards in this chapter, with such conditions and safeguards as it may
determine to be necessary so that the spirit of this chapter is observed,
public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
C. Interpretations. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to
determine the precise location of the boundary lines between zoning
districts when there is a dissatisfaction with the administrative decision
of the boundary location as made by the Zoning Administrator.
D. Use variance not permitted. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have
the power to permit a use not otherwise permitted within a zoning
district (i.e., a use variance). While the ZBA may grant dimensional or
other site-plan-related variances for special land uses, the ZBA shall not
have the power to reverse or modify the Township Board or Planning
Commission decision to approve or deny a special land use permit nor
grant variances to any special land use standards or conditions of
special land use approval.
87.Editor's Note: This title was amended 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 05-07.
285-23.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-23.3
1:905
stated in the appeal a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property,
in which case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by the
Circuit Court, on application, and upon notification of the Zoning
Administrator, and on due cause shown.
285-23.4. Appeal procedures. [Amended 12-13-2010 by Ord. No.
10-05]
A. Application for appeal. Variances, appeals and interpretations of any
nature in which Zoning Board of Appeals action is sought shall be
commenced by a person filing an application for appeal on such forms
and accompanied by such fees as may be specified. The application for
appeal shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based and
shall be signed. Applications involving a request for a variance shall
specify the requirements from which a variance is sought and the
nature and extent of such variance.
(1) Applications involving a specific site shall be accompanied by 10
complete copies of a plan drawing prepared in accordance with the
standards set forth below.
(a) Applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
(b) Scale, North point, and dates of submission and revisions.
(c) Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting
parcels.
(d) Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas,
driveways, and other improvements on the site and within 100
feet of the site.
(e) Proposed lot lines and lot dimensions, and general layout of
proposed structures, parking areas, driveways, and other
improvements on the site.
(f) Dimensions, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all
abutting streets and alleys.
(g) Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes and
streams, and woodlands.
(h) All existing and proposed easements.
(i) Location of sanitary sewer or septic systems, existing and
proposed.
(j) Location and size of water mains, well sites, transformers,
generators, and building service, existing and proposed.
285-23.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-23.4
1:906
(2) The Community Development Department or Zoning Board of
Appeals has the discretion to require additional items such as
building floor plans and elevations.
(3) If any of the items listed are not applicable to a particular plan
drawing, the applicant shall specify on the plan drawing which
items do not apply, and furthermore, why the items are not
applicable. Where an application for appeal involves a variance
sought in conjunction with a regular site plan review, the
application data requirements for site plan review as set forth in
Article 21 Site Plan Review shall be complied with.
B. Applicant attendance. The applicant or a designated representative
must be present at all scheduled review meetings or consideration of
the appeal or variance may be tabled. Any need to re-advertise a public
hearing due to absence or a requested tabling shall be funded by the
applicant. Absence at two consecutive meetings without prior notice to
the Zoning Administrator shall result in denial of the application.
C. Review by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Administrator shall
forward all applications for appeal, along with any supporting materials
and plans to the Zoning Board of Appeals. In accordance with the
requirements of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of
2006, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal, give due notice thereof to the parties involved,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. In addition, a notice of
the hearing shall be made in accordance with § 285-24.6.
D. Decision by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall reach its decision within 120
days from the date of the first hearing on the appeal. The
concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the administrative official or body, or
to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which they are
required to pass under, or to effect any variation in an ordinance
adopted pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act
110 of 2006.
(2) The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination, in accordance with the guidelines set forth herein.
To that end, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all the powers
of the officer or body from whom the appeal was taken and may
issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The Board may impose
conditions with an affirmative decision, pursuant to Section 604(7)
of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006.
E. Record of appeal. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall record into the
minutes all relevant findings, conditions, facts and other relevant
factors, including the vote of each member upon each question, or if
285-23.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-23.4
1:907
285-23.5. Standards for variances and appeals.
absent or failing to vote, and all of its official actions. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall prepare and retain a record of each appeal, and shall
base its decision on this record. This record shall include:
(1) The relevant administrative records and the administrative orders
issued thereon relating to the appeal;
(2) The notice of the appeal;
(3) Such documents, exhibits, plans, photographs, or written reports
as may be submitted to the Board for its consideration; and
(4) The motion which contains the decisions, and the conditions
imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals in acting on the appeal,
after being signed by the Secretary of the Board, thereby
effectuating said decision(s) or conditions.
F. Decision final. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
final, but a person having an interest affected by the zoning ordinance
may appeal to the circuit court.
G. Action on decision. The decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
expire after one year unless a building permit for the construction is
obtained and construction is started in accordance with the terms of the
permit and the requirements of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
H. Resubmission. No application for a variance which has been denied
wholly or in part by the Board of Appeals shall be resubmitted within
one year from the date of the original filing of an application for the
variance, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed
conditions relating to the reasons for the denial of the original appeal
found by the Board of Appeals to be valid.
A. Appeals and interpretations. The Zoning Board of Appeals is to review
the record and decision of the administrative body or official and
determine whether the record supports the conclusion that was
reached, in light of the requirements of this chapter. The ZBA is bound
by the same rules, procedures, and standards in this chapter as the
original decision body. The ZBA should uphold the original decision
unless the record clearly shows that the original decision body or
official was one of the following:
(1) Arbitrary or capricious;
(2) Failed to ensure consistency with ordinance standards;
(3) Made an error, such as relying on false or inaccurate information;
(4) Constituted an abuse of discretion; or
285-23.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-23.5
1:908
(5) Was based upon erroneous interpretation of this chapter or zoning
law.
B. Standards for variances from the chapter. Variances shall be granted
only in accordance with Michigan Public Act 184 of 1943, as amended,
and based on findings that:
(1) Practical difficulties. Compliance with the strict letter of the
regulations governing area, setbacks, frontage, bulk, density, or
other dimensional provisions would create practical difficulties and
unreasonably prevent the use of the property for a permitted
purpose or would render conformity with such restrictions
unnecessarily burdensome. The showing of mere inconvenience is
insufficient to justify a variance.
(2) Substantial justice. Granting of a requested variance or appeal
would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other
property owners in the district, or, as an alternative, granting of a
lesser variance than requested would give substantial relief to the
owner of the property involved and be more consistent with justice
to other property owners.
(3) Public safety and welfare. The requested variance or appeal can be
granted in such fashion that the spirit of this chapter will be
observed and public safety and welfare secured.
(4) Extraordinary circumstances. There are exceptional or
extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the
property involved or to the intended use of the property that do not
apply generally to other properties or other similar uses in the
same zoning district. The conditions resulting in a variance request
cannot be self-created.
(5) Preservation of property rights. A variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights
possessed by other property owners in the same zoning district.
(6) No safety hazard. The granting of a variance will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to other
nearby properties or improvements.
(7) No impact on land values. The granting of a variance or appeal will
not unreasonably diminish or impair the value of surrounding
properties.
(8) Neighborhood character. The granting of a variance or appeal will
not alter the essential character of the neighborhood.
(9) Light and air. The granting of a variance or appeal will not impair
the adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
(10) Promotes orderly development. The size, character and location of
a development permitted after granting of a variance shall be in
285-23.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-23.5
1:909
285-23.6. Conditions related to variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose conditions and restrictions as it
deems necessary in conjunction with the granting of a variance in order to
achieve the objectives of this chapter.88
harmony with the surrounding land use and shall promote orderly
development in the zoning district in which it is located.
(11) Traffic flow. A development permitted upon granting of a variance
shall make vehicular and pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than
is normal for the district in which it is located, taking into
consideration vehicular turning movements, adequacy of sight
lines for drivers, location and accessibility of off-street parking,
provisions for pedestrian traffic, and measures to reduce contact
between pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(12)No nuisance impacts. A development permitted upon granting of a
variance shall be designed so as to eliminate any dust, noise,
fumes, vibration, smoke, lights, or other undesirable impacts on
surrounding properties.
(13) Impact on adjacent properties. The location, design, and height of
buildings, structures, fences, or landscaping permitted upon
granting of a variance shall not interfere with or discourage the
appropriate development, continued use, or value of adjacent land
or buildings.
(14) Relationship to adjacent land uses. The development permitted
upon granting of a variance shall relate harmoniously in a physical
and economic sense with adjacent land uses. In evaluating this
criterion, consideration shall be given to prevailing shopping
patterns, convenience of access for patrons, continuity of
development, and the need for particular services and facilities in
specific areas of the Township.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 285-23.7, Amendments, as amended 7-22-2002, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 05-07. For current provisions,
see Art. 25.
285-23.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-23.6
1:910
ARTICLE 24
Administrative Organization
[Ord. No. 243, effective 10-12-1997; Ord. No. 275, effective
8-29-1999]
285-24.1. Overview; purpose.
285-24.2. Township Board of Trustees. [Amended 11-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-07; 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01]
The Township Board of Trustees shall have the following responsibilities
and authority pursuant to this chapter:
A. The Township Board of Trustees or its duly authorized representative as
specified in this article is hereby charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. Accordingly, the administration of this
chapter is hereby vested in the following Township entities:
(1) Township Board of Trustees.
(2) Township Planning Commission.
(3) Zoning Board of Appeals.
(4) Zoning enforcement officials, including the Zoning Administrator
and Township Planner.
B. The purpose of this article is to set forth the responsibilities and scope
of authority of these entities.
A. Adoption of Zoning Chapter and amendments. In accordance with the
intent and purposes expressed in the Preamble to this chapter, and
pursuant to the authority conferred by the Michigan Zoning Enabling
Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, the Township Board of Trustees shall have
the authority to adopt this chapter, as well as amendments previously
considered by the Planning Commission or at a hearing or as decreed
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Review and approval of special land uses. In accordance with Article
22, Special Land Use Review, the Planning Commission shall review
and provide recommendation to the Township Board for subsequent
approval, approval subject to revisions or denial of the special land use.
C. Setting of fees. In accordance with Article 20, Permits, Performance
Guarantee and Enforcement, the Township Board shall have the
authority to set all fees for permits, applications, and requests for
action pursuant to the regulations set forth in this chapter. In the
absence of specific action taken by the Township Board to set a fee for a
specific permit or application, the Zoning Administrator or other
appropriate enforcement officer shall assess the fee based on the
estimated costs of processing and reviewing the permit or application.
285-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-24.2
1:911
285-24.3. Township Planning Commission. [Amended 11-13-2006
by Ord. No. 06-07; 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01]
The Township Planning Commission shall have the following responsibilities
and authority pursuant to this chapter:
D. Approval of Planning Commission members. In accordance with the
Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, members of the
Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Township Supervisor
with approval by the Township Board of Trustees.
A. Creation. The Township Planning Commission is created pursuant to
the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008. In
accordance with Section 83 of Public Act 33 of 2008, the Planning
Commission shall have all the powers and duties provided for zoning
commissions created pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act,
Public Act 110 of 2006.
B. Membership and operation. Members of the Planning Commission shall
be nominated by the Township Supervisor and approved by the Board of
Trustees. The qualifications of members, the term of each member,
filling of vacancies, compensation of members, and operation of the
Planning Commission shall be in accordance with Public Act 33 of 2008.
(1) The Planning Commission shall consist of five, seven or nine
members. All members shall be qualified electors of the Township.
No more than one member of the Township Board shall be a
member of the Planning Commission.
(2) All members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the
Township Supervisor with the approval of the Township Board. The
Township Board may remove a member of the Planning
Commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office
upon written charges and after a public hearing.
(3) Members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed for threeyear
terms. If a vacancy occurs on the Planning Commission, the
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner
as provided for an original appointment. Terms shall expire on April
1. The term of the Township Board member on the Planning
Commission shall correspond to his/her term on the Township
Board.
(4) Members of the Planning Commission may be compensated for
their services as provided by the Township Board.
(5) The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and Secretary from its members and create and fill
such other offices or committees as it may deem advisable. The
Planning Commission may appoint advisory committees outside of
its membership. The terms of all officers shall be one year and shall
285-24.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-24.3
1:912
expire on June 1. Officers of the Planning Commission may not hold
other publicly elected office within the Township of Grosse Ile.
(6) The Planning Commission shall hold not fewer than four regular
meetings each year, and by resolution shall determine the time and
place of the meetings.
(7) A special meeting of the Planning Commission may be called by the
Chairperson or by two other members, upon written request to the
Secretary. Unless the bylaws provide otherwise, the Secretary shall
send written notice of a special meeting to Planning Commission
members not less than 48 hours before the meeting.
(8) The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business, and shall keep a public record of its resolutions,
transactions, findings, and determinations. The business that the
Planning Commission may perform shall be conducted at a public
meeting of the Planning Commission held in compliance with the
Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976. Public notice of the
time, date, and place of a regular or special meeting shall be given
in the manner required by that Act. A writing prepared, owned,
used, in the possession of, or retained by the Planning Commission
in the performance of an official function shall be made available to
the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act 422 of 1976.
(9) Upon the introduction of a matter on which a Planning Commission
member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of
interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest
to the Planning Commission. The member is disqualified from
voting on the matter if the conflict of interest is affirmed by a
majority vote of the remaining members of the Planning
Commission, in accordance with the Planning Commission bylaws.
Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as
required by this subsection constitutes malfeasance in office.
C. Jurisdiction. The Planning Commission shall discharge the following
duties pursuant to this chapter:
(1) Formulation of Zoning Chapter and amendments. The Planning
Commission shall be responsible for formulation of the Zoning
Chapter, review of amendments to the Zoning Chapter, holding
hearings on a proposed Zoning Chapter, or amendments, and
reporting its findings and recommendations concerning the Zoning
Chapter, or amendments to the Township Board of Trustees.
(2) Site plan review. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for
review of all applications for site plan approval in accordance with
Article 21, and making a determination to grant approval, approval
subject to revisions, or denial of approval.
285-24.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-24.3
1:913
285-24.4. Zoning Board of Appeals. [Amended by Ord. No. 289,
effective 7-16-2000; 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07; 1-12-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-01]
The Township Zoning Board of Appeals (hereinafter referred to as "ZBA")
shall have the following responsibilities and authority pursuant to this
chapter:
(3) Special land use review. The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for holding hearings and review of all applications for
special land use approval in accordance with Article 22 and
forwarding recommendation to the Township Board for approval,
approval subject to revisions or denial.
(4) Subdivisions. The Planning Commission shall review and make
recommendations on plats before action thereon by the Township
Board under Section 112 of the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of
1967, as amended. The Planning Commission may recommend to
the Township Board amendments to the Subdivision Control
Ordinance, as authorized under Section 105 of the Land Division
Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended.
(5) Formulation of a Master Plan. The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for formulation and adoption of a Master Plan as a
guide for the development of the Township, in accordance with
Michigan Public Act 33 of 2008.
(6) Review of matters referred by the Township Board. The Planning
Commission shall be responsible for review of plats or other
matters relating to land development referred to it by the Township
Board of Trustees. The Planning Commission shall recommend
appropriate regulations and action on such matters.
(7) Report on operation of the Zoning Chapter. In accordance with
Section 308(2) of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110
of 2006, and Section 19(2) of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act,
Public Act 33 of 2008, the Planning Commission shall make an
annual written report to the Township Board of Trustees
concerning the operations of the Zoning Chapter and the status of
planning activities, including recommendations as to the
enactment of amendments or supplements to the chapter and
recommendations regarding actions by the Township Board related
to planning and development.
A. Creation. The ZBA is created pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling
Act, Public Act 110 of 2006.
B. Membership and operation. Members of the ZBA shall be appointed in
accordance with Section 601 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act,
Public Act 110 of 2006.
285-24.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-24.4
1:914
(1) The first member shall be the Chairperson of the Township
Planning Commission or other member of the Planning
Commission.
(2) The second member shall be a member of the Township Board,
appointed by the Township Board.
(3) The third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh members shall be selected
and appointed by the Township Board from among the electors
residing in the unincorporated area of Grosse Ile Township, for a
term of three years. Such third, fourth and fifth member shall not
be an employee of the Township Board nor an elected officer of the
Township. Of the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh members of
the Board of Appeals first appointed, one shall be appointed for a
one-year term, one for a two-year term, and one for a three-year
term. Thereafter, such members shall be appointed for three-year
terms. Terms shall expire on April 1. A vacancy on the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired
term in the same manner as the original appointment.
(4) The Township Board may appoint not more than two alternate
members for the same term as regular members to the Zoning
Board of Appeals. An alternate member may be called as specified
to serve as a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the absence
of a regular member if the regular member will be unable to attend
one or more meetings. An alternate member may also be called to
serve as a member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case
in which the member has abstained for reasons of conflict of
interest. The alternate member appointed shall serve in the case
until a final decision is made. The alternate member has the same
voting rights as a regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals
while serving.
(5) The Board of Appeals shall annually elect from among its members
a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary and such other officers
as it may determine, who shall each hold office for one year. The
member of the Board of Appeals who is a member of the Township
Board shall not serve as an officer of the Township Board of
Appeals.
(6) In accordance with Section 602 of Public Act 110 of 2006, meetings
of the ZBA shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such
other times as the ZBA in its rules of procedure may specify.
C. Concurring vote required. The concurring vote of a majority of the
members of the ZBA shall be necessary to reverse an order,
requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official or
body; to decide in favor of an applicant on any matter upon which the
ZBA is required to act; or to effect any variation to this Zoning Chapter.
The ZBA shall state the grounds of each determination and shall
285-24.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-24.4
1:915
maintain a record of its proceedings, which shall be filed in the office of
the Township Clerk.
D. Jurisdiction.
(1) The ZBA shall act on all questions as they may arise in the
administration of the Zoning Chapter, including the interpretation
of the Zoning Chapter and zoning district maps. The ZBA shall also
hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirements,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official or
body charged with enforcement of this chapter. The ZBA shall also
hear and decide matters referred to it or upon which it is required
to pass under this chapter. In doing so, the ZBA may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the
premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer or
body from whom the appeal is taken.
(2) In acting on appeals or requests for variances, the ZBA shall
comply with the provisions of Article 23. While the ZBA may grant
dimensional or other site plan related variances for special land
uses, the ZBA shall not have the power to reverse the Township
Board decision to approve or deny a special land use permit nor
reverse special land use standards or conditions of approval. The
ZBA shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district
classification of any property.
(3) A member of the ZBA who is also a member of the Planning
Commission or the Township Board shall not vote on an appeal of a
decision that the member voted on as a member of the Planning
Commission, or the Township Board. However, that member may
vote on variance requests involving the same property, including
any variances that were made a condition of approval by the
Planning Commission, or the Township Board.
E. Decision final. The decision of the ZBA shall be final, but shall be
subject to review by the circuit court. An appeal from a decision of a
ZBA shall be filed within 30 days after the ZBA issues its decision in
writing signed by the Chairperson or within 21 days after the ZBA
approves the minutes of its decision. If the court finds the record
inadequate to make the review required by this section or finds that
additional material evidence exists that with good reason was not
presented, the court may order further proceedings on conditions that
the court considers proper. The ZBA may modify its findings and
decision as a result of the new proceedings or may affirm the original
decision. The supplementary record and decision shall be filed with the
court.
285-24.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-24.5
1:916
285-24.5. Community Development Director, Zoning Administrator
and other administrative officials.
As specified throughout this chapter, certain actions necessary for the
implementation of this chapter shall be administered by the Community
Development Department, Zoning Administrator, and other employees,
inspectors, and officials of the Township. In carrying out their designated
duties, all such enforcement officers shall administer this chapter precisely
as it is written and shall not make changes or vary the terms of this
chapter. Responsibilities of the Community Development Director, Zoning
Administrator and designees shall be as follows. They shall:
A. Provide citizens and public officials with information relative to this
chapter and related matters.
B. Provide applicants with appropriate forms and procedures related to
site plan review, rezoning, and other zoning matters.
C. Review all applications for sketch plan, site plan review and special
land use review and take any action required under the guidelines in
Article 21, Site Plan Review, and Article 22, Special Land Use Review.
D. Act as a member of the Site Plan Review Committee in reviewing sketch
plans and matters referred to it by the Planning Commission, following
the procedures and standards of Article 21, Site Plan Review.
E. Forward to the Planning Commission all applications for site plan
review, special land use review, petitions for amendments to this
chapter, and other applications which must be reviewed by the Planning
Commission.
F. Forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals all materials related to
applications for appeals, variances, of other matters on which the
Zoning Board of Appeals is required to act.
G. Forward to the Township Board all recommendations of the Planning
Commission concerning matters on which the Township Board is
required to take final action.
H. Periodically report to the Planning Commission on the status of the
Township's zoning and planning administration.
I. Maintain up-to-date Zoning Map, Zoning Ordinance text, and office
records by recording all amendments and filing all official minutes and
documents in an orderly fashion.
J. Review and investigate permit applications to determine compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
K. Perform inspections of buildings, structures, and premises to ensure
proposed land use changes or improvements are and will remain in
compliance with this chapter.
285-24.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-24.5
1:917
285-24.6. Public hearings. [Added 11-13-2006 by Ord. No. 06-07;
amended 1-12-2009 by Ord. No. 09-01]
In instances where a public hearing is required under this chapter with the
Planning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals, written notice of the
public hearing shall be made as follows:
L. Investigate alleged violations of this chapter and enforce appropriate
corrective measures when required, including issuance of violation
notices, issuance of orders to stop work, and revoking of permits.
A. Notice content. The notice shall do all of the following:
(1) Describe the nature of the request.
(2) Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice
shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the
property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no
such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no
street addresses, other means of identification may be used.
(3) State when and where the request will be considered.
(4) Indicate when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
B. Notice publication and delivery. Notice shall be published and delivered
no fewer than 15 days prior to the public hearing as follows:
(1) Notice of the request shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township.
(2) Notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of
property for which approval is being considered.
(3) Notice shall also be sent to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within 300 feet of the subject property and to the
occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the subject property
regardless of whether the property or structure is located in the
zoning jurisdiction. Notification need not be given to more than one
occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more
than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different
persons, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall be given
notice. If a single structure contains more than four dwelling units
or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different persons,
notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who
shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the
structure; however, the Township may also make a good faith effort
to notify each occupant of the structure. If the name of the
occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used for the
intended recipient of the notice. The Township will also make a
285-24.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-24.6
1:918
good faith effort to notify property owners and residents within 500
feet of the subject property.
(4) The notice under Subsection B(3) is considered to be given when
personally delivered or when deposited during normal business
hours for delivery with the United States Postal Service or other
public or private delivery service.
C. Ordinance amendments and rezonings of more than 10 properties.
Public hearings for an amendment to the Zoning Chapter, or the Zoning
Map that affects 11 or more properties shall only require notice in a
newspaper, which shall not be required to indicate the property subject
to the request under § 285-24.6A(2) above, and notice shall not be
required to be mailed to individual properties under § 285-24.6B(2) and
(3) above.
D. ZBA interpretations and appeals. Public hearings for ordinance
interpretations and appeals of administrative decisions by the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall only require notice in a newspaper, as required
in § 285-24.6B(1) above and if the interpretation or appeal of an
administrative decision involves a specific property, notice shall also be
given to the person bringing the appeal, as required in § 285-24.6B(2)
above. Variances shall require full notification under § 285-24.6B(1)
through (3) above.
285-24.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-24.6
1:919

ARTICLE 25
Amendment Procedure
[Added 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 05-0789]
285-25.1. Initiation of amendment. [Amended 11-13-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-07]
The Township Board may from time to time, on recommendation from the
Planning Commission or on petition, amend, supplement or change the
district boundaries or the regulations herein, pursuant to the authority and
procedures set forth in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110
of 2006). Text amendments may be proposed by any governmental body or
any interested person or organization. Changes in district boundaries may
be proposed by any governmental body or any persons having a freehold
interest in the subject property, or a possessor interest entitled to exclusive
possession, or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest,
or an exclusive possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession or which
is specifically enforceable.
285-25.2. Application for amendment.
Except those initiated by the Township Board or Planning Commission, a
petition for an amendment to the text of this chapter or an amendment
to change the zoning classification of a particular property shall be
commenced by filing a petition for Zoning Ordinance amendment on such
forms and accompanied by such application fees as may be specified. Said
petition shall explicitly describe the proposed amendment and shall be
signed by the applicant. Petitions for rezoning of a specific site shall be
accompanied by a plan drawing prepared in accordance with the standards
set forth below.
A. Where a petition for rezoning involves a single-family residential use,
the following information shall be included on all plan drawings, where
applicable:
(1) Applicant's name, address, and telephone number.
(2) Scale, North point, and dates of submission and revisions.
(3) Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels.
(4) Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas,
driveways, and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet
of the site.
(5) Proposed lot lines and lot dimensions, and general layout of
proposed structures, parking areas, driveways, and other
improvements on the site.
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Art. 25, Severability; When
Effective, as Art. 26.
285-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-25.2
1:921
(6) Dimensions, center lines, and right-of-way widths of all abutting
streets and alleys.
(7) Location of existing drainagecourses, floodplains, shorelines,
wetlands and woodlands.
(8) All existing and proposed easements.
(9) Location of sanitary sewer.
(10) Location and size of water mains, transformers, and generators.
(11) A written description of how the requested rezoning meets the
criteria for amendment of the Official Zoning Map contained in this
article.
(12) If any of the items listed are not applicable to a particular plan
drawing, the applicant shall specify on the plan drawing which
items do not apply, and furthermore, why the items are not
applicable.
B. Where the petition for rezoning involves a multiple-family or
nonresidential use, in addition to all of the above information, the
following information shall be included on all plan drawings:
(1) Location of existing drainagecourses, floodplains, lakes and
streams, and woodlots;
(2) All existing and proposed easements;
(3) Location of sanitary sewer or septic systems, existing and
proposed;
(4) Location and size of water mains, wells, transformers, generators,
and building service, existing and proposed; and
(5) If any of the items listed are not applicable to a particular plan
drawing, the applicant shall specify on the plan drawing which
items do not apply, and furthermore, why the items are not
applicable.
C. An applicant for a rezoning may voluntarily offer certain conditions and
limitations as part of the rezoning application (hereafter referred to as
"zoning agreement"). The offer for a zoning agreement shall either be
submitted at the time the rezoning application is filed or may be
submitted following the initial meeting with the Planning Commission
prior to the public hearing. An election to file a rezoning with a zoning
agreement shall be in writing and shall be pursuant to the Township
Zoning Act, specifically M.C.L.A. § 125.286i, as amended, and
§ 285-25.4 below. When necessary, the zoning agreement shall also
include and incorporate, by reference, a conceptual site plan. This plan
shall not replace the requirement for a site plan review and approval as
outlined in Article 21, which shall be conducted following the Township
285-25.2 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-25.2
1:922
285-25.3. Review procedures. [Amended 11-13-2006 by Ord. No.
06-07]
After the completed petition and all required supporting materials have
been received and review fees paid, the petition shall be reviewed in
accordance with the following procedures:
Board's approval of the rezoning. The Township may voluntarily accept
the offer for a zoning agreement, but shall not be obligated to accept
such offer.
A. Initial meeting with the Planning Commission.
(1) Following submittal of an application for rezoning, the applicant
shall meet with the Planning Commission at a regularly scheduled
meeting to introduce the proposed rezoning and receive comments
on issues and the need for additional material to evaluate the
impacts of the rezoning, such as a traffic or environmental studies.
No formal action shall be taken at this meeting.
(2) Based upon information provided by the Planning Commission, the
applicant may submit additional material in support of the rezoning
petition. At this time, the petitioner may also submit a zoning
agreement that meets the requirements of § 285-25.5 below to be
considered along with the application for rezoning, provided that
the Township may not require the petitioner to submit an
agreement as part of the rezoning petition if the petitioner does not
choose to do so.
B. Planning Commission public hearing. The petition shall be placed on
the agenda of the Planning Commission for a public hearing. The
Planning Commission shall review the petition for amendment in
accordance with the procedures and public notice and hearing
requirements set forth in § 285-24.6.
C. Zoning agreements. Where the applicant has offered a zoning
agreement, the following shall be completed prior to the Planning
Commission making a recommendation to the Township Board:
(1) The zoning agreement may be amended in response to comments
raised during the public hearing, provided that any amended or
additional agreements are voluntarily offered by the applicant and
they are in direct response to discussion at the public hearing.
(2) The zoning agreement shall be reviewed by the Township Attorney
prior to the Planning Commission making a recommendation to the
Township Board on the rezoning application. The Township
Attorney shall determine that the zoning agreement conforms to
the requirements of § 285-25.5 below and the Township Zoning Act,
as amended, and shall confirm that the zoning agreement is in a
form acceptable for recording with the County Register of Deeds.
285-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-25.3
1:923
(3) Should the Planning Commission determine that revisions to the
zoning agreement are of such a substantial nature or effect that
they are significantly different from the initial zoning agreement
reviewed at the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
have the option to hold another public hearing on the zoning
agreement.
D. Action by the Planning Commission. Following the hearing on the
proposed amendment, the Planning Commission shall make written
findings of fact which it shall transmit together with the comments
made at the public hearing, any zoning agreement, only if offered by the
applicant, and its recommendations to the Township Board.
E. Submission to County Planning Department. Following the hearing, the
petition shall be submitted to the Wayne County Planning Department
for review and recommendation. If a recommendation from the County
Planning Department has not been received within 30 days, it shall be
presumed that the County has waived its right for review and
recommendation.
F. Action by the Township Board.
(1) Following the submission of Planning Commission
recommendation, the Township Board may hold additional hearings
if the Township Board considers it necessary. Pursuant to Michigan
Public Act 110 of 2006, the Township Board may by majority vote of
its membership:
(a) Adopt the proposed amendment;
(b) Reject the proposed amendment; or
(c) Refer the proposed amendment back to the Planning
Commission for further recommendation within a specified
time period. Thereafter, the Township Board may either adopt
the amendment with or without the recommended revisions, or
reject it.
(2) If a zoning agreement has been offered by the applicant and
recommended for approval by the Planning Commission, the
Township Board may approve the zoning agreement if it meets all
requirements of § 285-25.5 below. Revisions may be made to the
zoning agreement, provided that if the revisions are of such a
substantial nature or effect that they are significantly different
from the zoning agreement reviewed by the Planning Commission,
the Township Board shall remand the matter back to the Planning
Commission to hold a public hearing on the zoning agreement, as
revised, and to resubmit a revised report and recommendation to
the Township Board. If an applicant proposes a zoning agreement
after the Planning Commission has made a recommendation on the
rezoning request, the Township Board shall first remand the
application back to the Planning Commission to hold another public
285-25.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-25.3
1:924
hearing on the rezoning and proposed zoning agreement and
resubmit a report and recommendation to the Township Board.
Upon approval, the zoning agreement shall be incorporated by
attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the ordinance
adopted by the Township Board to accomplish the requested
rezoning.
G. Enactment.
(1) Following adoption of an amendment by the Township Board, one
notice of adoption shall be filed with the Township Clerk and one
notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Township within 15 days after adoption, and shall take effect
upon the expiration of seven days after publication in accordance
with Section 401(6) and (7) of Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006.
(2) A record of all amendments shall be maintained by the Township
Clerk and the Zoning Administrator. A master Zoning Map shall be
maintained by the Zoning Administrator, which shall identify all
Map amendments by number and date.
(3) Following rezoning, all applicable approvals must be obtained prior
to initiating any development of the site, which may include site
plan approval under Article 21, special land use approval under
Article 22, subdivision plat approval under Chapter 238,
Subdivision Control, or condominium approval under Chapter 71,
Condominium Projects.
H. Zoning agreement. All of the following shall apply to a rezoning that
was approved along with a zoning agreement:
(1) The zoning classification of the rezoned property shall consist of
the district to which the property has been rezoned, plus a
reference to the zoning agreement. The Zoning Map shall specify
the new district, plus a small letter "a" to indicate that the property
is subject to a zoning agreement (i.e., "R-1-A-a").
(2) The Township Clerk shall maintain a listing of all properties subject
to zoning agreements and shall provide copies of the agreements
upon request. The approved zoning agreement shall be recorded by
the applicant with the County Register of Deeds.
(3) Unless extended by the Township Board for good cause, the zoning
agreement and associated rezoning shall expire two years after
adoption of the rezoning and zoning agreement, unless substantial
construction on the approved development of the property,
pursuant to building and other required permits issued by the
Township, commences within the two-year period and proceeds
diligently towards completion.
285-25.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-25.3
1:925
285-25.4. Criteria for amendments.
(4) In the event that substantial construction on the approved
development has not commenced within two years, the zoning
agreement shall be void and of no effect.
(5) Notwithstanding the above, if the property owner applies in writing
for an extension of the zoning agreement at least 50 days prior to
the expiration date, the Township Board may, after
recommendation by the Planning Commission, grant an extension
of up to one year. No further extensions may be granted.
(6) Should the zoning agreement become void, all development on the
subject property shall cease, and no further development shall be
permitted. Until action satisfactory to the Township is taken to
bring the property into compliance with the zoning agreement, the
Township may withhold or, following notice to the applicant and
being given an opportunity to be heard, revoke permits and
certificates, in addition to or in lieu of any other lawful action to
achieve compliance.
(7) If the rezoning and zoning agreement become void as outlined
above, then the land shall revert back to its original zoning
classification as set forth in Section 405 of the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006. Such reversion shall be
initiated by the Township Board with notice and hearing as
required for rezonings by the Township Zoning Act and this
chapter.
(8) Any amendment to the zoning agreement following the original
approval by the Township Board shall require a public hearing by
the Planning Commission and a recommendation to the Township
Board, in the same manner as was prescribed for the original
rezoning and zoning agreement.
A. Criteria for amendment of the Official Zoning Map. The Planning
Commission and Township Board shall, at minimum, consider the
following before taking action on any proposed rezoning:
(1) Will the proposed amendment be in accordance with the basic
intent and purpose of the Zoning Chapter?
(2) Will the proposed amendment be consistent with the goals, policies
and future land use map of the Grosse Ile Township Master Plan? If
conditions have changed since the Master Plan was adopted, will
the proposed amendment be consistent with recent development
trends in the area?
(3) Have conditions changed since the Zoning Chapter was adopted, or
was there a mistake in the Zoning Chapter that justifies the
amendment?
285-25.3 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-25.4
1:926
(4) Will the amendment set an inappropriate precedent, resulting in
the need to correct future planning mistakes?
(5) Is the proposed zoning consistent with the zoning classification of
surrounding land?
(6) Could all requirements in the proposed zoning classification be
complied with on the subject parcel?
(7) Is the proposed zoning consistent with the trends in land
development in the general vicinity of the property in question?
(8) Is the proposed zoning compatible with the site's physical,
geological, hydrological and other environmental features with the
host of uses permitted in the proposed zoning district?
(9) Is there evidence the applicant cannot receive a reasonable return
on investment through developing the property with one of the
uses permitted under the current zoning?
(10) Are all the potential uses allowed in the proposed zoning district
compatible with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land
suitability, impacts on the environment, density, nature of use,
traffic impacts, aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence
on property values?
(11) Is the capacity of Township utilities and services sufficient to
accommodate the uses permitted in the requested district without
compromising the health, safety and welfare of the Township?
(12) Is there sufficient capacity in the street system to safely and
efficiently accommodate the expected traffic generated by uses
permitted in the requested zoning district?
(13) If a rezoning is appropriate, is the requested zoning district
considered to be more appropriate from the Township's perspective
than another zoning district?
B. Criteria for amendment of the Official Zoning Chapter text. The
Planning Commission and Township Board shall, at minimum, consider
the following before taking action on any proposed amendment:
(1) Will the proposed amendment be in accordance with the basic
intent and purpose of the Zoning Chapter?
(2) Will the proposed amendment be consistent with the goals, policies
and future land use map of the Grosse Ile Township Master Plan? If
conditions have changed since the Master Plan was adopted, will
the proposed amendment be consistent with recent development
trends in the area?
285-25.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-25.4
1:927
285-25.5. Zoning agreements. [Amended 11-13-2006 by Ord. No.
06-07]
(3) Have conditions changed since the Zoning Chapter was adopted, or
was there a mistake in the Zoning Chapter, that justifies the
amendment?
(4) Will the amendment correct an inequitable situation created by the
Zoning Chapter, rather than merely grant special privileges?
(5) Will the amendment result in unlawful exclusionary zoning?
(6) Is there documentation from Township staff or the Zoning Board of
Appeals indicating problems and conflicts in implementation or
interpretation of specific sections of the chapter?
(7) Will the proposed amendment address changes to the state
legislation?
(8) Will the proposed amendment address potential legal issues or
administrative problems with the Zoning Chapter based on recent
case law or opinions rendered by the Attorney General of the State
of Michigan?
(9) Will the proposed amendment promote compliance with changes in
other Township ordinances and County, state or federal
regulations?
(10) Is the proposed amendment supported by the findings of reports,
studies, or other documentation on functional requirements,
contemporary building practices, environmental requirements and
similar technical items?
A. Zoning agreement. An applicant for a rezoning may voluntarily offer a
zoning agreement along with an application for rezoning. An election to
file a rezoning with a zoning agreement shall be pursuant to Section
405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, and
this article. The conditions set forth in the zoning agreement must be
voluntary and equally or more restrictive than the regulations that
would otherwise apply under the proposed zoning district. The zoning
agreement shall be a written agreement that is approved and executed
by the applicant and the Township and recorded with the County
Register of Deeds. When necessary, the zoning agreement shall also
include and incorporate, by reference, a site plan. This plan shall not
replace the requirement for a site plan as outlined in Article 21. The
zoning agreement must be voluntarily offered by the applicant, and the
Township shall not have the authority to require a petitioner for
rezoning to offer such agreement and shall not have the authority to
require modification to a zoning agreement without the consent of the
petitioner, provided that the Township shall not enter into a zoning
agreement that is not found acceptable to the Township Board.
285-25.4 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-25.5
1:928
B. Scope of agreement. The zoning agreement may include limitations on
the uses permitted on the property in question, specification of lower
density or less intensity of development and use, or may impose more
restrictive measures on the location, size, height, or other measure for
buildings, structures, improvements, setbacks, landscaping, buffers,
design, architecture and other features. The zoning agreement may not
authorize uses or developments of greater intensity or density or which
are not permitted in the proposed zoning district; nor may a zoning
agreement permit variances from height, area, setback or similar
dimensional requirements that are less restrictive than the proposed
zoning district. The zoning agreement may include conditions related to
the use and development of the property that are necessary to:
(1) Serve the intended use of the property, such as extension of or
improvements to roadways, utilities or other infrastructure serving
the site;
(2) Minimize the impact of the development on surrounding
properties; and
(3) Preserve natural features, historic resources and open space.
C. Content of agreement. In addition to any limitations on use or
development of the site, preservation of site features or improvements
described in Subsection B above, the zoning agreement shall also
include the following:
(1) Acknowledgement that the zoning agreement was proposed
voluntarily by the applicant and that the Township relied upon the
agreement and may not grant the rezoning but for the terms
spelled out in the zoning agreement.
(2) Acknowledgement that the zoning agreement and its terms and
conditions are authorized by all applicable state and federal law
and constitution, and that the zoning agreement is valid and was
entered into on a voluntary basis.
(3) Agreement and understanding that the property shall only be
developed and used in a manner that is consistent with the zoning
agreement.
(4) Agreement and understanding that the approval of the rezoning
and the zoning agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the
benefit of the property owner and the Township, and also their
respective heirs, successors, assigns, receivers or transferees.
(5) Agreement and understanding that, if a rezoning with a zoning
agreement becomes void in accordance with this section, that no
further development shall take place and no permits shall be issued
unless and until a new zoning district classification for the property
has been established.
285-25.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-25.5
1:929
(6) Agreement and understanding that no part of the zoning
agreement shall permit any activity, use, or condition that would
otherwise not be permitted in the proposed zoning district.
(7) A legal description of the land to which the agreement pertains.
(8) Any other provisions as are agreed upon by the parties.
D. Future rezonings. Nothing in the zoning agreement, nor any statement
or other provision, shall prohibit the Township from later rezoning all or
any portion of the land that is the subject of the zoning agreement to
another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in
compliance with this chapter and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act,
Public Act 110 of 2006.
E. Compliance with agreement. Failure to comply with the zoning
agreement at any time after approval will constitute a breach of the
agreement and also a violation of this chapter, and further use of the
property may be subject to legal remedies available to the Township.
285-25.5 GROSSE ILE CODE 285-25.5
1:930
ARTICLE 26
Severability; When Effective
[Ord. No. 290, effective 7-16-2000]
285-26.1. Severability.
285-26.2. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 30 days following the date of its publication.
A. This chapter and the various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections and
clauses it contains are hereby declared to be severable. Should any
part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause be adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by any court for any reason, such judgment
shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part
thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or
invalid.
B. Furthermore, should the application of any provision of this chapter to a
particular property, building, or structure be adjudged invalid by any
court, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to
any other property, building, or structure in the Township, unless
otherwise stated in the judgment.
285-26.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 285-26.2
1:931
Chapter A291
GAS FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235. Utilities — See Ch. 258.
§ A291-1. Grant of gas franchise and consent to laying of
equipment.
Subject to all the terms and conditions mentioned in this ordinance, consent
is hereby given to Michigan Consolidated Gas Company, a corporation
organized under the laws of the State of Michigan (the "company"), and
to its successors and assigns, to lay, maintain, operate, and use gas pipes,
mains, conductors, service pipes, and other necessary equipment in the
highways, streets, alleys, and other public places in the Township of Grosse
Ile, Wayne County, Michigan, and a franchise is hereby granted to the
company, its successors and assigns, to transact local business in said
Township of Grosse Ile for the purposes of conveying gas into and through
and supplying and selling gas in said Township of Grosse Ile and all other
matters incidental thereto.
§ A291-2. Gas service and extension of system.
If the provisions and conditions herein contained are accepted by the
company, as in § A291-6 hereof provided, then the company shall furnish
gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules
and regulations; and provided further that such initial installation and
any extensions shall be subject to the main extension provisions, the area
expansion program provisions (if and where applicable), and other
applicable provisions now or from time to time hereafter contained in the
company's rules and regulations for gas service as filed with the Michigan
Public Service Commission or successor agency having similar jurisdiction.
§ A291-3. Use of streets and other public places.
A. The company, its successors and assigns, shall not unnecessarily
obstruct the passage of any of the highways, streets, alleys, or other
public places within said Township of Grosse Ile and shall within a
reasonable time after making an opening or excavation repair the same
and leave it in as good condition as before the opening or excavation
was made. The company, its successors and assigns shall use due care
in exercising the privileges herein contained and shall be liable to said
Township of Grosse Ile for all damages and costs which may be
recovered against the Township of Grosse Ile arising from the default,
carelessness, or negligence of the company or its officers, agents, and
servants.
285-26.2 GROSSE ILE CODE § A291-3
1:932
§ A291-4. Standards and conditions of service; rules, regulations
and rates.
The company is now under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Public Service
Commission to the extent provided by statute; and the rates to be charged
for gas, and the standards and conditions of service and operation
hereunder, shall be the same as set forth in the company's schedule of
rules, regulations, and rates as applicable in the several cities, villages, and
Townships in which the company is now rendering gas service, or as shall
hereafter be validly prescribed for the Township of Grosse Ile under the
orders, rules, and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission
or other authority having jurisdiction in the premises.
§ A291-5. Successors and assigns.
The words "Michigan Consolidated Gas Company" and "the company,"
wherever used herein, are intended and shall be held and construed to
mean and include both Michigan Consolidated Gas Company and its
successors and assigns, whether so expressed or not.
§ A291-6. Effective date; term of franchise ordinance; acceptance
by company.
This ordinance shall take effect the day following the date of publication
thereof, which publication shall be made within 30 days after the date of
its adoption, and shall continue in effect for a period of 30 years thereafter,
subject to revocation at the will of the Township of Grosse Ile at any time
during said thirty-year period; provided, however, that when this ordinance
shall become effective the Township Clerk shall deliver to the company
a certified copy of the ordinance accompanied by written evidence of
publication and recording thereof as required by law, and the company
shall, 60 days after the date this ordinance takes effect, file with the
Township Clerk its written acceptance of the conditions and provisions
hereof.
§ A291-7. Effect and interpretation of ordinance.
All ordinances and resolutions, and parts thereof, which conflict with any
of the terms of this ordinance are hereby rescinded. In the case of conflict
between this ordinance and any such ordinances or resolutions, this
ordinance shall control. The catch line headings which precede each section
B. No road, street, alley, or highway shall be opened for the laying of trunk
lines or lateral mains except upon application to the Highway
Commissioner or the Township of Grosse Ile or other authority having
jurisdiction in the premises, stating the nature of the proposed work
and the route. Upon receipt of such application, it shall be the duty of
the Highway Commissioners or the Township Board, or such other
authority as may have jurisdiction, to issue a permit to the company to
do the work proposed.
§ A291-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A291-7
1:933
of this ordinance are for convenience in reference only and shall not be
taken into consideration in the construction or interpretation of any of the
provisions of this ordinance.
Chapter A292
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235. Utilities — See Ch. 258.
§ A292-1. Grant of franchise.
The Township of Grosse Ile, 9601 Groh Road, P.O. Box 300, Grosse Ile,
MI 48138 ("Township"), grants to Nordic Electric, L.L.C., 2010 Hogback
Road, Suite 4, Ann Arbor, State of Michigan, 48105, a limited liability
company ("grantee"), limited nonexclusive permission to market electricity
through and over existing and future electrical lines operated and owned
by another authorized public utility and to conduct a local electric business
as an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity in the
Township for a period of two years.
§ A292-2. Conditions.
A. As an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity,
grantee will not directly transmit or supply electricity, nor impair or
attempt to control or occupy any streets, alleys, or public places, nor
engage in any construction in any public street, alley, or other place or
right-of-way.
B. Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township from any and
all judgments, damages, decrees, losses, costs and expenses, including
attorney fees, which the Township may incur or which may be legally
obtained against the Township for or by reason of the wrongful or
negligent construction, maintenance or repair of the structures and
equipment, or the use and occupation of any highway, street, alley, or
other public place in the Township by the grantee pursuant to the terms
of this ordinance or resulting from the exercise by the grantee of any of
these privileges.
C. The Township may establish reasonable standards of service, prevent
unjust discrimination in service, and impose any other regulations as
may be determined by the Township Board to be conducive to the
safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. Grantee shall be and
remain subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the Township
now in effect, or which might be adopted.
§ A291-7 GROSSE ILE CODE § A292-2
1:934
§ A292-3. Rates.
Grantee may charge its customer(s) for electricity and electrical services at
a rate that is mutually agreeable to grantee and the customer, subject to the
parties' agreement that they will abide by all applicable federal and state
laws and Michigan Public Service Commission Regulations.
§ A292-4. Most favored nation.
If grantee or any subsidiary company pays a fee, charge, or other payment
of any kind on a periodic basis (e.g., monthly, quarterly, annually, etc.) for
a franchise to any municipality in Michigan, then the grantee shall pay to
the Township a fee computed in the same manner as the fee is computed in
the other municipality (e.g., if the fee in the other municipality is computed
on a percentage revenue, the same percentage shall be applicable and paid
to the Township. If such fee in the other municipality is computed on the
lineal measure of service, the same unit price shall be applicable and paid
to the Township). A one-time charge prior to and for the installation of such
new service shall not be considered a periodic fee unless the charge is
unreasonably higher than that paid to other municipalities. If fees are paid
by the grantee to more than one municipality, then the computation of the
fee for the Township shall be based upon the method producing the largest
fee. The Township shall have the right, at its own expense, to audit the
books and records or review audits of the books and records of the grantee
to determine whether and to what extent a fee is due. Any additional fee
found due as a result of the audit or review shall be paid by the grantee. If
the additional fee is greater than 2% of the total annual fee which should
have been paid for any calendar year, the grantee shall pay the Township's
cost for the audit.
§ A292-5. Insurance.
D. Subject to § A292-7, this franchise is strictly limited to the general
marketing and supplying of electricity and electrical services to the
customers operating or residing within the Township listed in Appendix
A.90
E. Grantee shall reimburse the Township for the Township's costs
associated with issuance of this franchise, including reasonable
attorney fees.
F. Grantee must file a written application to the Township requesting
permission to market electricity within the Township and said
application must acknowledge acceptance of the terms of this
ordinance.
A. The grantee and any contractor hired by the grantee may not
commence marketing electricity, as permitted by this ordinance, until it
has obtained the insurance required by this section. All insurance
90.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A292-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A292-5
1:935
coverage shall be with insurance carriers reasonably acceptable to the
Township. If any insurance is written with a deductible or self-insured
retention, the grantee or its contractor shall be solely responsible for
said deductible or self-insured retention. The purchase of insurance and
the furnishing of a certificate of insurance shall not be a satisfaction
of the grantee's duty to indemnify the Township. The grantee and any
contractor shall procure and maintain during the term of the franchise
the following coverage:
(1) Workers' compensation insurance in accordance with all applicable
statutes of the State of Michigan. Coverage shall include
employers' liability coverage.
(2) Commercial general liability insurance on an "occurrence" basis
with limits of liability not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for
bodily injury and personal injury, and $1,000,000 per occurrence
for property damage. Coverage shall include the following
extensions:
(a) Contractual liability.
(b) Products and completed operations.
(c) Independent contractors coverage.
(d) Broad form general liability extensions or equivalent.
(e) Coverage for X, C and U hazards.
(3) Motor vehicle liability coverage, including Michigan no-fault
coverage for all vehicles used in the performance of the contract.
Limits of liability shall not be less than $1,000,000 per occurrence
combined single limit bodily injury and property damage.
(4) Additional insured. Commercial general liability insurance and
automobile liability insurance as described above shall include an
endorsement stating the following shall be an additional named
insured: "The Township, including all elected and appointed
officials, boards, agents, commissions, officers, employees and
volunteers."
(5) Cancellation notice.
(a) Workers' compensation insurance, commercial general liability
insurance, and motor vehicle insurance as described above
shall include an endorsement stating the following: "It is
hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may
not be canceled by the insurer nor the intention not to renew
be stated by the insurer until 30 days after receipt by the
Township, by certified or registered mail, of a written notice of
such intention to cancel or not renew."
(b) Said notice shall be sent to:
§ A292-5 GROSSE ILE CODE § A292-5
1:936
§ A292-6. Interpretation.
Nothing in this franchise shall be construed to alienate the title of the public
in and to any highway, street, alley or public place. Nothing in this franchise
shall be construed in any manner as a surrender by the Township of its
legislative power with respect to the subject matter of this agreement or
with respect to any other matter or in any manner limiting the right of the
Township to lawfully regulate the use of any highway, street, alley or public
place in the Township.
§ A292-7. Extension of service.
Grantee may from time to time market electrical service to customers with
the Township which are not listed in Appendix A,91 subject to all applicable
ordinances, laws, statutes, rules and regulations, provided that grantee first
files with the Township Clerk and amendment to Appendix A and provided
grantee is in current compliance with all terms of this ordinance.
§ A292-8. Limitations.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as a waiver by grantee of
any of its rights under state or federal law. Grantee shall, as to all other
conditions and elements of service not addressed or fixed by this ordinance,
remain subject to the rules and regulations applicable to electric service
by the Michigan Public Service Commission, or its successor. Grantee shall
provide the Township with copies of all documents which grantee sends to
the Michigan Public Service Commission and copies of all orders, decisions,
or correspondence grantee receives from the Michigan Public Service
Commission. Grantee shall permit Township inspection and examination of
all records it is required to maintain or file under Michigan Public Service
Commission rules and regulations.
§ A292-9. Acceptance.
Upon acceptance and publication this ordinance shall constitute a contract
between the Township and the grantee and grantee's acceptance of the
Township of Grosse Ile
9601 Groh Road
P.O. Box 300
Grosse Ile, MI 48138
ATTN: Township Manager
B. If so requested by the Township, the grantee and any contractor shall
within 60 days of such request supply a copy of this insurance policy of
any of the insurance coverage required under this section.
91.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A292-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A292-9
1:937
terms of the ordinance shall be indicated by its application to the Township
requesting permission to market electricity within the Township.
§ A292-10. Assignment or transfer.
This franchise may not be leased, assigned or transferred.
§ A292-11. Revocation.
This franchise shall be revocable, upon 60 days' written notice to the
grantee, by the Township. The Township may repeal this ordinance for
misuse, nonuse or failure to comply with its provisions and may amend the
terms of this ordinance in the future.
§ A292-12. Severability.
Any and all sections, terms, provisions, or clauses of this franchise shall be
deemed independent and severable. If any court of competent jurisdiction
holds any section, term, provision or clause void or invalid, all remaining
sections, terms, provisions, or clauses not held void or invalid shall continue
in full force and effect.
§ A292-13. Renewal of franchise.
Grantee must notify the Township in writing within 90 days of the expiration
of the term of the franchise granted by this ordinance if it intends to renew
its franchise with the Township.
§ A292-14. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect the day following the date of publication of
this ordinance or a summary of this ordinance.
Chapter A293
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable Commission — See Ch. 67, Art. X.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 235.
Utilities — See Ch. 258.
§ A293-1. Short title.
This chapter will be known and may be cited as the "Township of Grosse Ile
Cable Television Regulatory Ordinance."
§ A292-9 GROSSE ILE CODE § A293-2
1:938
§ A293-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations will have the meaning set forth in this section. When consistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
in the plural include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION or FCC — Federal agency
constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or its
successor.
FRANCHISEE — The holder of a franchise awarded under this chapter.
LOCAL GROSS REVENUES — As defined in the franchise.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM and CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM — A facility,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide
cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to
subscribers within the Township, but such terms do not include:
TOWNSHIP — The Board of Trustees of the Township of Grosse Ile,
Michigan, or duly delegated persons, committees or other representatives.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Board of Trustees of the Township of Grosse Ile,
Michigan, or its successor.
§ A293-3. Qualifications of grantee and grant of authority.
No person may construct, operate or maintain a cable television system
in the Township without a franchise awarded by the Township Board of
Trustees. A franchise is a nonexclusive franchise, right and privilege to
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
B. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
A facility of a common carrier which is subject in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934 ("Act"),
except that such facility will be considered a cable system [other than
for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Act] to the extent such facility is
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers,
unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on demand
services;
C.
An open video system that complies with Section 653 of Title IV of the
Act; or
D.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility system.
E.
§ A293-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A293-3
1:939
construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain, in, upon, along, across,
above and over and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public
ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof,
and additions thereto, in the Township, poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary
for the maintenance and operation in the Township of a cable television
system for the purpose of providing cable television services.
§ A293-4. Franchise term.
An initial franchise will terminate 15 years from date of the grant subject
to renewal for periods of 15 years in duration on the same terms and
conditions or on such different or additional terms and conditions as may
be lawfully specified by the Township Board and are consistent with the
requirements of the Federal Communications Commission. Notwithstanding
anything in this chapter to the contrary, the franchise, or any renewals
thereof, will be revocable at any time, for cause, as expressed through
resolution of the Township Board. A franchise may be renewed by the
Township upon application of the franchisee pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546 or
then applicable federal and state law.
§ A293-5. Compliance with laws, regulations and ordinances.
The franchisee will be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power
by the Township and to such reasonable regulation as the Township will
by resolution or ordinance adopt. The construction, operation and
maintenance of the system by the franchisee must be in full compliance
with such portions of the National Building and Electric Code and National
Electric Safety Code as may be applicable and as the same may be amended
and revised from time to time, and in full compliance with all other
applicable rules, regulations and ordinances now in effect or hereinafter
adopted by the Federal Communications Commission, the Township, or any
other agency of the State of Michigan or the United States, which may
hereafter acquire jurisdiction of the operations of the franchisee authority.
In the event of a conflict between the terms and conditions of a franchise
and this chapter, the franchise will control.
§ A293-6. Liability and indemnification.
The franchisee will indemnify the Township for and hold it harmless from all
liability, damage, cost, or expense arising from claims of injury to persons
or damage to property occasioned by reason of any conduct undertaken
pursuant to this chapter, including libel and slander actions as set forth
in the franchise. The Township will notify the franchisee's representative
within 15 days after the presentation of any claim or demand to the
Township, either by suit, or otherwise, made against the Township on
account of any negligence or contract as aforesaid on the part of the
franchisee. The franchisee further agrees as follows:
§ A293-3 GROSSE ILE CODE § A293-6
1:940
A. A franchisee will carry workmen's compensation insurance with
statutory limits and employer's liability insurance with limits of no less
than $100,000, which will cover all operations to be performed by
franchisee as a result of this chapter.
B. A franchisee will carry commercial general liability and comprehensive
automobile liability insurance with bodily injury limits of not less than
$500,000 per person and $1,000,000 per occurrence.
C. A franchisee's workmen's compensation, commercial general liability
and comprehensive automobile liability insurance will be written by an
insurance company with capital and/or a surplus of not less than
$3,000,000, and a franchisee agrees to furnish Township with certified
copies of certificates of insurance of said policies, which will provide
that insurance will not be canceled unless 10 days' prior written notice
will first be given to the Township.
D. A franchisee will post a performance bond with the Township written by
an approved corporation surety in the amount of $100,000, and in a
form satisfactory to the Township guaranteeing franchisee's continued
operation of the cable television system within the Township, and a
franchisee will well and truly observe, fulfill, and perform each term
and condition of the bond. All damages which may be directly
occasioned by the failure of the franchisee to perform under this
chapter, up to the principal amount of the bond, will be recoverable
from the principals and sureties of said bond by the Township. The bond
required will be reduced to $25,000 at such time as construction of the
system is complete.
E. If a franchisee should commit a breach of this chapter and not remedy
such breach 60 days after receipt of written notice from the Township
to do so, then the Township, at its discretion, may declare a portion of
the bond equivalent to the amount of damages sustained by the
municipality which are directly attributable to such breach forfeited
and franchisee will thereupon be required to remedy the breach with
reasonable dispatch and within 60 days of such forfeiture replace the
forfeited portion of the bond. Notwithstanding the foregoing nothing
contained in this paragraph will serve to absolve franchisee of any of its
obligations under this chapter or the rules and regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission.
F. The franchisee will pay all premiums chargeable for the bond and will
keep the same in full force and effect at all times throughout the term of
this chapter and during the removal of all poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors, converters,
equipment, and fixtures subsequent to the termination of this chapter.
The bond will contain a provision that it will not be terminated or
otherwise allowed to expire prior to 30 days after written notice to that
effect is given to the Clerk of the Township.
§ A293-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A293-6
1:941
§ A293-7. System construction, maintenance and procedures.
G. All insurance policies and bonds as are required of the franchisee in this
regulatory chapter will be written by a company or companies
authorized and qualified to do business in the State of Michigan.
Certificates of all coverage required will be promptly filed by the
franchisee with the Township.
H. A franchisee will file with the Federal Communications Commission
such request, petition, or other application as is then proper to secure
from the Federal Communications Commission any and all necessary
permits, licenses, waivers, or the like as may be necessary to be
secured from the Federal Communications Commission to fully comply
with the terms of this chapter. The franchisee will thereafter diligently
pursue such application with the Federal Communications Commission
and will do all reasonable things necessary and proper to secure any
such permit, license, waiver, approval, or the like from it. The
franchisee will keep the Township advised, from time to time, of the
process of such application.
A. Franchisees will obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate state,
county, and federal officials necessary to cross highways or roads under
respective jurisdictions to supply main trunk lines from the franchisee's
receiving antennas, obtain permission from the Federal Aviation
Authority to erect and maintain antennae suitable to the needs of the
system and its subscribers, and obtain whatever other permits a
Township, county, state or federal agency may require. The franchisee
will construct its cable system using material of good and durable
quality and all work involved in the construction, maintenance, and
repair of the cable system will be performed in a safe, thorough and
reliable manner. Any real or personal property damaged or destroyed
will be promptly repaired or replaced by the franchisee and restored to
its previous condition.
B. The franchisee system, poles, wires, and appurtenances will be located,
erected, and maintained so that none of its facilities will endanger or
interfere with the lives of persons, or interfere with any improvements
the Township may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily hinder or
obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements, or public
property.
C. All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment
erected by the franchisee within the Township will be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, or
other public ways and places.
D. In the case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or
other surfacing, the franchisee will, at its own cost and expense and in a
manner approved by the Township, replace and restore all paving,
sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street, alley, or other public place
disturbed, in as good condition as before said work was commenced.
§ A293-6 GROSSE ILE CODE § A293-7
1:942
§ A293-8. Construction schedule.
The franchisee will make cable service available to all residents of the
Township within 36 months after all necessary permits and notifications
are received, and all necessary utility (telephone and power) pole
rearrangements are completed.
§ A293-9. Line extensions.
It is the obligation of the franchisee to serve all residents of the Township.
Franchisees will provide service to all areas defined by the original
franchise agreement during the prescribed construction period and the
franchisee will extend service to new areas when there is an average of 40
homes per each linear mile of new cable construction, provided that any
such new subscribers will be charged at the normal installation charge and
monthly rate for customers of that classification. In the event that these
requirements are not met, extensions of service will be required only on a
basis which is reasonable and compensatory as set forth in the franchise.
E. In the event that the Township lawfully elects to alter or change the
grade of a street, alley, or other public way, the franchisee, upon
reasonable notice by the Township, will remove, relay, and relocate its
poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other
fixtures at its own expense.
F. Franchisees will not place poles or other fixtures where the same will
interfere with any gas, electric, or telephone fixture, water hydrant or
main, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street will be
placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and
those placed in alleys will be placed close to the line of the lot abutting
on said alleys and then in such manner as not to interfere with the usual
travel on any streets, alleys, and public ways.
G. Franchisees will, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit issued by the Township, temporarily raise or lower its
wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary
removal, raising, or lowering of wires will be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the franchisee will have the authority to
require such payment in advance. The franchisee will be given not less
than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.
H. The franchisee will have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places of the
Township so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in
contact with the wires and cables of the franchisee, all trimming to be
done under the supervision and direction of the Township and at the
expense of the franchisee.
§ A293-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A293-10
1:943
§ A293-10. Compliance with standards.
All facilities and equipment of franchisee will be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the
National Electrical Safety Code and such applicable ordinances and
regulations set forth by the Township and/or any other local, state, or
federal agencies.
§ A293-11. Franchisee rules and regulations.
The franchisee will have the authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, terms, and conditions governing the conduct of its business as
will be reasonably necessary to enable the franchisee to exercise its rights
and perform its obligations and to assure an uninterrupted service to each
and all of its customers. Such rules, regulations, terms and conditions will
not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or with federal and state laws.
§ A293-12. Renewal procedure.
Unless a cable operator has initiated the procedures set forth in 47 U.S.C.
§ 546, 12 months prior to expiration of the franchise, the Township Board
may review the performance of the franchise and the content of this chapter
in accordance with the following procedure:
§ A293-13. Compliance with FCC rules and regulations.
The franchisee will, at all times, comply with the rules and regulations
governing the cable system promulgated by the FCC. This will include
adherence by the franchisee to FCC rules regarding technical and
engineering specifications involved in the construction of the cable system
and signal carriage therein.
A. After giving public notice, the Township Board will proceed to
determine whether the franchisee has satisfactorily performed its
obligations under the franchise. To determine satisfactory performance,
the Township Board will review the technical development of the
system, programming, services offered, cost of service, and any other
particular requirement set forth in this chapter, such as the availability
of programming equipment and personnel to aid access channel users,
and resolution of subscriber complaints. Also, among other standards,
the Board will consider the franchisee's reports made to the Township
or the FCC. Provisions will be made for community comment. Industry
performance standards on a national basis will be considered.
B. If the Board determines the franchisee's performance to be satisfactory,
a new franchise may be granted pursuant to this chapter.
C. In the event the current franchisee is determined by the Board to have
performed unsatisfactorily, new applicants may be sought and
evaluated and a franchise awarded in accordance with franchising
procedures adopted herein.
§ A293-10 GROSSE ILE CODE § A293-14
1:944
§ A293-14. Channel capacity and access.
The franchisee's distribution system will initially be capable of carrying at
least 80 channels of television and constructed with capacity for separate
and distinct two-way transmission.
§ A293-15. Modification of FCC rules.
At such time that the FCC may relinquish its regulation of franchise fees
paid to the grantor of a cable system franchise by the franchisee, the
Township will reserve the right to renegotiate the franchise fee with the
franchisee.
§ A293-16. Publication costs.
The franchisee will assume the costs of the publication of an ordinance
awarding a franchise as such publication is required by law. A bill for
publication costs will be presented to the franchisee by the appropriate
Township officials upon the franchisee's filing of its acceptance of this
franchise and the said publication costs will be paid at that time by the
franchisee.
§ A293-17. Township rights.
A. The right is reserved to the Township to adopt, in addition to the
provisions and existing applicable ordinances, such additional generally
applicable regulations as it will find necessary in the exercise of the
police power, provided that such regulations, by ordinance or
otherwise, will be reasonable, generally applicable and not in conflict
with the applicable laws of the State of Michigan or the United States or
the franchise.
B. The Township will have the right, without charge, of maintaining upon
the poles or in the underground conduits of the franchisee within the
Township limits, wires, and fixtures that will be necessary for a traffic
signal control system and/or a police and fire alert system. Such wires
and fixtures will be installed and maintained at the sole expense of the
Township and will at all times comply with all the reasonable rules and
regulations of the franchisee so that there may be a minimum danger of
contact or conflict between the wires and fixtures of the franchisee and
wires and fixtures used by the Township.
C. In the case of any emergency or disaster, the franchisee will, upon
request of the Township. make available its facilities to the Township for
emergency use during the emergency or disaster period as set forth in
the franchise.
D. The Township will not be liable for any damage occurring to the
property of the franchisee caused by employees of the Township in the
performance of their duties, except for damage caused to the
franchisee's facilities by the negligence of the Township's employees.
§ A293-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A293-17
1:945
§ A293-18. Activities prohibited.
§ A293-19. Payments to Township.
Unless caused by the gross negligence of the Township employees or
its representatives, the Township will not be liable for the interruption
of service by actions of such persons, their agents, contractors or
representatives in the performance of their duties, nor will the
Township be held liable for the failure of the franchisee to be able to
perform normal service due to acts of God or other factors beyond the
control of the Township.
E. Nothing in this chapter grants to the franchisee any right of property in
Township-owned property, nor will the Township be compelled to
maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any fashion other
than in the Township's judgment its own needs may require.
F. Except for individual service drops, the franchisee will not erect any
pole, any underground lines, or conduits, run any line, or make any
attachment, nor will any construction of any kind be commenced
without the prior approval of the Community Development Department/
Township Consulting Engineer or appropriate department of the
Township, which approval will not unreasonably be withheld. The
Township will have and maintain the right to inspect the construction,
operation, and maintenance of the system by the franchisee to insure
the proper performance of the terms of this chapter, subject to payment
of fees set by resolution of the Township Board of Trustees.
A. The franchisee will not allow its cable or other operations to interfere
with television reception of persons not served by the franchisee, nor
will the system interfere with, obstruct, or hinder in any manner the
operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the Township.
B. The franchisee will not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules,
regulations, or any other respect, take from or grant any preference or
advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage, provided that nothing in this chapter will be deemed to
prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and
classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such
classification would be entitled, except as may be permitted by
applicable state and federal law.
A. The franchisee will, during each year of operation, pay to the Township
5% of the annual local gross revenues received by the franchisee for all
cable television services rendered within the Township. The franchisee
will furnish the Township with an operating report showing the
franchisee's annual local gross revenues during the preceding year and
such other information as is required by the franchise related to the
franchisee's services within the Township for such period.
§ A293-17 GROSSE ILE CODE § A293-19
1:946
§ A293-20. Records and reports.
The franchisee will keep full, true, accurate, and current books of account
which books and records, and all other pertinent books, records, maps,
plans, financial statements and other like materials, will be made available
for inspection and copying by the Township pertinent to either franchisee's
cable system in the Township or franchisees local gross revenues upon
reasonable notice and during normal business hours as set forth in the
franchise.
§ A293-21. Subscriber rates and charges.
The Township reserves the right to regulate subscriber rates and charges
subject to state and federal law.
§ A293-22. Complaint procedures.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the franchisee
will maintain a reasonably convenient agent for the purpose of receiving
and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment
malfunctions, and similar matters as set forth in the franchise. The agent
will be available for contact by a local or toll-free telephone call. The
agent will be open to receive inquiries or complaints from subscribers
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Any complaints from subscribers will
be investigated and acted upon as soon as possible, but at least within
three business days of their receipt. The franchisee will keep a maintenance
service log which will indicate the nature of each service complaint, the
date and time it was received, the disposition of said complaint, and the
time and date thereof. This log will be made available for periodic inspection
by the Township.
§ A293-23. Protection of privacy.
B. All payments as required by the franchisee to the Township will be
made quarterly and will be due 45 days after the close of the threemonth
period.
A. Franchisees will not permit the transmission of any signal, whether
aural, visual, or digital, including "polling" the channel selection, from
any subscriber's premises without first obtaining written permission of
the subscriber. This provision is not intended to prohibit the use of
transmission of signals useful for the control or measurement of system
performance.
B. Franchisees will not permit the installation of any terminal equipment
in any subscriber's premises that will permit transmission from
subscribers' premises of two-way services utilizing aural, visual, or
digital signals without consent of the subscriber except for interactive
and information services.
§ A293-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A293-23
1:947
§ A293-24. Additional regulations.
The Township reserves the right to adopt, in addition to the provisions
contained in this chapter, such additional regulations as it will find
necessary in the exercise of its police power; provided, however, that such
regulations are reasonable and not materially in conflict with the privileges
granted in this chapter or the franchise.
§ A293-25. Receivership, foreclosure, or act of bankruptcy.
§ A293-26. Program content restrictions.
In addition to providing basic cable television service consisting of
broadcast and access channels, the franchisee may offer subscribers
C. It is unlawful for any person to attach or affix or to cause to be attached
or affixed any equipment or device which allows access or use of the
cable television service without payment to the franchisee for sale.
A. A franchise will, at the option of the Township Board or its designee,
cease and terminate 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or
receivers or trustee or trustees to take over and conduct the business of
the franchisee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or
other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship will
have been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
(1) Such receivers or trustees, within 120 days after their election or
appointment, fully comply with all the terms and provisions of this
chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the
receivers or trustees within said 120 days remedy all defaults
under the franchise; and
(2) Such receivers or trustees, within said 120 days, execute an
agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to
be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the
franchise granted.
B. In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property
and equipment of the franchisee, or any part thereof, including or
excluding this franchise, the Township Board or its designee may serve
notice of termination upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at
such sale, in which event the franchise herein granted and all rights and
privileges of the franchisee hereunder will cease and terminate 30 days
after service of such notice, unless:
(1) The Township Board approves the transfer of this franchise in the
manner set forth in this chapter; and
(2) Unless such successful bidder covenants and agrees with the
Township to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions
of this chapter and the franchise.
§ A293-23 GROSSE ILE CODE § A293-26
1:948
options services on a per-program or per-channel basis (pay cable). The
franchisee will not, however, program or, in any way, display obscene
material not protected by the First Amendment.
§ A293-27. Employment requirement.
The franchisee will not refuse to hire, nor discharge from employment, nor
discriminate against any person regarding compensation, terms, conditions,
or privileges of employment because of sex, race, color, creed, or national
origin. The franchisee will take affirmative action to insure that employees
are treated without regard to their sex, race, color, creed, or national origin
during employment.
§ A293-28. Forfeiture of franchise.
In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the Township by
virtue of the franchise or this chapter, the Township may terminate and
cancel the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchisee
thereunder in the event that the franchisee:
§ A293-29. Continuity of service.
The franchisee will be required to provide continuous service to all
subscribers in return for payment of the established fee. If the franchisee
modifies or sells the system, or the franchisor revokes or fails to renew the
franchise, or the franchisor elects to purchase the system, the franchisee
A. Substantially violates any provision of the franchise where such
violation will remain uncured for a period of 30 days subsequent to
receipt by franchisee of written notice of said violation, except when
such violation is not the fault of the franchisee;
B. Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this chapter or a franchise
agreement, or practice any fraud or deceit upon the Township;
C. Any termination and cancellation will be made by resolution of the
Township Board duly adopted after 60 days' notice to the franchisee
and will in no way affect any of the Township's rights under this
franchise or any provisions of law, provided, however, that before the
franchise may be terminated and canceled under this section, the
franchisee will be provided with an opportunity to be heard before the
Board, upon 30 days' written notice to the franchisee of the time and
place of the hearing; and provided further that said notice will
affirmatively recite whether the revocation is at will, or for cause, and if
for cause the reasons alleged to constitute such cause will be recited in
the notice. The opportunity to be heard will not be interpreted as an
implication that cause need be shown by the Township to support a
revocability of a franchise under the Constitution of the State of
Michigan, the laws and regulations of the United States and the State of
Michigan, the Township of Grosse Ile, or any agreements between the
parties.
§ A293-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A293-29
1:949
is required as part of the franchise to continue to operate the system until
an orderly change of operation is effectuated, but in no event more than
six months. In the event the franchisee fails to operate the system for
five consecutive days without prior approval of the Board, the Township
or its agents may operate the system until such time that a new operator
is selected. If the Township is required to fulfill this obligation for the
franchisee, the franchisee will reimburse the Township for any costs or
damages that are the result of the franchisee's failure to perform.
§ A293-30. Location of cables.
In areas where telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at
the time of installation, the franchisee may install its cable above ground. In
those areas of the Township of Grosse Ile where both public utility facilities
are underground at the time of installation, the franchisee will install its
cable underground.
§ A293-31. Public service installations.
The franchisee will, without charge for installation, maintenance, or service,
make single installations of its basic cable programming service channel
offerings at each fire and police station, and all public schools within the
Township. The franchisee will, without charge for installation, maintenance,
or service make installation of its standard antenna service facilities to
the Township's public buildings and school buildings set forth in Exhibit
H.92 Such installation will receive the complete basic cable programming
service channel offering of the franchisee, without charge, subject only to
contractual prohibitions between the franchisee and third party sources.
Such installations will be made at such reasonable locations as will be
requested by the respective units of government or educational institutions.
Any charge for relocation of such installations will be charged at actual
costs. Additional installations at the same location will be made at cost
plus 10%. No monthly service charges will be made for distribution of the
franchisee's signals within such publicly owned buildings.
§ A293-32. Other business activities.
A franchise authorizes only the operation of a cable system as provided for
in this chapter and does not take the place of any other franchise, license,
or permit which might be required by law of the franchisee.
§ A293-33. Removal of facilities upon request.
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the franchisee will promptly
remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of such
subscriber upon written request.
92.Editor's Note: Exhibit H is on file in the Township offices.
§ A293-29 GROSSE ILE CODE § A293-34
1:950
§ A293-34. Right of Township to purchase system; other
transactions affecting ownership or control of facilities.
§ A293-35. Township's right of intervention.
The franchisee will not oppose intervention by the Township in any suit or
proceeding to which the franchisee is a party.
§ A293-36. Maintenance personnel.
The franchisee will maintain a sufficient force of agents and employees, at
all times, to provide safe, adequate, and prompt service for its facilities.
§ A293-37. Filings and communications with regulatory agencies.
Copies of all petitions, communications, and applications submitted by the
franchisee to the Federal Communication Commission, Securities and
Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission,
or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable
television operations authorized pursuant to a franchise, will also be
submitted to the Township, upon request.
§ A293-38. Emergency alert.
The system will be engineered to provide an emergency alert system to
allow authorized officials to automatically override the signal on all
channels and transmit and report emergency information as set forth in the
franchise. In the event of any such use by the Township, the Township will
hold harmless and indemnify the franchisee from any damages or penalties
resulting from the use of this service.
§ A293-39. Operational standards.
The technical standard for operation of the system will, in addition to
meeting the requirements, specified in this chapter, conform to all further
A. Prior approval of the Township Board is required where ownership or
control of more than 25% of the right of control of a franchisee is
acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of
whom already own or control 25% or more of such right of control,
singularly or collectively except as otherwise set forth in the franchise.
B. No franchise may be transferred unless such transaction is first
approved by the Township Board, by resolution after public hearing, in
accordance with the same procedures as are specified for grants of
franchises. Such approval will not be unreasonably withheld.
C. By its acceptance of the franchise the franchisee specifically concedes
and agrees that any acquisitions or transfer as set forth in Subsection A
or B above without prior approval of the Township Board will constitute
a violation of the franchise and this chapter by the franchisee.
§ A293-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A293-39
1:951
requirements specified in the franchise agreement, and any other standards
or codes therefore as may be adopted by the Township Board.
§ A293-40. Dedicated channel access.
The franchisee will make the following available and operational at all times
during the length of the franchise:
§ A293-41. Right of recomputation.
No acceptance of any payment will be construed as a release or as an
accord or satisfaction of any claim the Township may have for further or
additional sums payable as a franchise fee under the franchise agreement,
this chapter, or for the performance of any obligation hereunder.
§ A293-42. Failure to make required payment.
Failure to pay any fees required by this chapter or franchise agreement will
result in automatic suspension of the franchise granted, and reinstatement
thereof may be had only upon resolution by the Township Board and
payment of the delinquent fee or fees plus any interest or penalties as may
be required by the resolution.
§ A293-43. Nonenforcement; no estoppel.
The franchisee will not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly
with any of the provisions of its franchise by any failure of the Township to
enforce prompt compliance.
§ A293-44. Prosecution.
Prosecutions under this chapter will be prosecuted in the name of the
Township.93
A. A minimum of one channel at no charge on the general subscriber
network system, available to all subscribers within the Township,
designated as the local government channel for the exclusive use of
local government agencies.
B. A minimum of one channel at no charge on the general subscriber
network system, available to all subscribers within the Township, for
the exclusive use of the Grosse Ile Township Schools.
C. A minimum of one channel at no charge on the general subscriber
network system available to all subscribers within the Township for
exclusive use by the general public on a first come, first served basis.
93.Editor’s Note: Former § A293-45, Cable Communications Commission, which immediately
followed this section, was superseded 8-30-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02. For current provisions
see Ch. 67, Commissions, Art. X, Cable Commission.
§ A293-39 GROSSE ILE CODE § A293-44
1:952